Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
That the Township Committee hereby adopts the revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Little Egg harbor in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:49-4.
§ 1-2. Ordinances on file.
That the revised General Ordinances shall be filed in the office of the
Township Clerk for the examination and inspection by the public until final
action is taken on the revised General Ordinances and that said copy of the
revisions will remain on file and be available for purchase after adoption.
§ 1-3. Repealer; effect on existing provisions.
That by adoption of these revised General Ordinances the previous codified
General Ordinances of the Township of Little Egg Harbor as set forth in the
Township Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor are hereby repealed in
their entirety except for the Land Use and Development Ordinance, Chapter
15, as amended, the Grading and Drainage Ordinance, Chapter 25, Section
3-30, the Graffiti Ordinance, and the Cable Ordinance.1
§ 1-4. Approval and adoption.
That pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4 the General Ordinances of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor is revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections consisting of Chapters 1 through 374 together with an Appendix
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 1-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
1. Editor's Note: Copies of these ordinances are on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:3
§ 1-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect after second reading and publication as
required by law.
§ 1-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 1-7
1:4
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 86.
§ 3-1. Form of government.
The Township of Little Egg Harbor is organized pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:63-1 to 40A:63-7.1, and the Township Committee shall perform its
duties in the manner prescribed by statute.
§ 3-2. Organization of departments.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7, the Township Committee hereby establishes
the organization of departments in the Township. The departments of the
Township shall consist of a Police Department, Municipal Court, Finance
Department, Municipal Clerk's Office, Department of Community
Development and Department of Public Works. The Police Department shall
also include the Office of Emergency Management and Animal Control; the
Finance Department shall include the Treasurer's Office, the Tax Assessor's
Office and the Tax Collector's Office; and the Department of Community
Development shall include the Zoning Office, the Code Enforcement Office
and the Construction Office.
§ 3-3. Department heads.
The following persons are designated as department heads and shall report
directly to the Township Administrator: Chief of Police, Municipal Court
Administrator, Municipal Clerk, and Public Works Superintendent. The
Municipal Treasurer is designated the Director of the Finance Department,
and the Assistant Township Administrator is designated the Director of
the Department of Community Development and Planning and both shall
report directly to the Township Administrator. Further provisions as to
appointment and duties are located within Chapter 86, Officers and
Employees.
Chapter 5
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG ABUSE, MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE
COMMITTEE ON
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 130. Drug-free zones — See Ch. 169.
§ 1-7 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION § 3-3
3:5
§ 5-1. Establishment.
There shall be established a Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse.
§ 5-2. Membership.
Membership on the Municipal Alliance Committee shall be appointed by
the Township Committee and shall include but not necessarily be limited to
representatives of the following groups:
A. Little Egg Harbor Township Chief of Police.
B. President of the School Board, Little Egg Harbor Township Schools.
C. President of the School Board, Pinelands Regional High School.
D. Superintendent of Pinelands Regional High School.
E. Superintendent of Little Egg Harbor Township Schools.
F. Business Administrator, Little Egg Harbor Township.
G. President of PTA, Pinelands Regional High School.
H. President of PTA, Little Egg Harbor Township Schools.
I. Student Assistance Coordinator, Pinelands Regional High School.
J. Student Assistance Coordinator, Little Egg Harbor Township Schools.
K. Pastor, United Methodist Church, Tuckerton.
L. Pastor, St. Theresa's Church, Little Egg Harbor. [Amended 7-24-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-08]
M. Pastor, First Presbyterian Church, Tuckerton.
N. Pastor, Calvary Baptist Church, Little Egg Harbor Township.
O. Pastor, Good Shepherd Lutheran Church, Little Egg Harbor Township.
P. Director, Pinelands Youth Services.
Q. Pastor, Church of the Holy Spirit, Tuckerton.
R. Other local religious groups.
S. Municipal Court Judge.
T. Representative of Local Bargaining Unit for Teachers.
U. Representative of the Chamber of Commerce.
§ 3-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 5-3
3:6
§ 5-3. Designation of Chairman and Vice Chairman.
The members of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall designate one of
their members as Chairman of the Committee to serve for a term of one year
commencing on January 1 of that year and ending on December 31 of the
same year. Members of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall elect each
other officers from amongst their Committee as they deem appropriate.
Any individual designated as an officer of the Municipal Alliance Committee
shall serve for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of that year and
ending on December 31 of that same year.
§ 5-4. Purpose.
The purposes of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall include the
following:
§ 5-5. Functions.
The functions of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall be:
A. To organize and coordinate efforts involving school, law enforcement,
business and community groups for purposes of reducing alcoholism
and drug abuse.
B. To develop, in conjunction with the local school districts,
comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education programs for
Grades K-12.
C. To develop, in conjunction with the local school districts, procedures for
intervention, treatment/referral and discipline of students involved with
substance abuse.
D. To develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education,
outreach and support efforts for parents.
E. To develop a comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness program.
F. To make such individual studies, reports and initiate alcoholism and
drug abuse programs as may be requested by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
A. To create a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives for public and private human service agencies who are
dedicated to promote and support drug and alcohol prevention and
education programs.
B. To conduct an assessment of community-wide needs pertaining to drug
abuse and alcohol issues.
C. To identify existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
§ 5-3 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION § 5-5
3:7
§ 5-6. Municipal Alliance Coordinator.
D. To assist in the development of programs at the municipal level that
accomplish the purpose of the Alliance effort.
E. To assist the municipality in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
F. To cooperate with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse, as well as the County Alliance Committee, to provide data,
reports or other information that may be needed to assist in the Alliance
effort.
A. Position created. There is hereby created the position of Municipal
Alliance Coordinator for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. Hours of work; appointment; term of office.
(1) The position of Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be a part-time
position. The Coordinator's hours shall not exceed 19 hours per
week.
(2) The Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and shall serve for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on
December 31 of that year or until a successor has been appointed
and qualified.
C. Qualifications. To be appointed to the position of Municipal Alliance
Coordinator for the Township of Little Egg Harbor, an individual must
possess the following qualifications:
(1) Bachelor's degree from a recognized accredited college or
university. Four years of appropriate relevant experience may be
substituted.
(2) Experience or training in the ATOD (Alcohol, Tobacco and Other
Drugs Council) field.
(3) Experience in coordinating and managing programs in a related
field.
(4) Ability to read, write, speak, understand and communicate in the
English language sufficiently to perform the duties of the position.
(5) Possess good health and freedom from disabling physical and
mental defects which would prevent the individual from performing
the duties of the position.
D. Duties. The Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be responsible for the
planning, promotion, development and supervision of the Municipal
Alliance Program as follows:
(1) Coordinating and assuring the implementation of all Alliance ATOD
(Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drugs) programs as outlined in the
§ 5-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 5-6
3:8
§ 5-7. Joint committees.
Nothing within this chapter shall prevent the Township Committee from
joining with one or more municipalities to appoint a Municipal Alliance
Committee which is consistent with N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-1 et seq.
approved grant. These programs shall include, but not be limited
to, Project Graduation, the Senior Citizen Awareness Program,
the Tobacco Awareness Program, Teen Coffee Shop Night and the
Monthly Newsletter.
(2) Gathering information for the community needs assessment and
making recommendations for future grant applications based on
that information.
(3) Coordinating and managing Alliance volunteers by scheduling
meetings, providing information and training, overseeing
committees and maintaining pertinent records.
(4) Providing the community with information on ATOD prevention,
resources and specific Alliance programs through a monthly
newsletter, press and other media releases.
(5) Organizing fund-raising activities that will provide additional funds
as needed.
(6) Preparing the annual grant application which shall require
attendance at Ocean County grant-related meetings/training and
the compilation of statistical and financial information.
(7) Coordinating activities with other municipal agencies and
organizations, including the Board of Education.
(8) Maintaining and filing all records in a central office. Such records
shall include, but not be limited to, minutes of monthly meetings,
financial records, the annual grant and related documents,
program descriptions and evaluations, copies of the newsletter,
media releases, a video pamphlet library, correspondence with the
County of Ocean and training and time records for Alliance
volunteers.
E. Accountability. The Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be responsible
to the Administrator of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and will
perform such duties as the Administrator may from time to time
designate.
F. Compensation. The salary for the part-time position of Municipal
Alliance Coordinator shall be determined from time to time by the
Township Committee and shall be paid in accordance with the terms
and provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor. Said position shall also be funded by a grant from the
Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse.
§ 5-6 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION § 5-7
3:9
Chapter 7
AMERICAN DISABILITIES ACT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 7-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an American Disabilities Act ("ADA") Advisory
Board for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 7-2. Membership; designation of Chairman; alternates.
The American Disabilities Act Advisory Board shall consist of five regular
members and two alternate members, designated as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2," appointed by the Mayor. The ADA Coordinator shall
be appointed as a regular member of the ADA Advisory Board and shall
be the chairperson of the Board as provided for in § 7-5D. The Deputy
ADA Coordinator shall be appointed as "Alternate No. 1" to said Board as
provided for in § 7-5D.
§ 7-3. Terms of office; vacancies; alternates' participation.
§ 7-4. Powers and duties.
The American Disabilities Act Advisory Board shall:
A. All appointments to the American Disabilities Act Advisory Board shall
be for a term of one year, commencing January 1 of the year of
appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of appointment. A
vacancy on the Board occurring other than by expiration of term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor.
B. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
A. Review the application of the American Disabilities Act to the Township
of Little Egg Harbor, its buildings, facilities and programs to ensure
that the Township of Little Egg Harbor complies with the requirements
of the American Disabilities Act.
B. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Committee
concerning the implementation of compliance with the American
Disabilities Act as it applies to Township buildings, facilities and
programs.
C. Make such individual studies and reports as may be requested by the
Mayor and Township Committee.
§ 5-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 7-4
7:10
§ 7-5. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator.
§ 7-6. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Advisory Board.
There is hereby established an American Disabilities Act Advisory Board for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Members to the Board shall be appointed
and perform their duties in accordance with this chapter.
§ 7-7. Notice.
D. Hear appeals filed pursuant to § 7-8, and make the appropriate report
to the Mayor and Township Committee regarding its findings and
recommendations.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Committee,
shall appoint one employee to serve as ADA Coordinator. The ADA
Coordinator shall be familiar with the requirements of the ADA and
coordinate Township efforts to comply with and carry out Township
responsibilities under the ADA and the rules promulgated pursuant
thereto, including the investigation of complaints alleging violations of
the ADA.
B. The Township shall make the name, office address and telephone
number of the ADA Coordinator available to any interested individuals.
C. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Committee,
may appoint an individual to serve as Deputy ADA Coordinator. The
Deputy ADA Coordinator shall assist the ADA Coordinator and perform
such duties as required by the ADA Coordinator.
D. The ADA Coordinator shall be appointed as a member of the ADA
Advisory Board as provided for in § 7-2. The Deputy ADA Coordinator
shall be appointed as "Alternate No. 1" of the Board as provided for in
§ 7-2.
E. The term of office for the ADA Coordinator and Deputy ADA
Coordinator shall be for one year, commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of appointment.
A. The Township shall disseminate sufficient information to inform all
interested persons of the rights and protections afforded by ADA and
the rules promulgated pursuant thereto related to the responsibilities
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. This information shall be provided
in a manner consistent with the federal rules for effective
communication.
B. The Township may fulfill this requirement by publication of information
in handbooks, manuals or pamphlets which describe the Township's
programs and activities, by the display of posters in service centers and
other public places, or the broadcast of information on radio or
television.
§ 7-4 AMERICAN DISABILITIES ACT ADVISORY § 7-8
7:11
§ 7-8. Grievance procedure.
The Township shall adopt and publish the following grievance procedure
which provides for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints
alleging any action that is prohibited by the ADA and the rules promulgated
pursuant thereto:
A. Grievances shall be processed promptly and expeditiously and shall be
adjudicated according to the terms of the procedure provided herein.
B. Formal grievances and appeals shall be in writing.
C. Communications and decisions concerning formal grievances shall be
in writing.
D. A written complaint signed by the grievant shall be filed with the ADA
Coordinator within 15 days after the alleged violation. The ADA
Coordinator shall forward a copy of any written complaint received to
the Mayor and Township Committee.
E. The complaint shall identify the parties and contain a clear and concise
statement of the facts that constitute the alleged discrimination on the
basis of disability.
F. The ADA Coordinator shall review the grievance and hold a hearing.
G. A grievant shall be permitted a representative at all levels of the
grievance procedure and may produce witnesses for the purpose of
providing testimony relevant to the alleged discrimination on the basis
of handicap.
H. A written determination shall be issued by the ADA Coordinator and a
copy forwarded by certified mail to the grievant no later than 30 days
after the date of the hearing on the complaint. A copy of said
determination shall be provided to the Mayor and Township Committee.
I. If the grievant is dissatisfied with the answer submitted by the ADA
Coordinator, the grievant may appeal the answer to the ADA Advisory
Board within seven days after receipt of the written answer. A hearing
shall be scheduled within seven days after receipt of the grievance
appeal. The hearing granted by the ADA Advisory Board will take place
within 15 days after the scheduled date is submitted to the grievant.
J. Minutes of the hearing shall be kept or, in the alternative, the hearing
may be recorded.
K. The ADA Advisory Board shall hear the appeal within 15 days from the
date of filing of the appeal and thereafter, make the appropriate written
report to the Mayor and Township Committee setting forth its findings
and recommendations. The Mayor and Township Committee shall
review the findings and recommendations of the ADA Advisory Board
and make a final determination on the appeal.
§ 7-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 7-8
7:12
§ 7-9. Self-evaluation.
§ 7-10. Maintenance of accessible features.
§ 7-11. Employment.
L. The ADA Coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the
Township relating to complaints filed.
M. Failure by the grievant to process a grievance or appeal the decision of
the ADA Coordinator within the specified time limit shall render the
grievance as settled in favor of the Township. Failure by the Township
to issue a decision within the specified time limit shall render the
grievance advanced to the next level. The aforementioned time limits
may, however, be extended by mutual consent of the parties.
N. This grievance procedure shall be construed to protect the substantive
rights of interested persons, to meet appropriate due process
standards, and to assure that the Township complied with the
requirements of the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. The ADA Advisory Board shall evaluate all Township programs and
services to insure equal opportunity and equal access.
B. The ADA Advisory Board shall distribute the self-evaluation plan and
permit comment thereon by all interested parties.
C. The self-evaluation shall in all respects comply with the federal rules
adopted pursuant to the ADA and shall be kept on file for a period of
three years.
A. The Township shall maintain in proper working condition those features
of facilities and equipment that are required to be accessible and usable
by persons with disabilities.
B. This section of the Township Code shall not be interpreted to prohibit
reasonable shut down times for repairs.
A. The hiring practices of the Township shall not discriminate against
persons with disabilities.
B. All job descriptions shall precisely and accurately describe the essential
functions of the job performed by each employee.
C. Job applications shall pertain strictly to job performance.
D. All job interviews shall be limited to questions concerning the
applicant's ability to perform the job.
E. The interviewer shall not inquire about disabilities or conduct tests that
screen out people with disabilities.
§ 7-8 AMERICAN DISABILITIES ACT ADVISORY § 7-11
7:13
§ 7-12. Program accessibility.
F. Questions about the applicant's addiction to alcohol or drugs shall not
be asked.
G. The Township shall not conduct medical examinations or inquiries of job
applicants prior to an offer of employment. The Township may, however,
require medical examinations and/or inquiries after making an offer of
employment to a job applicant and before the applicant begins
employment with the Township. The Township may condition an offer of
employment on the results of the medical examination or inquiry. If the
Township chooses to conduct such medical examinations or inquiries,
all entering employees in the same job category shall be subject to the
examination or inquiry regardless of disability.
H. Any medical information obtained from employee medical examinations
and inquiries shall be maintained on separate forms and shall be
treated as confidential and not kept in an employee's personnel file.
I. Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they
can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the employer
undue hardship, such person may not be eligible.
A. The Township shall make reasonable accommodations to make its
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. An
individual shall not be excluded from participation in or be denied the
benefits of the services, programs or activities of the Township due to
disability.
B. The Township shall make reasonable accommodations to its facilities as
required by the ADA.
C. The Township shall prepare a transition plan setting forth the steps
necessary to complete the structural changes in all public facilities. All
interested persons, including individuals with disabilities, shall be able
to participate in the development of the transition plan. After
completion, a copy of the transition plan shall be made available for
public inspection. The transition plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Identification of physical obstacles in the Township's facilities that
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals
with disabilities.
(2) Description in detail of the methods that will be used to make the
facilities accessible.
(3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve
compliance.
§ 7-11 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 7-12
7:14
§ 7-13. Communications.
Chapter 10
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 10-1. Imposition of service charge; tender of future payments.
A service charge in the amount of $20 shall be imposed on any taxes,
fees or other charges due to the Township of Little Egg Harbor where a
check or draft has been submitted to the Township toward the payment
of such taxes, fees or other charges, and such check or draft is returned
for insufficient funds. The Township Committee authorizes the appropriate
municipal officer to demand that future payments be tendered in cash or
by certified or cashier's check on any account where a check tendered for
payment on such account is returned for insufficient funds. In addition, the
service charge aforesaid may be collected in any manner authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40:5-18.
§ 10-2. Amount of service charge.
It is hereby determined that the amount of such service charge is equal to
the approximate amount of the Township's administrative or other related
costs where a check or draft has been returned for insufficient funds.
Chapter 14
(4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan.
(5) Indicate why certain Township facilities cannot be made accessible.
D. Effective immediately, the new construction and alteration provisions of
the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to all
Township construction.
A. The Township shall take whatever steps may be necessary to insure that
communications with applicants, participants and members of the
public with disabilities are as effective as communications with others.
B. Auxiliary aids and services shall be furnished to afford individuals with
disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in and enjoy the benefits
of the Township's services, programs and activities.
C. The Township shall equip emergency systems with telecommunications
devices for the deaf (TDD's) and computer modems.
D. All Township communications, including the public notices required by
§ 7-7 of this chapter, shall comply with the communication
requirements of the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
E. The Township shall place an appropriate access statement on all public
communications.
§ 7-12 CHECKS, RETURNED § 10-2
10:15
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 14-1. Payment of claims.
The processing of all payroll, purchase orders and payment of claims shall
be in accordance with the policy and procedures as prescribed in a
purchasing manual approved by resolution of the Township Committee and
kept on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 14-2. Designation of approval officer; duties. [Added 4-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-05]
§ 14-3. Procedure for approval of claims. [Added 4-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-05]
Any and all purchases to be made by the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
or any department thereof, which do not require sealed bids pursuant
to statute shall be in accordance with the method designated herein, as
follows:
A. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Little Egg Harbor is
hereby designated as the approval officer with the title of "Certifying
and Approval Officer."
B. The Certifying and Approval Officer shall ascertain the existence of
proper and sufficient appropriations for the payments to be made and
determining that there is legal authority for the payments, evidenced by
action of a purchasing department or agent or officer in respect to the
goods or services ordered and the incurring of expense therefore.
A. Approvals. All purchases in excess of $1,000 shall be forwarded to the
Township Committee liaison for the department which originated the
order. The Committee liaison shall approve or disapprove the order and
return the purchase order to the Township Administrator. For any
purchase less than $1,000 the approval and signature of the Committee
liaison shall not be required, but a copy of the purchase order shall be
provided to the Committee liaison as soon as possible. The Township
Administrator then reviews the purchase order to ascertain compliance
with these purchasing procedures and policies and the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law. All purchase orders which are approved by
the Township Administrator are then delivered to the Mayor for
approval and signature.
B. Following receipt and inspection of goods received or assuring the
completion of services in accordance with the contract, the department
head certifies the receipt of goods or services to the Certifying and
Approval Officer.
C. The Certifying and Approval Officer reviews the invoice and voucher for
correctness and process the claim for approval or disapproval as
appropriate.
§ 10-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 14-4
10:16
§ 14-4. Presentation of claims to Council; approval by resolution.
[Added 4-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
The Chief Financial Officer shall certify to the Township Committee that
the goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township
and that the claims have been paid. The Township Committee shall ratify
approved claims by resolution, at a regular public meeting the month
following payment.
Chapter 15
COMMERCIAL REVITALIZATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 15-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Commercial Revitalization Board of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 15-2. Membership; terms; organization.
A. The Commercial Revitalization Board shall consist of 12 regular voting
members and up to three alternate voting members appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. The
Committee shall include the Mayor or his/her designee; the Zoning
Board Chairman or his/her designee; and the Planning Board Chairman
or his/her designee. All other members shall be residents of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor and to the extent practicable, the Board
shall be comprised so as to provide representation from all areas of the
Township. The terms of all regular voting members of the Commercial
Revitalization Board shall be for a term of one year, and shall terminate
on December 31 of the year of appointment.
B. The Commercial Revitalization Board shall also include a member of the
governing body, chosen by it, to serve as voting/liaison member of the
Commercial Revitalization Board. The liaison shall report to the
governing body and the public on a monthly basis by Committee report
to advise on activities and recommendations of the Commercial
Revitalization Board.
C. In addition to the 12 regular voting members and the alternate voting
members, which may number up to three, there shall be up to three
nonvoting ex officio members who may be nonresidents of Little Egg
Harbor who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee in the event that the Mayor and
Committee believe that such nonresidents have an expertise or
perspective which may be beneficial to the Board. The terms of the ex
officio members shall terminate on December 31 of the year of
appointment.
D. The Commercial Revitalization Board shall annually elect from its
membership a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and a Secretary. All
§ 14-4 CHECKS, RETURNED § 15-2
10:17
§ 15-3. Meeting requirements; duties and responsibilities.
Chapter 16
COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARD
§ 16-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Community Advisory Board of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 16-2. Membership; terms; organization.
The Community Advisory Board shall consist of 24 regular nonvoting
members and up to five alternate nonvoting members appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. All
members must be residents of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The terms
of all members of the Community Advisory Board shall be one year, and shall
terminate on December 31 of the year of appointment.
§ 16-3. Meeting requirements; duties and responsibilities.
positions to be unpaid. The Committee liaison shall not be eligible to
serve in any of those offices or positions. No one shall serve in any
officer position for more than three consecutive years.
A. The Commercial Revitalization Board shall meet at least quarterly and
nothing shall preclude the Board from meeting more frequently if
deemed necessary. The Commercial Revitalization Board may, with the
consent of the governing body by resolution, create subcommittees. All
meetings of the Commercial Revitalization Board and/or any
subcommittee of the Commercial Revitalization Board shall be
advertised on the municipal website as open to the public and shall be
held in the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Building.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Commercial Revitalization Board shall
be responsible for advising the Mayor and Township Committee on
programs and policies which will promote, attract and retain business
in locations that are consistent with the Master Plan and land use
regulations of the Township. Primary goals are to develop the
Township's commercial community, maintain and improve residents'
quality of life and in doing so, keep focus with the constant appreciation
of the unique attributes the Township has to offer local, regional and
national businesses, promote and encourage business development,
including identifying and removing unnecessary obstacles to the
creation and development of smart business opportunities in the
Township.
§ 15-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 16-3
10:18
§ 16-4. Committee liaison.
The Mayor shall annually appoint a member of the governing body to serve
as liaison to the Community Advisory Board. The liaison shall report to the
governing body and the public on a monthly basis, by Committee report,
to advise on activities and recommendations of the Community Advisory
Board.
Chapter 18
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 18-1. Establishment of Department and Director.
There is hereby established a Department of Community Development in
and for the Township of Little Egg Harbor, and the position of Director of
the Department of Community Development.
§ 18-2. Powers and duties.
The Department of Community Development shall:
A. The Community Advisory Board shall meet at least quarterly. Nothing
shall preclude the Board from meeting more frequently if deemed
necessary.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Community Advisory Board shall be
responsible for advising the Mayor and Township Committee on matters
impacting the Township, including but not limited to the areas of
medical and social services, nutrition programs, transportation,
recreation, employment opportunities, taxation and housing. The
Community Advisory Board may also sponsor and schedule educational
programs, in conjunction with the Community Activities Board, on
topics of interest in the Township community centers.
A. Ensure compliance with various municipal ordinances, as well as
resolutions of the Township Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
B. Initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to enforcement of
ordinances and the resolutions of the Township Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-28]
C. Initiate necessary legal action against violators of various municipal
ordinances.
D. Prepare needed reports, establish and maintain records and files, and
assist in the promulgation of municipal ordinances.
E. Enforce the zoning ordinances of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 16-3 CHECKS, RETURNED § 18-2
10:19
F. Issue zoning permits in accordance with Chapter 212, Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
G. Issue flood hazard letters when requested.
H. Answer all inquiries with regard to zoning and planning. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
I. Keep a record of all applications for permits and of all permits and
certificates issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved.
J. File and safely keep copies of all plans submitted pertaining to land use
within the Township of Little Egg Harbor. [Amended 12-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-28]
K. Collect and record fees for zoning permits and flood hazard letters.
L. Prepare monthly reports for the Township Committee summarizing all
zoning permits and flood hazard letters issued by said Department, a
copy of which shall also be given to the Tax Assessor.
M. In general, perform all duties in accordance with Chapter 212, Land
Development, of the Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
N. Accept applications to the Planning Board, including plots, maps, and
other documents and instruments as required by law, for consideration
by the Planning Board.
O. Accept applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, including plots,
maps and other documents and instruments as required by law for
consideration by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Added 12-13-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-282]
P. Accept application fees and any other fees payable to the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment as required by law. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
Q. Coordinate efforts of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and, in general,
undertake such other duties or responsibilities as may be imposed from
time to time with regard to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
R. Maintain the official Township of Little Egg Harbor House Numbering
Map and, in pursuance thereof, assign and record official numbers to
lots and subdivisions and resubdivisions of land, and assign house
numbers to buildings or structures. The Department shall also have
responsibility to ensure that the house number assigned to each house,
building, or structure is properly displayed and to issue violations to
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsections O through R as
Subsections P through S, respectively.
§ 18-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 18-2
10:20
§ 18-3. Director of the Department of Community Development.
§ 18-4. Personnel.
occupants or owners of any dwelling not in compliance with Chapter
145, Buildings, Numbering of.
S. Administer excavation and soil mining applications and permits,
including approval and issuance thereof, field inspections, and
appropriate enforcement measures.
A. Appointment and term of office. The executive and responsible officer
of the Department of Community Development of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor shall be known and designated as the "Director of the
Department of Community Development," who shall be appointed by
the Township Committee. The term of said office shall be one year,
commencing with January 1 of each year or until a successor is
appointed. Should the office become vacant during any term, it shall be
filled by a similar appointment, but for the unexpired term only.
B. The Director shall further serve as the Secretary of both the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall attend all meetings
and be responsible for the production of all minutes. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
C. Records and books. The Director shall keep accurate records and books
of accounts of all transactions as Director, and of the work and
transactions of the Department. The Director shall prepare budget
recommendations for the Department, and shall have full charge and
management of the functions of the Department of Community
Development.
D. Reports and recommendations. The Director shall render to the
Township Committee such reports, recommendations, drawings, or
other documents as may be required at regular stated intervals, or on
special request therefor. The Director shall be available for consultation
and advice to all municipal officials and municipal boards or
commissions, and shall prepare and present to the Township Committee
short-term and long-range recommendations for the improvement of
the Township in the areas within the functions and duties of the
Department.
E. (Reserved)3
F. Accountability. The Director shall be directly accountable to the
Township Clerk of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Authority to delegate, was repealed 12-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-28.
§ 18-2 CHECKS, RETURNED § 18-4
10:21
Chapter 22
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 22-1. Municipal Court established; effective date.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., there is hereby
established a Municipal Court for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 22-2. Title of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, in the County of Ocean."
§ 22-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have an official seal, which shall bear the name
of the Court.
§ 22-4. Appointment and term of Judge; vacancies.
There shall be a Judge of said Municipal Court who shall be appointed by
the governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Said Municipal
Court Judge shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his or her
appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Any
appointment to fill a vacancy not caused by the expiration of term shall be
made for the unexpired term only.
§ 22-5. Qualifications of Municipal Court Judge.
Every Judge, temporary Judge, and Acting Judge of a Municipal Court shall
be a resident of this state and an attorney at law admitted to practice in the
State of New Jersey for at least five years, and in good standing.
§ 22-6. Salary of Judge.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive an annual salary which shall
be fixed by the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The
salary shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal
officers are paid. The salary shall be in lieu of all fees.
A. The Department of Community Development shall consist of the
Director and such other positions and personnel as the Township
Committee shall create or designate from time to time. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-28]
B. In addition, the Director of the Department of Community Development
shall oversee the Building Department, Health Department,
Engineering Department and the Land Use Department of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 18-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 22-7
22:22
§ 22-7. Powers and duties of Court and Judge.
The Municipal Court of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and the Judge
thereof shall have, possess, and exercise all of the jurisdictions, functions,
powers and duties conferred by law and the applicable Rules of the
Supreme Court of New Jersey upon said Court and Judge.
§ 22-8. Administrator of Municipal Court.
There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
The Administrator shall serve for a term of three years from the date
of appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The
Administrator of the Municipal Court will receive an annual salary which
shall be fixed by the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
The salary shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other
municipal officers and employees. Such salary shall be paid in lieu of any
other fees.
§ 22-9. Certification of Administrator of Municipal Court.
A. A person shall be certified as a Municipal Court Administrator if the
person:
(1) Is a high school graduate.
(2) Has a combination of two years of either full-time government
employment performing duties related to those of Municipal Court
Administrator, or higher education.
(3) Completes the training required by the Municipal Court
Administrator Certification Board appointment by the Supreme
Court.
(4) Passes the examination held by the Municipal Court Administrator
Certification Board.
(5) Pays any required certification fee.
B. If a person has been serving in the position of Municipal Court
Administrator for five years on the effective date of this chapter, he or
she shall be certified as a Municipal Court Administrator if he or she
passes the examination held by the Municipal Court Administrator
Certification Board and pays any required certification fee. If said
person has been serving that position for three years on the effective
date of this chapter, he or she shall be certified as a Municipal Court
Administrator if he or she completes the training required by a
Municipal Court Administrator Certification Board, passes the
examination held by a Municipal Court Administrator Certification
Board, and pays any required certification fee. A certificate issued
pursuant to this section may be revoked or suspended by the Municipal
Court Administrator Certification Board for dishonest practices or
§ 22-7 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 22-9
22:23
§ 22-10. Duties of Administrator of Municipal Court.
The Administrator of the Municipal Court shall perform such functions and
duties as shall be prescribed for said Administrator by law, by the rules
applicable to Municipal Courts, and by the Judge of the Municipal Court of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 22-11. Powers of Administrator.
Any process, order, warrant, or judgment issued by the Municipal Court
may be signed by the Judge or be attested in the Judge's name and signed by
the Municipal Court Administrator. The Municipal Court Administrator shall
have the authority granted by law and the Rules of Court to Administrators
and Clerks of Courts of record.
§ 22-12. Bond or insurance.
Before assuming the duties of office, a Judge or Administrator of the
Municipal Court, or person employed by the Municipal Court who handles
money in the scope of that employment, shall be covered by a bond or
insurance against loss or misappropriation of funds, payable to the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, County of Ocean, State of New Jersey, in an
amount and with terms set by the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 22-13. Deputy Court Administrator; duties.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Court Administrator of the
Municipal Court. The Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal Court
will receive an annual salary which shall be fixed by the Salary Ordinance
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The salary shall be paid in the
same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers and employees.
The salary shall be paid in lieu of any other fees. The Deputy Court
Administrator shall perform such functions and duties as shall be
prescribed for the Deputy Court Administrator by law, the rules applicable
to Municipal Court, and by the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 22-14. Place and time of holding Court.
The Municipal Court shall be held at the Municipal Building, 665 Radio
Road, Little Egg Harbor Township, Ocean County, New Jersey. The Judge of
the Municipal Court of the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall sit on such
days and at such times as the business of the Court requires and as set by
said Judge, subject to the rules applicable to municipal courts.
failure to perform, or neglect of, duties of a Municipal Court
Administrator.
§ 22-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 22-15
22:24
§ 22-15. Office of Municipal Public Defender; office created;
qualifications; term.
There is hereby created the Office of the Municipal Public Defender. The
Mayor, with the advice and consent of Township Committee, may designate
one or more attorneys at law of the State of New Jersey to provide
representation of persons entitled by law to appointment of counsel,
pursuant to the terms of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-3, for crimes and offenses cognizable
by the Municipal Court of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. He or she shall
serve for a term of one year and thereafter until his or her successor has
been appointed and qualified.
§ 22-16. Duties of Public Defender.
The Public Defender shall defend indigent persons in the Municipal Court
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor upon being requested to do so by the
Municipal Judge, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by
N.J.S.A. 2B:24-6, and any other applicable statutes and Rules of Court of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 22-17. Application fee for representation by Public Defender;
waiver of fee.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq., the Township of Little Egg Harbor
shall require any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender to pay an application fee of not more than $200. The Municipal
Court may waive any required application fee, in whole or in part, if the
Court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 22-18. Compensation of Public Defender.
The annual salary for the Municipal Public Defender shall be established
by the Township Committee by ordinance. The compensation of a Municipal
Public Defender for services rendered shall be in lieu of any and all other
compensation by the Township.
§ 22-19. Removal of Public Defender.
In addition to any other means provided by law for the removal from office
of a public official, a Municipal Public Defender may be removed by the
Township Committee for good cause and after a public hearing, and upon
due notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 22-20. Other representation by Public Defender.
The Municipal Public Defender may represent private clients in any
municipality, including the municipality where they act as a Municipal
Public Defender, subject to the Rules of Court Governing the Conduct of
Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
§ 22-15 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 22-21
22:25
§ 22-21. Office of Municipal Court Prosecutor; position created.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Court Prosecutor.
§ 22-22. Qualifications of Municipal Court Prosecutor.
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of
New Jersey in good standing.
§ 22-23. Appointment and term of office of Municipal Court
Prosecutor.
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Township Committee. He or she shall serve for a
term of one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 22-24. Duties of Municipal Court Prosecutor.
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall appear in the Municipal Court on
behalf of the State of New Jersey or the Township of Little Egg Harbor
in any case therein pending, upon the request of the Municipal Judge, the
Chief of Police or directive of the Mayor or Committee. He or she shall
exercise the powers and duties assigned to such office by N.J.S.A. 2B:25-5,
and any other applicable statutes and Rules of Court of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 22-25. Removal of Municipal Court Prosecutor.
In addition to any other means provided by law for the removal from office
of a public official, a Municipal Court Prosecutor may be removed by the
Township Committee for good cause and after a public hearing, and upon
due notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 22-26. Compensation of Municipal Court Prosecutor.
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be compensated in accordance with
a professional services contract as approved by resolution of the Township
Committee. The compensation shall be in lieu of any and all other fees;
provided, however, that when a Municipal Prosecutor is assigned to
prosecute a de novo appeal in Superior Court, the Prosecutor shall be
entitled to additional compensation, unless the municipality expressly
provides otherwise at the time the compensation is fixed.
Chapter 26
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 22-21 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 26-1
26:26
DEFENSE — The means by which a public employee may respond to any
suit, allegation, or cause of action. The Township of Little Egg Harbor
shall provide for the defense of any action, suit or proceeding, whether
civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative, including a cross action,
counterclaim, or cross complaint against any public employee because of
any act or omission of such public employee in the scope of his or her
employment, and shall defray all costs of defending such action, including
reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any,
excepting actions, suits or proceedings brought by the Township of Little
Egg Harbor against such public employee. Expressly exempted from this
chapter are any charges, allegations, or actions of any nature asserted by
the Township of Little Egg Harbor against its own public employee.
INDEMNIFICATION — To secure against future loss or damage, or to
provide compensation for or repair loss or damage already suffered; to
insure; to save harmless.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any employee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
or any elected or appointed official, or any officer, employee, or servant,
whether or not compensated, who is authorized to perform any act or
service for the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The term "public employee"
shall also include persons formerly holding office or employment, provided
the events giving rise to a cause of action or claim hereunder conform to
the requirements herein established.
§ 26-2. Defense in civil actions.
Subject to the limitations set forth in the subsequent sections of this
chapter, whenever any civil action has been, or shall be, brought against
any public employee holding or formerly holding any office, position, or
employment with the Township of Little Egg Harbor, for any action or
omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties
of such office, position, or employment, the Township shall defray all costs
of defending such action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of appeal, if any, and shall save harmless and protect
such persons from any financial loss resulting from the litigation. The
Township Attorney, or another attorney selected by the Township
Committee, shall represent the Township official or employee.
§ 26-3. Criminal actions.
The Township shall not defray the costs of defending any criminal action
against any public employee, except as may be authorized by state statute
or other municipal ordinance or resolution of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, and in those circumstances, the responsibility for defraying the
costs of defending such public employee shall be applicable only when
such criminal proceedings shall have been dismissed or result in a final
disposition in favor of the public employee. However, should the Township
determine that there is good cause, arising out of the incident or related
incidents of the criminal prosecution, to dismiss the public employee, the
Township will not reimburse the public employee for legal defense and/or
§ 26-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 26-3
26:27
the costs of defending the suit, even though criminal proceedings against
the public employee may be dismissed or the public employee is found not
guilty.
§ 26-4. Exceptions.
A. The obligation of the Township of Little Egg Harbor to defend and
indemnify its public employees for acts or omissions arising out of, or
during the course of, the performance of the duties of said public
employee, shall be limited to those circumstances under which the
Township itself would be liable for the acts of its public employees
under the doctrine of respondeat superior, except that the Township
shall defend any such public employee sued under the Federal Civil
Rights Act, provided that the Township Committee shall not have
concluded that such act or omission was outside the scope of the
responsibilities of said public employee.
B. The Township shall not defend and save harmless any public employee
committing an intentional or willful act or willful omission arising out
of, or in the course of, the performance of the duties of such office,
position, or employment.
C. Any public employee providing any form of professional medical
service, such as a doctor or nurse, is specifically excluded from the
provisions of this chapter insofar as said civil action arises out of, or
concerns, those professional medical services.
D. The Township shall not be responsible for the defense or
indemnification of any public employee of the Township, when the
Township Committee has determined that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
(2) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct, or actual malice.
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the public employee.
(4) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy, or policies, whether obtained by the Township or
by any other person.
(5) The public employee failed to deliver to the Township
Administrator within 10 calendar days after the time he or she is
served, the original or copy of any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand, or pleading.
(6) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 26-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 26-5
26:28
§ 26-5. Township control over litigation.
Whenever the Township provides any defense required of it under this
chapter, the Township, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over
the representation of the public employee, and such employee shall
cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 26-6. Indemnification.
§ 26-7. Limitations.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Township to pay for punitive or
exemplary damages, or damages resulting from the commission of a crime.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 29, Economic Development Advisory Board, adopted
5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08, was repealed 1-11-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01.]
Chapter 33
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICE
§ 33-1. Emergency Management Coordinator.
A. In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense under
this chapter, the Township shall pay or shall reimburse the public
employee for:
(1) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the public
employee.
(2) Any judgments entered against the public employee.
(3) If the Township has failed to provide such required defense, all
costs of defending the action, including reasonable counsel fees
and expenses, together with costs of any appeal.
B. In addition, in any case where the Township would be required to
provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the Township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance.
A. The Mayor shall appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator from
among the residents of the municipality. The Emergency Management
Coordinator shall serve, subject to fulfilling the requirements of this
section, for a term of three years.
§ 26-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICE § 33-1
33:29
§ 33-2. Emergency Management Deputy Coordinator.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint an Emergency
Management Deputy Coordinator with the approval of the Mayor. Wherever
possible, such Deputy shall be appointed from among the salaried officers
or employees of the municipality.
§ 33-3. Duties of Coordinator.
§ 33-4. Emergency Management Service Council.
There is hereby created an Emergency Management Service Council to be
composed of not more than 15 members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member and shall serve as
Chairman of the Emergency Management Service Council.
§ 33-5. Duties of Council.
B. As a condition of his or her appointment and his or her right to continue
for the full term of his or her appointment, the Emergency Management
Coordinator shall have successfully completed, at the time of his or her
appointment or within one year immediately following his or her
appointment, the current approved home study course and basic
emergency management workshop. The failure of any Emergency
Management Coordinator to fulfill such requirements within the period
prescribed shall disqualify the Coordinator from continuing in the office
of Coordinator, and thereupon a vacancy in said office shall be deemed
to have been created.
A. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible for the
planning, activating, coordinating and the conduct of emergency
management operations within the Township.
B. Whenever, in his or her opinion, a disaster has occurred or is imminent
in any municipality, the Emergency Management Coordinator of that
municipality shall proclaim a state of local disaster emergency within
the Township. The Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance
with regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency
Management, shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders as
may be necessary to implement and carry out emergency management
operations and to protect the health, safety and resources of the
residents of the Township.
A. The Emergency Management Service Council shall assist the
municipality in establishing the various local volunteer agencies needed
to meet the requirements of all local emergency management activities
in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Governor of the State of New Jersey.
§ 33-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 33-5
33:30
Chapter 37
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 37-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq. The Environmental
Commission shall be responsible for the protection, development and use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 37-2. Membership; Chairman.
The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven regular members, one
of whom shall be a member of the Municipal Planning Board, appointed by
the Mayor of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Two alternate members,
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," shall be appointed
by the governing body. The Mayor shall designate one member of the
Environmental Commission to serve as Chairman and presiding officer. All
members shall be residents of the municipality.
§ 37-3. Terms of office; vacancies.
B. The Emergency Management Service Council is authorized, within the
limits of appropriations, to establish an adequate organization to assist
in supervising and coordinating the civil defense and emergency
management activities of the local municipality.
A. The initial term of office for the first members of the Commission shall
be as follows: two members for one year, two members for two years,
and three members for three years. As the term of each member on the
Commission expires, the successor shall be appointed for a term of
three years. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment.
B. The terms of office for the alternate members of the Commission shall
be two years, except that the terms of the alternate members first
appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled by the governing body for the
unexpired term only. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act
on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. An alternate member may, after public
hearing if he or she requests one, be removed by the governing body for
cause. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
§ 33-5 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 37-3
37:31
§ 37-4. Removal of members.
The Mayor and governing body of the Township may remove any member of
the Environmental Commission for cause, on written charges served upon a
member. The member shall be entitled to a hearing and shall be entitled to
be represented by counsel.
§ 37-5. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall:
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
A. Formulate such recommendations to the Township Committee
concerning open space preservation, water resources management, air
pollution control, solid waste management, noise control, soil and
landscaping protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and the protection of flora and fauna.
B. Initiate studies concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise
control, soil and landscaping protection, environmental appearance,
marine resources and the protection of flora and fauna.
C. Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas and make
recommendations to the Planning Board and the governing body
concerning the same.
D. Keep records of its meetings and activities and make an annual report
to the governing body.
E. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes and advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets, and promote public education programs
which support recycling and the preservation of our environment.
F. Subject to the approval of the governing body, acquire property, both
real and personal, in the name of the municipality, by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes subject to terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or
lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect and limit the future use or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other lands
and water areas in the Township.
§ 37-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 37-5
37:32
Chapter 40
ETHICS
G. Appoint such clerks and other employees and incur such expenses as it
may from time to time require, provided that the same shall be within
the limits of funds appropriated to it by the governing body or otherwise
available to it.
§ 37-5 ETHICS § 37-5
40:33

ARTICLE I
Prohibition on Award of Contracts to Certain Contributors
§ 40-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to comply and adopt the provisions of
Chapter 19, P.L. 2004, as amended P.L. 2005, c. 51, and Chapter 271, P.L.
2005 (the "Pay to Play Acts").4
§ 40-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise noted, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated, as delineated within N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.7:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any natural or legal person, business corporation,
professional services corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state or of any other
state or foreign jurisdiction;
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits or
assets of a business entity or 10% of the stock in the case of a business
entity that is a corporation for profit, as appropriate;
§ 40-3. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. The Township of Little Egg Harbor, and any agency or instrumentality
thereof, shall not enter into a contract having an anticipated value in
excess of $17,500, as determined in advance and certified in writing by
the Township, with a business entity, except a contract that is awarded
pursuant to a fair and open process, if, during the preceding one-year
period, that business entity has made a contribution that is reportable
by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83 (N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.), to any
Little Egg Harbor Township committee of a political party, if a member
of that political party is serving in an elective public office of Little Egg
Harbor when the contract is awarded, or to any candidate committee of
any person serving in an elective public office of that municipality when
the contract is awarded; and
B. A business entity that has entered into a contract having an anticipated
value in excess of $17,500 with the Township of Little Egg Harbor, or
any agency or instrumentality thereof, except a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, shall not make such a
contribution, reportable by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83 (N.J.S.A.
19:44A-1 et seq.), to any Little Egg Harbor Township committee of a
political party, if a member of that political party is serving in an
elective public office of that municipality when the contract is awarded,
or to any candidate committee of any person serving in an elective
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.3 et seq.
§ 40-1 ETHICS § 40-3
40:35
§ 40-4. Certain contributions deemed as contributions by business
entity.
When a business entity is a natural person, a contribution by that person's
spouse or child residing therewith shall be deemed to be a contribution by
the business entity. When a business entity is other than a natural person,
a contribution by any person or other business entity having an interest
therein shall be deemed to be a contribution by the business entity.
§ 40-5. Return of excess contributions.
If a business entity makes a contribution that would cause it to be ineligible
to receive a public contract, or in the case of a contribution made during
the term of a public contract that would constitute a violation of the Pay
to Play Acts, the business entity may request, in writing, within 60 days
of the date on which the contribution was made, that the recipient thereof
repay the contribution and, if repayment is received within those 60 days,
the business entity would again be eligible to receive a contract, or would
no longer be in violation, as appropriate.
§ 40-6. Public exigency.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
awarding of a contract when the public exigency requires the immediate
delivery of goods or performance of emergency services as determined by
the State Treasurer.
§ 40-7. Violations and penalties; civil penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall result in penalties as prescribed within
N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.10 and 19:44A-20.11.
public office of that municipality when the contract is awarded during
the term of that contract.
C. No such committee as referenced in Subsection A or B above shall
accept such a contribution from a business entity during the term of the
business entity's contract with the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
unless it was awarded under a fair and open process.
§ 40-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 40-7
40:36
ARTICLE II
Fair and Open Process
§ 40-8. Fair and open process utilized to award contracts with
anticipated value in excess of $17,500.
A. The Township shall award all contracts with a business entity having an
anticipated value in excess of $17,500 on the basis of the fair and open
process herein, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.7. For purposes
of this article, contracts awarded by public bidding pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-4, and competitive contracting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1
to 40A:11-4.5, shall be deemed to have satisfied the Township's "fair
and open process." This article shall not apply to any contract for which
the entity is regulated by the state so as to prohibit or restrict said
entity from making political contributions.
B. Fair and open process defined.
(1) Requests for proposal shall be published by the posting of a public
notice at least 10 days prior to the awarding of any contract herein.
(a) The public notice shall be:
[1] Prominently posted in the public place reserved for
Sunshine Law notices;
[2] Mailed, telephoned, telegrammed, faxed, or hand
delivered to at least two newspapers designated to receive
such notice because they have the greatest likelihood of
informing the public within the municipality, one of which
shall be the official newspaper of the municipality; and
[3] Filed with the Township Clerk.
(b) The public notice shall, at minimum, include:
[1] A description of the goods or services needed, including,
where appropriate, a description of tasks involved.
[2] Threshold qualification requirements setting the highest
possible minimum standards for qualifying to compete for
the particular goods or services and tasks involved.
[3] Notice that the selection criteria are on file and available
at a stated location in the Township.
[4] Deadline and place for all submissions.
(2) The selection criteria to be used in awarding a contract or
agreement for goods or services shall include:
(a) Name and business address of proposed contractor. For
service contracts, the names and roles of the individuals who
§ 40-8 ETHICS § 40-8
40:37
will perform the task, and a description of their experience
with projects similar to the matter being advertised.
(b) References which include evidence of successful transactions
for provision of similar goods or services.
(c) Description of ability to provide the goods or services in a
timely fashion (for service contracts, include staffing,
familiarity, and location of key staff).
(d) Cost details. For service contracts, include the hourly rates of
each of the individuals who will perform services, time
estimates for each individual, all expenses, and where
appropriate, total cost of "not to exceed" amount.
(e) Qualifications of the individuals who will perform the tasks and
the amounts of their respective participation (services only).
(f) Other relevant experience.
(g) Ability to perform the task or provide goods in a timely fashion.
(h) Cost consideration, including, but not limited to, as applicable,
historical costs for similar goods or services, expertise involved
and comparable costs for comparable public entities.
(3) All submissions shall be kept on file during the term of the related
contract, and shall be public records after the deadline for the
submission of proposals.
(4) Contracts awarded under this article shall be publicly announced
and awarded.
§ 40-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 40-8
40:38
Chapter 44
FIRE DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
§ 44-1. Creation of Fire District No. 1.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70, there is hereby created a Fire
District No. 1 in the Township of Little Egg Harbor, County of Ocean, and
State of New Jersey.
§ 44-2. Boundaries of Fire District No. 1.
The boundaries of Fire District No. 1 shall be as set forth on Schedule A,
which is annexed hereto and made a part hereof.5
§ 44-3. Creation of Fire District No. 2.
There is hereby created Fire District No. 2 in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, County of Ocean, and State of New Jersey.
§ 44-4. Boundaries of Fire District No. 2.
The boundaries of Fire District No. 2 shall be as set forth in Schedule B,
which is annexed hereto and made a part hereof.6
§ 44-5. Creation of Fire District No. 3.
There is hereby created Fire District No. 3 in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, County of Ocean, and State of New Jersey.
§ 44-6. Boundaries of Fire District No. 3.
The boundaries of Fire District No. 3 shall be as set forth in Schedule C,
which is annexed hereto and made a part hereof.7
Chapter 49
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT PLAN COMMITTEE
5. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
6. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
7. Editor's Note: Schedule C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 40-8 FIRE DISTRICTS § 49-1
44:39
§ 49-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Floodplain Management Plan Committee,
which shall be an advisory body responsible for aiding the Township
Engineer in preparing a Floodplain Management Plan, discussing various
aspects of the Floodplain Management Plan, including assessing the hazard,
assessing the problem, setting goals, and reviewing possible activities and
strategies to mitigate the hazard, and drafting an action plan.
§ 49-2. Membership; alternates.
§ 49-3. Term of office; vacancies.
A. The Floodplain Management Committee shall consist of 10 members,
who shall serve without compensation. The members shall be appointed
by the Township Committee from the following Township Departments:
(1) Building/Code Enforcement;
(2) Engineering;
(3) Land Use/Planning/Zoning;
(4) Public Works;
(5) Emergency Management/Public Safety;
(6) Public Information;
(7) Environmental Protection/Public Health;
(8) Parks and Recreation;
(9) Council members; and
(10) Housing and Community Development.
B. The Mayor and Township Council may appoint by resolution two
additional members of the public who currently reside in the floodplain
area.
C. The Chair of the Committee will be the Township Engineer.
D. A secretary shall be elected annually from among the members of the
Committee.
E. The Chair shall establish the meeting schedule.
F. There shall be two alternate members, who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee.
A. The term of office for the appointed members of the Committee shall be
for two years.
§ 49-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 49-3
44:40
§ 49-4. Meetings.
§ 49-5. Duties of members.
Committee members shall meet and discuss various aspects of the
Floodplain Management Plan and draft an action plan.
§ 49-6. Removal of members.
The Mayor or Township Committee may remove any member of the
Committee for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after
a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
§ 49-7. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall:
Chapter 50
GREEN TEAM ADVISORY COMMITTEE
B. A vacancy on the Committee occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only by the Mayor.
C. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
is made.
A. There shall be not fewer than five meetings a year. The Chair shall
preside at all meetings of the Committee.
B. There shall be not fewer than two public information sessions a year
held within the floodplain area.
A. Identify and assess flood hazards within the Township;
B. Establish goals and objectives;
C. Review possible activities and strategies designed to minimize flooding
and mitigate the impacts from flooding in the future;
D. Aid in the preparation and drafting of an action plan;
E. Hold two public information sessions a year in a floodplain area;
F. Keep records of its meetings and make an annual report to the
governing body; and
G. Perform any other duties as directed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
§ 49-3 FIRE DISTRICTS § 50-1
44:41
§ 50-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Green Team Advisory Committee to the Little
Egg Harbor Township Committee.
§ 50-2. Purpose.
The general purpose for the Green Team Advisory Committee includes but
is not limited to the following:
§ 50-3. Membership; term. [Amended 11-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-15]
A. Manage the Township's participation in the Sustainable Jersey
program;
B. Encourage the pursuit of sustainable practices where possible within
the Township;
C. Make Green Team information available to the public;
D. At the recommendation of the Township Committee, work with existing
groups within the Township whose actions affect environmental issues;
E. Provide suggestions for further research and action to the Township
Committee;
F. At the direction of the Township Committee, provide advice and
suggestions to the Township Zoning and Planning Boards to assure that
environmental issues are considered in their deliberations and actions;
G. Solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community; and
H. Promote sustainability within the Township.
A. The Green Team shall consist of 10 members, with two alternates also
being appointed by resolution of the Township Committee. All members
and alternates shall be Township residents.
B. Additionally, two members of the Township Committee, the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, the Township
Engineer and the Township Administrator or Assistant Township
Administrator shall serve as ex officio members of the Green Team. Ex
officio members shall not vote.
C. The Green Team shall elect from among its members a Chair, Vice Chair
and Secretary/Treasurer.
D. All terms shall be for three years.
E. The Green Team shall select Township volunteers to work on Green
Team projects.
§ 50-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 50-3
44:42
§ 50-4. Meetings.
There shall be not fewer than six meetings a year. The Chair shall preside
at all meetings of the Green Team.
Chapter 55
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Ch. Part III
of the Code.
§ 55-1. Acceptance of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Subdivision B of Article 1 of N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 et seq. are
hereby adopted in the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 55-2. Membership of Board; alternates. [Amended 1-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-01]
The local Board of Health of the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be
composed of seven members and two alternates. The alternate members
shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. Upon consent of
the prospective appointee, the governing body of the Township may appoint
a school nurse or a municipal physician to the local board notwithstanding
that the nurse or physician is not a resident of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
§ 55-3. Appointment of members.
Regular and alternate members of the local Board of Health shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation by affirmative vote of a
majority of the members of the governing body in attendance at a regular
meeting.
§ 55-4. Terms of office; vacancies.
F. The Green Team shall periodically submit reports and minutes to the
Township Committee.
A. Three of the members first appointed and confirmed shall serve for
terms of three years, and two of the members first appointed and
confirmed shall serve for terms of two years. Upon the expiration of the
term of each of the members first appointed, all subsequent
appointments shall be for terms of three years. Any appointment made
to fill any vacancy occurring other than by reason of the expiration of
the term of a member shall be for the period of the unexpired term only
§ 50-3 FIRE DISTRICTS § 55-4
44:43
§ 55-5. Organization of Board; meetings. [Amended 1-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 55-6. Uncompensated service.
The members of the Board of Health shall receive no salary or compensation
for their services.
§ 55-7. Notice of appointment; assumption of duties.
Upon appointment and confirmation of the members of the new Board, the
Township Clerk shall notify each appointee of his or her appointment and
shall properly induct him into office. The tenure of the present Board of
and shall be made in the same manner and by the same method as
provided in § 55-3 hereof for the making of the original appointments to
said Board.
B. The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be for two years
for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term of
not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
by the governing body for the unexpired term only.
A. The Board of Health, upon appointment and confirmation of all of its
members, shall, within two weeks from the date thereof, hold an
organizational meeting at which it shall fix a place, day and hour for the
regular meeting of the Board to conduct its general business, notice of
which shall be published in at least one newspaper circulating in the
Township of Little Egg Harbor. The Board shall hold at least one regular
meeting each quarter of the year and such special meetings as may be
called from time to time by the Chairman of the Board of Health or by
four members of said Board in accordance with such rules and
regulations as said Board may adopt.
B. After the qualification of the members of said Board, they shall each
year select one of their members who shall be the Secretary of the
Board.
C. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
D. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
or she requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
§ 55-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 55-7
44:44
Health shall cease at the time of, and simultaneously with, the organization
and qualification of the new Board as provided for herein. Upon the
induction of the new members into office and after organization thereof,
the new Board shall immediately assume all of the duties, obligations and
responsibilities of the local Board of Health.
Chapter 59
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 59-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Historic Preservation Commission in the
Township of Little Egg Harbor in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107.
§ 59-2. Membership; appointments.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five members and
two alternates appointed by the Mayor of Little Egg Harbor Township. The
members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall designate one of its
members as Chairman of the Commission. The membership of the Historic
Preservation Commission shall be broken down into three categories as
follows:
§ 59-3. Terms of members; vacancies; organization; voting; removal
of members.
A. Class A. There shall be one Class A member who shall be a person
knowledgeable in building design and construction or architectural
history and who may reside outside the municipality.
B. Class B. There shall be one Class B member who shall be a person
knowledgeable or with a demonstrated interest in local history and who
may reside outside the municipality.
C. Class C. There shall be three Class C members who shall be citizens of
the municipality who shall hold no other municipal office, position, or
employment, except for membership on the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
D. There shall be two alternate members who shall meet the qualifications
of Class C members.
A. The Class A member shall be initially appointed to a two-year term and
thereafter all appointments shall be for four years.
B. The Class B member shall initially be appointed for a term of three
years, and thereafter for a term of four years.
C. The Class C members shall have initial appointments for terms of one,
two and three years, respectively. One Class C member shall be
appointed for a one-year term, one Class C member shall be appointed
§ 55-7 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION § 59-3
59:45
§ 59-4. Duties.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following duties:
for a two-year term, and one Class C member shall be appointed for a
three-year term. Thereafter, all Class C member appointments shall be
for four-year terms.
D. Alternates, who shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate
No. 2, shall be appointed for initial terms of one year for Alternate No. 1
and two years for Alternate No. 2. Thereafter, terms of both alternate
members shall be two years.
E. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the balance of the unexpired term only.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any member
common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning
Board shall be for the terms of membership on the Planning Board; and
the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of
membership on the Board of Adjustment.
G. The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and select a Secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Historic Preservation Commission or a municipal
employee.
H. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
I. No member of any Historic Preservation Commission shall act on any
manner in which he or she has, directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
J. A member of a historic preservation body may, after public hearing, if
he or she requests, be removed by the governing body for cause.
A. Prepare a survey of historic sites of the municipality pursuant to criteria
identified in the Survey Report.
B. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the implications
for preservation of historic sites of any other Master Plan elements.
C. Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended Capital Improvement Program.
§ 59-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 59-4
59:46
Chapter 65
HOSPITALIZATION PLAN
§ 65-1. Coverage.
As they become eligible, new full-time employees will be advised by the
Township Clerk that they are permitted to enroll in the current health
benefit plan. It is the employee's option to accept or waive coverage
beginning with the first day of the month in permanent employee status.
Any change in the employee's dependent status must be reported
immediately to the Township Clerk or designated responsible employee.
§ 65-2. Waiver of coverage.
Any employee eligible for the Township's health benefits plan who is also
eligible for coverage as a dependent of the employee's spouse under
another plan offered by the spouse's employer or through the health benefit
plan of another employer may waive coverage under the Township's plan.
The waiver shall be made on a form provided by and filed with the Township
Clerk.
§ 65-3. Payment for waiver of coverage. [Amended 6-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-13]
Any employee filing for a waiver of health benefits pursuant to § 65-2
subsequent to May 21, 2010, will annually be paid by the Township a
sum equal to 25% of the amount saved by the Township because of the
employee’s waiver of coverage, or $5,000, whichever is less, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:14-17.31. Employees receiving payment for waiver of health
benefits, which was filed before May 21, 2010, shall receive the same
percentage of payment he or she is currently receiving, until a change in
status occurs.
§ 65-4. Discontinuation of waiver of coverage.
Any employee who waives health benefits pursuant to § 65-2 above shall
be permitted to resume coverage under the same terms and conditions
D. Advise the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment on applications
for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110, historic zoning
districts.
E. Provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111, designation of
historic sites, on the application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions
concerning historic preservation.8
F. Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions
as will promote historic preservation in the municipality.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Land Development.
§ 59-4 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION § 65-4
59:47
as applied to initial coverage if the employee ceases to be covered under
his or her spouse's health benefits plan or through the health benefit plan
of another employer. Any employee resuming coverage shall repay to the
Township on a pro rata basis any amount received in advance for a period
of time during which coverage has been resumed.
§ 65-5. Form to resume coverage.
Any employee who wishes to resume coverage shall file with the Township
Clerk a declaration on a form provided by the Township Clerk.
Chapter 71
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY
§ 71-1. Authority created; name.
Pursuant to the provisions of Title 40, Chapter 14B of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey, there is hereby created a public body corporate and politic
under the name and style of the "Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal
Utilities Authority" (hereinafter "LEHMUA").
§ 71-2. Statutory powers and duties.
The Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities Authority hereby
created is a municipal authority as particularly contemplated and provided
for in Section 4, Chapter 14B of Title 409 and shall have and exercise all
the powers and perform all the duties provided for by said law and shall
constitute an agency and instrumentality of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
§ 71-3. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
A. After the enactment of this chapter creating said Authority and the
filing of a certified copy thereof as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4(a), five
persons shall be appointed as the members of the LEHMUA. The
members first appointed shall, by the resolution of appointment, be
designated to serve for terms respectively expiring on the first days of
the first, second, third, fourth and fifth Februarys next ensuing after the
date of their appointment. On or after January 1 in each year after such
first appointments, one person shall be appointed as a member of the
Municipal Authority to serve for a term commencing February 1 in such
year and expiring on February 1 in the fifth year after such year. In the
event of a vacancy in the membership of the Authority occurring during
an unexpired term of office, a person shall be appointed as a member to
serve for such unexpired term.
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4.
§ 65-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 71-3
59:48
§ 71-4. Proof of appointment of members.
A copy of the resolution appointing any member of the said Authority, duly
certified by the Township Clerk, may be filed in the office of the Secretary
of State. A copy of such certified resolution, duly certified by or on behalf of
the Secretary of State, shall be admissible in evidence in any suit, action or
proceeding and, except in a suit, action or proceeding directly questioning
such appointment, shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper
appointment of the member or members named therein.
§ 71-5. Reimbursement for expenses.
§ 71-6. Organization of Authority; employees.
The Authority, upon the first appointment of its members and thereafter
on or after February 1 in each year, shall annually elect from among its
members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman, who shall hold office until
February 1 next ensuing and until their respective successors have been
elected and have qualified. The Authority may also appoint and employ
such agents and employees as it may require and may determine their
duties and compensation without regard to the provisions of Title 11 of
the Revised Statutes, including but not limited to a secretary, executive
director, attorney and engineer.
B. Two alternate members shall be appointed to the LEHMUA by the
governing body. Said alternate members shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" when appointed by the
Township Committee and shall serve during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members of the LEHMUA.
The term of each alternate member shall be five years commencing on
February 1 of the year of appointment; provided, however, that, in the
event that two alternate members are appointed, their initial terms
shall be five years and four years, respectively. Alternate members may
participate in discussions at the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member.
A. Upon vouchers duly presented to and approved by the Authority,
members may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the
discharge of their duties.
B. The Chairman and members of the LEHMUA shall be compensated for
their services as the Authority may determine by resolution, not to
exceed $5,000 annually. [Amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-13]
C. Alternate members of the LEHMUA may be compensated by the
Authority for meetings attended and be reimbursed for necessary
expenses as hereinabove set forth. The payment to alternates shall not
exceed the amount paid to regular members for meetings attended.
§ 71-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION § 71-7
59:49
§ 71-7. Purpose.
The purpose of the Authority shall be:
Chapter 78
MUTUAL AID
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management service — See Ch.
33.
Police Department — See Ch. 93.
A. The provision and distribution of an adequate supply of water for the
public and private users of the Township of Little Egg Harbor Township
and its inhabitants.
B. The relief of waters in or bordering the state from pollution arising from
causes within Little Egg Harbor Township, the relief of waters in,
bordering or entering Little Egg Harbor Township from pollution or
threatened pollution and the consequent improvement of conditions
affecting the public health.
C. The provision of sewage collection and disposal service within or
without the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
D. The provision of water supply and distribution service in such areas
outside the Township of Little Egg Harbor as are permitted by the
provisions of Title 40, Chapter 14B of the Revised Statutes.
§ 71-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 71-7
78:50
ARTICLE I
Police Services
§ 78-1. Preamble.
§ 78-2. Mutual aid agreements established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there are hereby established mutual aid
agreements among and between the Township of Little Egg Harbor and
each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County of Ocean, New
Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption by one or more of
the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter referred to as "participating
municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to provide mutual aid in police
services in case of emergency. This agreement shall apply whenever this
municipality shall have an emergency within its boundaries requiring
additional police assistance to protect life and property, and whenever any
of the aforementioned municipalities may experience a similar emergency.
§ 78-3. Emergency defined; S.O.P.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "emergency" shall be defined to
include situations in which the number of available police officers in a
participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need in a
particular situation, and situations where police aid involving special
expertise or training is required in order to protect life and property or to
assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No formal declaration of emergency
is required to implement the provisions of the Mutual Aid Agreement.
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 authorizes municipalities to enter into mutual aid
and assistance agreements for police services in cases of emergencies.
B. The County of Ocean consists of 33 municipalities, 32 of which have
municipal police or fire departments operating for or within the
Township of Barnegat, Borough of Barnegat Light, Borough of Bay
Head, Borough of Beach Haven, Borough of Beachwood, Township of
Berkeley, Township of Brick, Township of Dover, Township of
Eagleswood, Borough of Harvey Cedars, Borough of Island Heights,
Township of Jackson, Township of Lacey, Borough of Lakehurst,
Township of Lakewood, Borough of Lavallette, Township of Little Egg
Harbor, Township of Long Beach, Township of Manchester, Borough of
Mantoloking, Borough of Ocean Gate, Township of Ocean, Borough of
Pine Beach, Township of Plumsted, Borough of Point Pleasant, Borough
of Point Pleasant Beach, Borough of Seaside Heights, Borough of
Seaside Park, Borough of Ship Bottom, Borough of South Toms River,
Township of Stafford, Borough of Surf City, and Borough of Tuckerton,
which regularly interact and provide assistance to each other in policerelated
emergencies.
C. Each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County of Ocean
wishes to formalize and refine existing practice by entering into mutual
aid agreements.
§ 78-1 MUTUAL AID § 78-4
78:51
§ 78-4. Requests for assistance.
The Chief or acting head of the Police Department, or Mayor or Chief
Executive Officer of a participating municipality, is hereby authorized to
request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police Department
of any other participating municipality to provide aid in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq.
§ 78-5. Provision of assistance.
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request is made to supply personnel in accordance with this agreement,
to the extent possible, without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
§ 78-6. Powers; rights; immunities.
The members of the police department of the municipality supplying aid
shall have the same powers, authority, rights and immunities as the
members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid is being
rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights
and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 78-7. County Critical Incident Management Plan.
The mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Ocean shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Ocean County Prosecutor
as the chief law enforcement official in the county. The Plan provides
for response by a specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high-risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or other similar situations
occurring within a municipality in Ocean County.
§ 78-8. Benefits; injury; death.
A member of the police force of the providing municipality who suffers
injury or death while rendering assistance in the requesting municipality,
or the member's legal representative, shall be entitled to all salary, pension
rights, workmen's compensation or other benefits, as the member would
have accrued if such injury or death had occurred in the performance
of duties in his or her own municipality, with such benefits to be the
responsibility of the providing municipality.
§ 78-9. Reimbursement.
A. A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the
terms of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall not be
required to directly reimburse the regional team for services so
§ 78-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 78-9
78:52
§ 78-10. Effective date of agreement.
When such other participating municipality has adopted an ordinance
reciprocal to this one, and such ordinance has become effective in that
municipality, it shall become effective with respect to the Township of Little
Egg Harbor's activities with another participating municipality.
provided. The member municipalities shall, however, otherwise support
the function of the respective regional response teams by providing the
necessary manpower, equipment and supplies on an ongoing annual
basis, pursuant to the terms of the County Critical Incident
Management Plan.
B. Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under
circumstances outside of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan, reimbursement shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such
other terms and conditions for reimbursement specifically agreed to
between specific municipalities.
§ 78-9 MUTUAL AID § 78-10
78:53
Chapter 82
NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 82-1. Establishment; number of members.
There is hereby established a Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee
which shall consist of nine members and two alternate members.
§ 82-2. Membership; alternate members; terms; vacancies.
§ 82-3. Compensation.
The members of the Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee shall serve
without compensation.
A. The Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee shall consist of the Mayor
of Little Egg Harbor Township, one additional member of the Township
Committee of Little Egg Harbor Township selected by the Township
Committee, Assistant Township Administrator, Chairperson of the
Environmental Commission, and Chairperson of the Planning Board.
The Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee shall also be comprised of
four at-large members. Two of the four at-large members shall be
residents of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The two remaining atlarge
members may be nonresidents, provided that these members
have considerable educations, backgrounds and experience in the areas
of natural lands protection, land conservation, environmental
protection, forest management, ecological or biological study, wildlife
preservation, or similar areas of substantive knowledge and
experience. No at-large member shall be an employee of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
B. There shall be two alternate members of the Natural Lands Trust
Advisory Committee who shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2. The alternate members shall be permitted to
participate at meetings of the Advisory Committee but shall not vote
unless a regular member or members are absent, in which case an
alternate member in numerical order shall be permitted to vote in the
absence of a regular member or members.
C. The terms of all members of the Natural Lands Trust Advisory
Committee shall be for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of
the year of the appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of
the appointment.
D. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
E. The four at-large members and two alternate members of the Natural
Lands Trust Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Township
Committee.
§ 78-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 82-4
82:54
§ 82-4. Powers and duties; ex officio member; designation of
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson; meetings.
Chapter 86
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
American Disabilities Act Advisory
Board — See Ch. 7.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26.
Ethics — See Ch. 40.
Hospitalization plan — See Ch. 65.
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
90.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 103.
Sick Leave Trust Fund — See Ch. 116.
Officers and employees of the Board of
Health — See Ch. 363.
A. The Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee shall be responsible for
the evaluation of properties to be acquired and developed for open
space and conservation purposes, pursuant to the establishment of the
annual levy for this purpose under N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7. The Advisory
Committee shall make recommendations to the governing body
concerning acquisition of lands for open space and conservation
purposes, development of lands acquired for open space and
conservation purposes, and maintenance of lands acquired for open
space conservation purposes.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the Advisory
Committee to enter into any contract or agreement or to expend,
obligate or otherwise encumber finds of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for any of the purposes set forth in this section, and the powers
of the Advisory Committee shall be limited to the making of
recommendations and providing reports as needed or appropriate to
the governing body in accordance with this section.
C. The Township Administrator shall be an ex officio member of the
Advisory Committee and shall have the right to attend and participate
at all meetings of the Advisory Committee but shall not have a vote on
the Advisory Committee.
D. The Mayor of the Township of Little Egg Harbor Township shall serve as
the Chairperson of the Natural Lands Trust Advisory Committee. The
members of the Advisory Committee shall select one of the remaining
regular members of the Advisory Committee to serve as the Vice
Chairperson of the Advisory Committee.
§ 82-4 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 82-4
82:55

ARTICLE I
Health and Fitness
§ 86-1. Compliance with Americans With Disabilities Act.
All employment by the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be in compliance
with the Americans With Disabilities Act.10
§ 86-2. Freedom from disabling defects; accommodations for
disabled.
Notwithstanding any provision relating to a job position in this chapter, the
following shall apply:
A. Persons employed by the Township of Little Egg Harbor in a position
provided by this chapter shall possess good health and freedom from
disabling physical and mental defects which impair the proper
performance of the required duties or which might endanger the health
and safety of oneself or others. Persons with mental or physical
disabilities are eligible as long as they can perform the essential
functions of the job position after reasonable accommodation is made to
their known limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made because
it would cause the employer undue hardship, such person may not be
eligible.
B. Persons employed by the Township of Little Egg Harbor in a position
provided by this chapter shall have the ability to read, write, speak,
understand or communicate in English sufficiently to perform the
duties of this position. American Sign Language or Braille may also be
considered as acceptable forms of communication.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 7, American Disabilities Act Advisory Board.
§ 86-1 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-2
82:57

ARTICLE II
Residency Requirement
§ 86-3. Preference to Township residents.11
In the appointing of any employee, officer or department head, preference
shall be given to residents of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
11.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 90, § 90-3, Residency requirements.
§ 86-3 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-3
82:59

ARTICLE III
Township Administrator
§ 86-4. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Township Administrator for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, to administer
the business affairs of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and to have such
powers and perform such duties as hereinafter set forth, with the exception
of those required by law to be exercised by the Mayor and/or Township
Committee or by another officer, board or body.
§ 86-5. Duties; qualifications.
A. The Township Administrator shall perform the executive responsibility
of the municipality and shall supervise all heads of departments and
direct the implementation of all policies, ordinances, rules and
regulations as adopted by the Township Committee.
B. He or she shall recommend, implement and enforce the procedures and
policies of the Township Committee for the coordination, compilation,
editing and prompt dissemination and release of public information.
C. He or she shall recommend to the Township Committee adoption of
such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the
health, safety and welfare of the community or for the improvement of
services of the Township and shall recommend the nature and location
of public improvements authorized by the Township Committee.
D. He or she shall prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the
efficient management of Township government, subject to approval by
the Township Committee and ordinances of the Township.
E. As a representative of the Township Committee, the Township
Administrator shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the Township and
in regard to services maintained by the public utilities in the Township
and shall see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the
Township are faithfully observed. He or she shall receive and reply to all
inquiries and complaints concerning Township business, provide
information and assistance and remedy, or cause to be remedied, the
source of any just complaint.
F. The Township Administrator shall negotiate contracts for the Township
as authorized by and subject to the approval of the Township
Committee. He or she shall ensure that all terms and conditions
favorable to the Township in any statute or contract are faithfully kept
and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation, shall call the
same to the attention of the Township Committee.
§ 86-4 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-5
82:61
§ 86-6. Removal from office.
The Township Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the
governing body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the governing body. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-138, the governing body may provide that the resolution of removal
shall have immediate effect; provided, however, that the governing body
shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of
his or her salary, and his or her salary for the next three calendar months
following adoption of the resolution.
§ 86-7. Appointment; term of office.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the
Township Committee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137. The term of
office of the Township Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the
governing body, subject to the provisions of state law.
G. The Township Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Township
Committee, as of the end of the year, a complete report on the finances
and administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
H. The Township Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Township Committee, consistent with the laws of the
State of New Jersey or the Township.
I. The Township Administrator shall, before separation from the
Township, render a report on all activities of the Township from the
date of his or her last report to the date of his or her separation.
§ 86-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-7
82:62
ARTICLE IV
Assistant Township Administrator.
§ 86-8. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Township Administrator
for the Township of Little Egg Harbor, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:63-7.1, to assist in the administration of the Township under the
direction of the Township Administrator. The position of Assistant Township
Administrator shall be an unclassified position in accordance with the
provisions of Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 86-9. Qualifications.
To be appointed to the position of Assistant Township Administrator, an
individual shall possess the following qualifications:
§ 86-10. Duties and responsibilities.
A. Education. Bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university.
However, applicants who do not meet this requirement may substitute
additional work experience as described below on the basis of one year
of such experience for each 30 semester hours of credit the applicant is
lacking. Possession of a master's degree from an accredited college or
university with a major course of study in human services
administration, business administration, public administration,
industrial management, industrial engineering, management sciences
or in a program related to the organization, operation, administration,
and control of private or public organizations may be substituted for
one year of the experience described below.
B. Experience. Fours years of management experience which shall have
included all of the following management functions:
(1) Setting program organizational goals and objectives;
(2) Establishing organizational structure or determining the need for
and developing plans for organizational changes;
(3) Setting policy for the organization or program managed by
establishing program emphasis and priorities and developing
operating and procedural guidelines; and
(4) Directing the work of the organization or program through
subordinate levels of supervision.
A. The Assistant Township Administrator shall have the following duties
and responsibilities and shall have such other duties and
responsibilities as assigned by the Township Administrator:
(1) Assists the Township Administrator and Finance Department in the
preparation and review of the annual budget.
§ 86-8 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-10
82:63
§ 86-11. Appointment; term of office; removal.
§ 86-12. Residency.
A person appointed to the position of Assistant Township Administrator
need not be a resident of Little Egg Harbor Township.
§ 86-13. Salary.
The Assistant Township Administrator shall be compensated in accordance
with the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(2) Assists the Township Administrator in installing modern
management methods and systems in all departments.
(3) Assists the Township Administrator in advising the governing body
on matters of policy.
(4) Assists the Township Administrator in editing and compiling public
information releases.
(5) Assists the Township Administrator in advising the governing body
on all matters of personnel and administrative organization.
(6) Prepares comprehensive reports, and supervises the establishment
and maintenance of suitable records and files.
(7) Utilizes various types of electronic and/or manual recording and
information systems such as, but not limited to, personal
computers and software.
B. During the absence or disability of the Township Administrator, the
Assistant Township Administrator shall have all the powers of the
Township Administrator and shall perform the functions and duties of
the Township Administrator accordingly.
A. The Assistant Township Administrator shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the Township governing body.
B. The term of office of the Assistant Township Administrator shall be at
the pleasure of the Township governing body.
C. The Assistant Township Administrator may be removed by the Township
governing body in accordance with the same removal procedures which
apply to municipal administrators as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138 and
any revisions thereto.
§ 86-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-13
82:64
ARTICLE V
Municipal Clerk
§ 86-14. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.
§ 86-15. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-16. Vacancies.
Within 90 days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Municipal
Clerk by reason of the departure of the Registered Municipal Clerk, the
governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor may appoint a person
who does not hold a registered municipal clerk certificate to act as Acting
Municipal Clerk for a period not to exceed one year, commencing on the
date of the vacancy. Any person so appointed may, with the approval of the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department
of Community Affairs, be reappointed as Acting Municipal Clerk for a
maximum of two subsequent one-year terms following the termination of
the temporary appointment. No local unit shall fill the position of Acting
Municipal Clerk for more than three consecutive years. Time served as
Acting Municipal Clerk may be credited toward the experience authorized
as a substitute for the college education requirement pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133.2. Time served as Acting Municipal Clerk may not be credited
as time served as Municipal Clerk for the purposes of acquiring tenure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.7.
§ 86-17. Appointment; term of office.
The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve for a term of three years, commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the third year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of
Municipal Clerk, other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall act as the secretary to the governing body
and custodian of municipal records. The Municipal Clerk shall plan and
coordinate office activities in accordance with state/local laws, rules,
regulations and policies, and perform such functions as may be
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133. The Municipal Clerk shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Municipal Clerk, an individual must
possess a municipal clerk certificate as provided for by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133.2.
§ 86-14 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-17
82:65

ARTICLE VI
Deputy Municipal Clerk
§ 86-18. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Municipal Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
§ 86-19. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-20. Appointment; term of office.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve for a term of one year, commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of
Assistant Municipal Clerk, other than due to expiration of term, shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Clerk, on a regular and recurring
basis, the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall plan, organize, manage and
coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance with state
and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. The Deputy Municipal
Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. During the absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk, the Deputy
Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk and
shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
C. To be appointed to the position of Deputy Municipal Clerk, an individual
must possess a municipal clerk certificate as provided for by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133.2.
§ 86-18 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-20
82:67

ARTICLE VII
Assistant Municipal Clerk
§ 86-21. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Municipal Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-22. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Clerk, on a regular and recurring
basis, the Assistant Municipal Clerk shall plan, organize, manage and
coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance with state
and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. The Assistant Municipal
Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Assistant Municipal Clerk, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Five years of clerical experience involving responsibility for
maintaining records of business transactions and office activities
requiring a knowledge of office systems and procedures, two years
of which shall have been in a supervisory capacity. Applicants may
substitute college credits from an accredited college or university
for the nonsupervisory work experience on the basis of 30 semester
hour credits being equal to one year of experience.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-21 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-22
82:69

ARTICLE VIII
Township Attorney
§ 86-23. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Township Attorney for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139.
§ 86-24. Qualifications.
To be appointed to the position of Township Attorney, an individual must be
an attorney authorized to practice law in the State of New Jersey.
§ 86-25. Appointment; term of office.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve a one-year term, commencing January 1 of the year of
appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until a
successor shall be appointed and qualified. The appointment of the
Township Attorney shall be in accordance with the procedures developed by
Chapter 40, entitled "Ethics."
§ 86-23 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-25
82:71

ARTICLE IX
Township Engineer
§ 86-26. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Township Engineer for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.
§ 86-27. Qualifications.
To be appointed to the position of Township Engineer, an individual must be
a licensed professional engineer in the State of New Jersey.
§ 86-28. Appointment; term of office.
The Township Engineer shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve a one-year term, commencing January 1 of the year of
appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until a
successor shall be appointed and qualified. The appointment of the
Township Engineer shall be in accordance with the procedures developed
by Chapter 40, entitled "Ethics."
§ 86-26 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-28
82:73

ARTICLE X
Chief Financial Officer
§ 86-29. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Chief Financial Officer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
§ 86-30. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-31. Appointment; term of office.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve for a term of four years, commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the fourth year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of Chief
Financial Officer, other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall plan, organize, manage and coordinate
the various activities of the office in accordance with state and local
laws, rules, regulations, and policies, and perform such other functions
as may be required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1(d). The Chief Financial
Officer shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Chief Financial Officer, an individual
must possess a municipal finance officer certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.13(a).
§ 86-29 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-31
82:75

ARTICLE XI
Assistant Municipal Treasurer
§ 86-32. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Municipal Treasurer.
§ 86-33. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-34. Salary.
The salary for the position of Assistant Municipal Treasurer shall be
determined from time to time by the Township Committee and shall be paid
in accordance with the provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
A. The Assistant Municipal Treasurer shall assist the Chief Financial
Officer in supervising and performing the work involved in the
disbursement, accounting and auditing of funds received and disbursed
by the Township, as well as the negotiation of loans and sale of bonds
for the Township. The Assistant Municipal Treasurer shall also perform
all related work as required by the Chief Financial Officer.
B. To be appointed to the position of Assistant Municipal Treasurer, an
individual must meet the following requirements:
(1) Graduation from a four-year course at an accredited college or
university with 21 semester hour credits in professional accounting
subjects. Possession of a valid certification as a municipal finance
officer issued by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Division of Local Government Services may be substituted for the
educational requirements.
(2) Four years of varied supervisory accounting experience and work
involving the installation, operation and keeping of large-scale
systems of accounts, one year of which shall have been in municipal
accounting or auditing.
(3) Thorough knowledge of the principals, methods and procedures
used in modern accounting and auditing, of the laws, rules and
regulations governing the installation, operation and keeping of
accounts and their application to specific situations, and of the
preparation of involved and detailed accounting and other financial
reports containing findings, conclusions and recommendations.
(4) Ability to analyze complex financial problems, to give suitable
assignments and instructions, to prepare suitable reports, and to
direct the establishment and maintenance of extensive financial
and related records and files.
§ 86-32 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-34
82:77

ARTICLE XII
Municipal Court Attendant
§ 86-35. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Court Attendant for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.12
§ 86-36. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-37. Salary.
The salary for Municipal Court Attendant shall be determined from time
to time by the governing body and shall be paid in accordance with the
provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
A. The duties of the Municipal Court Attendant position shall be those set
forth by the New Jersey Department of Personnel under examples of
work pursuant to job specification 02524, incorporated herein by
reference.
B. The qualifications for the position of Municipal Court Attendant shall
also be those as set forth in the Department of Personnel Job
Specification 02524 under the heading requirements, incorporated
herein by reference, including license, knowledge and ability.
12.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 22, Court, Municipal.
§ 86-35 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-37
82:79

ARTICLE XIII
Senior Account Clerk
§ 86-38. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Account Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-39. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Senior Account
Clerk shall perform a variety of responsible and difficult clerical tasks
which involve computing, classifying, verifying and recording
numerical data and the reconciliation of accounts, records and
documents in order to keep sets of financial records complete and/or
takes the lead over other employees in the maintenance of accounting
records. The Senior Account Clerk shall also perform other related
work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Account Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in the preparation, maintenance and/or
review and verification of financial records.
(2) A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey, only if the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-38 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-39
82:81

ARTICLE XIV
Senior Account Clerk, Typing
§ 86-40. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Account Clerk, Typing, for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-41. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Senior Account
Clerk, Typing, shall perform a variety of responsible and difficult
clerical tasks which involve computing, classifying, verifying, and
recording numerical data and the reconciliation of accounts, records,
and documents to keep sets of financial records complete and/or takes
the lead over other employees in the maintenance of accounting
records. The Senior Account Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other
related work and typing as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Account Clerk, Typing, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in the preparation, maintenance and/or
review and verification of financial records.
(2) A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey, only if the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-40 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-41
82:83

ARTICLE XV
Account Clerk
§ 86-42. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Account Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-43. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Account Clerk
shall perform a variety of routine, repetitive, noncomplex clerical tasks
which involve computing, classifying, verifying, and recording
numerical data and the reconciliation of accounts, records, and
documents to keep sets of financial records complete. The Account
Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Account Clerk shall possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey,
only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is
necessary to perform essential duties of the position.
§ 86-42 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-43
82:85

ARTICLE XVI
Account Clerk, Typing
§ 86-44. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Account Clerk, Typing, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-45. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Account Clerk,
Typing, shall perform a variety of routine, repetitive, noncomplex
clerical tasks which involve computing, classifying, verifying, and
recording numerical data and the reconciliation of accounts, records,
and documents in order to keep sets of financial records complete. The
Account Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other related work and typing
as required.
B. The Account Clerk, Typing, shall possess a driver's license valid in the
State of New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than
employee mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the
position.
§ 86-44 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-45
82:87

ARTICLE XVII
Tax Collector
§ 86-46. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Collector for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
§ 86-47. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-48. Appointment; term of office.
The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Township Committee and shall
serve for a term of four years, commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment and ending on December 31 of the fourth year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of
Tax Collector, other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
A. The Tax Collector shall plan, organize, manage and coordinate the
various activities of the office in accordance with state and local laws,
rules, regulations and policies, and perform such functions as may be
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141. The Tax Collector shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Tax Collector, an individual must
possess a tax collector certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.7.
§ 86-46 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-48
82:89

ARTICLE XVIII
Deputy Tax Collector
§ 86-49. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Tax Collector for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-4.
§ 86-50. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-51. Appointment; term of office.
The Deputy Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve for a term of one year, commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of
Deputy Tax Collector, other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
A. Under the direction of the Tax Collector, on a regular and recurring
basis, the Deputy Tax Collector shall plan, organize, manage and
coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance with state
and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. The Deputy Tax Collector
shall also perform other related work as required.
B. During the absence or disability of the Tax Collector, the Deputy Tax
Collector shall have all the powers of the Tax Collector and shall
perform the functions and duties of such office.
C. To be appointed to the position of Deputy Tax Collector, an individual
must possess a tax collector certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-145.7.
§ 86-49 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-51
82:91

ARTICLE XIX
Assistant Municipal Tax Collector
§ 86-52. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Municipal Tax Collector for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-53. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Tax Collector, on a regular and recurring
basis, the Assistant Municipal Tax Collector shall plan, organize,
manage and coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance
with state and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. The Assistant
Municipal Tax Collector shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Assistant Municipal Tax Collector, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Graduation from an accredited college or university with a
bachelor's degree. Four years of experience in either municipal tax
collection administration, or in the collection and recording of
municipal tax revenues, or in preparing, maintaining, or auditing
records of municipal tax accounts. An applicant who does not meet
the above educational requirement may substitute additional work
experience as described above on a year-for-year basis with 30
semester hour credits being equal to one year of experience, or
possess a current, valid tax collector's certificate issued by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
(2) If the Assistant Municipal Tax Collector shall perform all duties of
the office of Tax Collector in his or her absence, the Assistant
Municipal Tax Collector shall possess certificates showing
satisfactory completion of courses in Municipal Tax Collection I, II
or III offered by Rutger's University, or a current and valid tax
collector's certificate issued by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
(3) A valid driver's license in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-52 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-53
82:93

ARTICLE XX
Tax Clerk
§ 86-54. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Clerk for the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
§ 86-55. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Tax Clerk shall perform the routine work involved
in computing and recording of tax payments. The Tax Clerk shall also
perform other related work as required.
B. The Tax Clerk shall possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if
the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-54 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-55
82:95

ARTICLE XXI
Tax Clerk, Typing
§ 86-56. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Clerk, Typing, for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-57. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Tax Clerk, Typing, shall perform the routine work
involved in computing and recording of tax payments. The Tax Clerk,
Typing, shall also perform other related work and typing as required.
B. The Tax Clerk, Typing, shall possess a driver's license valid in New
Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility,
is necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-56 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-57
82:97

ARTICLE XXII
Senior Tax Clerk
§ 86-58. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Tax Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-59. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Senior Tax Clerk shall perform responsible, varied
clerical work involved in the posting and maintaining of tax payments.
The Senior Tax Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Tax Clerk, an individual shall
possess the following:
(1) One year of clerical work requiring knowledge of tax records and
procedures.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-58 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-59
82:99

ARTICLE XXIII
Senior Tax Clerk, Typing
§ 86-60. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Tax Clerk, Typing, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-61. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Senior Tax Clerk, Typing, shall perform
responsible, various clerical work involved in posting and maintenance
of tax payments. The Senior Tax Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other
related work and typing as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Tax Clerk, Typing, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in clerical work, including typing and
requiring knowledge of tax records and procedures.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-60 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-61
82:101

ARTICLE XXIV
Principal Tax Clerk
§ 86-62. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Tax Clerk for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-63. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Principal Tax Clerk shall perform highly
responsible, varied clerical work involved in computing and recording
tax payments and/or has charge of a small tax clerical unit. The
Principal Tax Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Principal Tax Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in clerical work involving tax records and
procedures.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-62 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-63
82:103

ARTICLE XXV
Tax Assessor
§ 86-64. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Assessor for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.
§ 86-65. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-66. Appointment; term of office.
The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Township Committee for a term
of four years commencing on July 1 of the year of appointment and ending
on December 31 of the fourth year, or until a successor shall be appointed
and qualified. A vacancy in the office of Tax Assessor, other than due to
expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
A. Under direction, the Tax Assessor shall plan, organize, manage and
coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance with state
and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies, and perform such other
functions as may be required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148.1. The Tax Assessor
shall also perform other related work as required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Tax Assessor, an individual
must possess a tax assessor certificate as provided for by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148.1.
§ 86-64 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-66
82:105

ARTICLE XXVI
Deputy Tax Assessor
§ 86-67. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Tax Assessor for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.
§ 86-68. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-69. Appointment; term of office.
The Deputy Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Township Committee
for a term of four years commencing on July 1 of the year of appointment
and ending on December 31 of the fourth year, or until a successor shall
be appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of Deputy Tax Assessor,
other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term.
A. Under the direction of the Tax Assessor, on a regular and recurring
basis, the Deputy Tax Assessor shall plan, organize, manage and
coordinate the various activities of the office in accordance with state
and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies, and perform such other
functions as may be required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148.1. The Deputy Tax
Assessor shall also perform other related work as required.
B. During the absence or disability of the Tax Assessor, the Deputy Tax
Assessor shall have all the powers of the Tax Assessor and shall perform
the functions and duties of such office.
C. To be appointed to the position of Deputy Tax Assessor, an individual
must possess a tax assessor's certificate as provided for by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148.1.
§ 86-67 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-69
82:107

ARTICLE XXVII
Assessor Trainee
§ 86-70. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assessor Trainee for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-71. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under close supervision, the Assessor Trainee shall perform productive
work while receiving formal and on-the-job training in accumulating
data that will be used in establishing a system of valuations for real
property. The Assessor Trainee shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. The Assessor Trainee shall possess a driver's license valid in New
Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility,
is necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-70 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-71
82:109

ARTICLE XXVIII
Assessing Aide
§ 86-72. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assessing Aide for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-73. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, with no supervision of his own, the Assessing Aide
shall work primarily in the field, make physical inspections of
properties, and buildings taking information to be of use to the
Assessor. The Assessing Aide shall perform other related work as
required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Assessing Aide, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in the field investigations which shall have
included the gathering of significant data and compiling of data
into meaningful reports.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-72 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-73
82:111

ARTICLE XXIX
Assessing Clerk
§ 86-74. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assessing Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-75. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Assessing Clerk shall perform routine clerical
work involved in the assessment of real and personal property. The
Assessing Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Assessing Clerk shall possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey,
only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is
necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-74 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-75
82:113

ARTICLE XXX
Principal Assessing Clerk
§ 86-76. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Assessing Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-77. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Principal Assessing Clerk shall perform highly
responsible and varied clerical work involved in the assessment of real
and personal property requiring knowledge of relevant rules and
regulations and the frequent exercise of independent judgment and/or
has charge of a small assessing clerical unit. The Principal Assessing
Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Principal Assessing Clerk, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in clerical work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-76 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-77
82:115

ARTICLE XXXI
Senior Assessing Clerk
§ 86-78. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Assessing Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-79. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Senior
Assessing Clerk shall perform responsible and varied clerical work
involved in the assessment of real and personal property of limited
complexity requiring knowledge of relevant functions and/or takes the
lead in a very small assessing clerical unit. The Senior Assessing Clerk
shall perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Assessing Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in clerical work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-78 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-79
82:117

ARTICLE XXXII
Code Enforcement Officer
§ 86-80. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Officer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-81. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-82. Appointment; term of office.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall serve for a term of three years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the
third year, or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall perform varied types of field and office work
involved in seeing that residents, business places, and citizens comply
with various municipal ordinances other than the State Sanitary Code,
State Uniform Construction Code, or any of its subcodes or the State
Uniform Fire Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also perform
other related duties as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Code Enforcement Officer, an
individual shall possess:
(1) One year of experience in conducting inspections or investigations
to detect violations of and ensure compliance with laws, rules and
regulations.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-80 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-82
82:119

ARTICLE XXXIII
Code Enforcement Officer Trainee
§ 86-83. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Officer Trainee
for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-84. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under close supervision in a trainee program, the Code Enforcement
Officer Trainee shall perform productive work while receiving formal
and/or on-the-job training in seeing that residents, business
establishments, and citizens comply with various ordinances other than
the State Sanitary Code, State Uniform Construction Code, or any of its
subcodes, State Uniform Fire Code or any other code for which a
license, registration, or certification is required by state law. The Code
Enforcement Officer Trainee shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer Trainee shall possess a driver's license
valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than
employee mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the
position.
§ 86-83 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-84
82:121

ARTICLE XXXIV
CATV System Operations and Complaint Investigator
§ 86-85. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of CATV System Operations and
Complaint Investigator of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-86. Duties.
The duties of the said CATV System Operations and Complaint Investigator
shall be to receive, evaluate and resolve any and all complaints concerning
CATV service; ensure that the cable TV company operating in Little Egg
Harbor Township complies with the provisions of the Cable TV Ordinance;
take all necessary actions concerning the enforcement of the Cable TV
Ordinance, including but not limited to field investigations of complaints;
hold hearings concerning any alleged violation of the Cable TV Ordinance
and file complaints in the court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the
Cable TV Ordinance; take any and all necessary actions which are required
in order to ensure the best cable TV service possible to the residents of
Little Egg Harbor Township.13
§ 86-87. Appointment; term of office.
The CATV System Operations and Complaint Investigator shall be appointed
by the Township Committee and shall serve for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on
December 31 of the same year, or until a successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A380, Cable Television Franchise.
§ 86-85 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-87
82:123

ARTICLE XXXV
Maintenance Repairer
§ 86-88. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Maintenance Repairer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-89. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Maintenance Repairer shall perform a variety of
routine maintenance and repair tasks involved in masonry, plastering,
carpentry, painting, plumbing, steam fitting, sheet metal, electrical,
glazing, mechanical, and/or other types of maintenance work. The
Maintenance Repairer shall perform other related work as required.
B. The Maintenance Repairer shall possess a driver's license valid in New
Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility,
is necessary to perform essential duties of the position.
§ 86-88 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-89
82:125

ARTICLE XXXVI
Building Maintenance Worker
§ 86-90. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Building Maintenance Worker for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-91. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of a supervisory official, the Building Maintenance
Worker shall perform varied, simple and moderately physically
strenuous tasks involved in cleaning and maintaining offices, furniture,
buildings, and grounds. The Building Maintenance Worker may also
assist in making minor repairs to buildings or equipment. The Building
Maintenance Worker shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Building Maintenance Worker will be required to possess a driver's
license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather
than employee mobility, is necessary to perform essential duties of the
position.
§ 86-90 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-91
82:127

ARTICLE XXXVII
Construction Official
§ 86-92. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Construction Official of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-93. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-94. Substitution of terms of reference.
The term "Construction Official" shall be substituted for the term "Building
Inspector" wherever the latter shall appear in any ordinance or in the Code
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-95. Appointment; term of office.
The Construction Official shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve for a term of four years, commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the fourth year, or until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. Under the direction of the Township Administrator, the Construction
Official shall have the chief administrative responsibility for
administering and enforcing provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall have the power to
overrule a determination of a subcode official based on an
interpretation of a substantive provision of the subcode which such
subcode official administers only if the Construction Official is qualified
to act, pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, as a
subcode official for such subcode. The Construction Official may also
serve as a subcode official for any subcode which he is qualified to
administer under the State Uniform Construction Code Act. The
Construction Official shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Construction Official, an individual
shall possess the following (a subcode official or Municipal Engineer
may serve as a Construction Official if otherwise qualified under the
provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code Act):
(1) A valid construction official's license issued by the Department of
Community Affairs.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
(3) Where the Construction Official also serves as one or more subcode
officials, the Construction Official shall be required to possess the
appropriate subcode license or licenses.
§ 86-92 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-95
82:129

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Building Subcode Official
§ 86-96. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Building Subcode Official of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-97. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-98. Appointment; term of office.
The Building Subcode Official shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall serve for a term of four years, commencing on January
1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the fourth year,
or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. Under the direction of the Construction Official, the Building Subcode
Official has the subordinate administrative responsibility for
administering the building subcode of the State Uniform Construction
Code within the concerned jurisdiction, and to inspect and/or supervise
the inspection of buildings in construction projects underway to ensure
that compliance with plans and specifications approved in accordance
with the State Uniform Construction Code is achieved. The Building
Subcode Official shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Building Subcode Official, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) A valid license as a building subcode official issued by the Code
Enforcement License Office, Division of Housing and Urban
Renewal, Department of Community Affairs.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-96 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-98
82:131

ARTICLE XXXIX
Fire Protection Subcode Official
§ 86-99. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Fire Protection Subcode Official of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-100. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-101. Appointment; term of office.
The Fire Protection Subcode Official shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall serve for a term of four years, commencing on January
1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the fourth year,
or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. Under the direction of the Construction Official, the Fire Protection
Subcode Official shall be responsible for administering the fire
protection subcode of the State Uniform Construction Code within the
concerned jurisdiction, inspect and/or supervise the inspection of
construction projects underway to ensure that compliance with plans
and specifications for fire protection approved in accordance with the
State Uniform Construction Code is achieved. The Fire Protection
Subcode Official shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Fire Protection Subcode Official, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) A valid license as a fire protection subcode official of the
appropriate class issued by the Department of Community Affairs.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-99 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-101
82:133

ARTICLE XL
Electrical Subcode Official (Part-Time)
§ 86-102. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of part-time Electrical Subcode Official
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-103. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-104. Hours.
The Electrical Subcode Official shall work a maximum of 19 hours per week.
A. Under the direction of the Construction Official, the Electrical Subcode
Official has the subordinate administrative responsibility for
administering the electrical subcode of the State Uniform Construction
Code within the concerned jurisdiction, and to inspect and/or supervise
the inspection of electrical work in construction projects underway to
ensure that compliance with plans and specifications approved in
accordance with the State Uniform Construction Code is achieved. The
Electrical Subcode Official shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Electrical Subcode Official, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) A valid license as an electrical subcode official issued by the Code
Enforcement License Office, Division of Housing and Urban
Renewal, Department of Community Affairs.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-102 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-104
82:135

ARTICLE XLI
Plumbing Subcode Official (Part-Time)
§ 86-105. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of part-time Plumbing Subcode Official
for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-106. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-107. Hours.
The Plumbing Subcode Official shall work a maximum of 19 hours per week.
A. Under the direction of the Construction Official, the Plumbing Subcode
Official has the subordinate administrative responsibility for
administering the plumbing subcode of the State Uniform Construction
Code within the concerned jurisdiction, and inspects and/or supervises
the inspection of plumbing work in construction projects underway to
ensure that compliance with plans and specifications approved in
accordance with the State Uniform Construction Code is achieved. The
Plumbing Subcode Official shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Plumbing Subcode Official, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) A valid license as a plumbing subcode official issued by the Code
Enforcement License Office, Division of Housing and Urban
Renewal, Department of Community Affairs.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
(3) The statutory requirements for appointment as a subcode official as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126, Subdivision c.
§ 86-105 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-107
82:137

ARTICLE XLII
Zoning Officer
§ 86-108. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Zoning Officer of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-109. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-110. Appointment; term of office.
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve for a term of one year, commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until a
successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. The Zoning Officer shall examine the working plans of proposed
buildings for their compliance with state, county and local zoning laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations and shall conduct field work to
ensure compliance of zoning regulations. The Zoning Officer shall also
be deemed to be the administrative officer as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-3 and shall also issue certifications on behalf of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, certifying whether or not a subdivision has been
approved by the Little Egg Harbor Township Planning Board, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56 and, in general, shall coordinate
the efforts of the Planning Board of the Township of Little Egg Harbor
and have such other duties or responsibilities as may, from time to time,
be imposed with regard to the Planning Board. In addition, the Zoning
Officer shall conduct field inspections and special investigations to
ensure compliance with various municipal ordinances, initiate and
enforce rules and regulations in relation to enforcement of ordinances,
initiate necessary legal action against violators of various municipal
ordinances, prepare needed reports, establish and maintain records
and files and may assist in the promulgation of municipal ordinances.
The Zoning Officer shall also perform such other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Zoning Officer, an individual shall
possess the following:
(1) Three years of experience in the preparation and revision of
building construction plans and specifications or in the full-time
inspection and enforcement of zoning and/or building construction
laws and regulations.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-108 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-110
82:139

ARTICLE XLIII
Assistant Zoning Officer
§ 86-111. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Zoning Officer of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-112. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-113. Appointment; term of office.
The Assistant Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee
and shall serve for a term of one year, commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment and ending on December 31 of the same year, or until a
successor shall be appointed and qualified.
A. Under the direction of the Zoning Officer, the Assistant Zoning Officer
shall examine the working plans of proposed buildings for their
compliance with state, county, and local zoning laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations. The Assistant Zoning Officer shall also perform such
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Assistant Zoning Officer, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in the preparation and revision of building
construction plans and specifications or in the full-time inspection
and enforcement of zoning and/or building construction laws and
regulations.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-111 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-113
82:141

ARTICLE XLIV
Confidential Secretary to the Mayor and Township Committee
§ 86-114. Position created. [Amended 5-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11]
There is hereby created the position of Confidential Secretary. There shall
be a Confidential Secretary to the Mayor and Township Committee, and a
Confidential Secretary to the Township Administrator.
§ 86-115. Duties; qualifications.
A. The duties of the Confidential Secretary to the Mayor and Township
Committee, under direction, shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) To perform all those secretarial and clerical duties of a varied
nature and related work as directed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
(2) To perform those clerical duties assigned to him or her by the
Mayor and Township Committee concerning the preparation of the
budget.
(3) To perform those clerical duties directed by the Mayor and
Township Committee in processing disciplinary and/or grievance
matters.
(4) To perform whatever clerical duties are necessary pertaining to
matters of a confidential nature between the Mayor and Township
Committee and any other elected officials, appointed officers or
employees.
(5) To perform any other related work as directed by the Mayor and
Township Committee.
B. To be appointed to the position of Confidential Secretary to the Mayor
and Township Committee, an individual must meet the following
requirements:
(1) Possess some knowledge of modern office methods, practices and
equipment, of performing routine, repetitive and noncomplex
typing work from varied types of copy and of taking and
transcribing dictation of limited complexity.
(2) Possess the ability to understand, remember and carry out oral and
written directions.
(3) Ability to read, write, speak, understand, or communicate in
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position. American
Sign Language or Braille may also be considered as acceptable
forms of communication.
§ 86-114 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-115
82:143
§ 86-116. Duties; qualifications of Confidential Secretary to
Township Administrator. [Amended 5-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
(4) Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as
they can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the
employer undue hardship, such persons may not be eligible.
C. The Confidential Secretary to the Mayor and Township Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee. [Added 5-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
A. The duties of the Confidential Secretary to the Township Administrator,
under direction, shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) To perform those secretarial and clerical duties of a varied nature
and related work as directed by the Township Administrator.
(2) To perform those clerical duties assigned to him or her by the
Township Administrator concerning the preparation of the budget.
(3) To perform those clerical duties directed by the Township
Administrator in processing disciplinary and/or grievance matters.
(4) To perform whatever clerical duties are necessary pertaining to
matters of a confidential nature between the Township
Administrator and any other elected officials, appointed officers or
employees.
(5) To perform any other related work as directed by the Township
Administrator.
B. To be appointed to the position of Confidential Secretary to the
Township Administrator, an individual must meet the following
requirements:
(1) Possess some knowledge of modern office methods, practices and
equipment, of performing routine, repetitive and noncomplex
typing work from varied types of copy and of taking and
transcribing dictation of limited complexity.
(2) Possess the ability to understand, remember and carry out oral and
written instructions.
(3) Ability to read, write, speak, understand, or communicate in
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position. American
Sign Language or Braille may also be considered as acceptable
forms of communication.
(4) Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as
they can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
§ 86-115 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-116
82:144
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the
employer undue hardship, such persons may not be eligible.
C. The Confidential Secretary to the Township Administrator shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee.
§ 86-116 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-116
82:145

ARTICLE XLV
Executive Secretary
§ 86-117. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Executive Secretary.
§ 86-118. Duties; qualifications.
A. The duties of Executive Secretary, under direction, shall include, but
not be limited to:
(1) To perform all those secretarial and clerical duties of a varied
nature and related work as directed by the department head to
whom the Executive Secretary is responsible as assigned by the
Township Administrator.
(2) To review, sort and route incoming correspondence, and prepare
letters on routine matters that may or may not be signed or
reviewed by the department head.
(3) To obtain pertinent material from files and other sources and to
organize the same for review by and use of the department head.
(4) To accept callers at the office and to maintain a schedule of
appointments and the daily engagement calendar of the
department head.
(5) To prepare the agenda of departmental meetings and to take
minutes of the meetings and transcribe those minutes as necessary.
(6) To assemble statistical and other materials required for reports and
to prepare those reports as needed.
(7) To maintain confidential, personal correspondence and other
records and files, including a follow-up file.
(8) To perform clerical duties as directed by the department head in
processing any matters that are the responsibility of the
department head.
(9) To perform any other related work as directed by the department
head.
B. To be appointed to the position of Executive Secretary, an individual
must meet the following requirements:
(1) Possess six years of experience in secretarial and administrative
clerical work.
(2) Possess knowledge of modern secretarial office routines,
procedures and practices and their application to specific
situations.
§ 86-117 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-118
82:147
§ 86-119. Appointment; term of office.
The Executive Secretary shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Township Committee, and shall serve a term of office
of three years, commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and
ending on December 31 of the third year, or until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified.
(3) Ability to act as confidential secretary to a department head and to
relieve him/her of office detail.
(4) Ability to organize secretarial work, sometimes of the confidential
nature, which may entail supervision of clerical employees.
(5) Ability to read, write, speak, understand, or communicate in
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position. American
Sign Language or Braille may also be considered as acceptable
forms of communication.
(6) Ability to take minutes of meetings and transcribe them into
authoritative form.
(7) Ability to prepare routine correspondence.
(8) Ability to maintain confidential, follow-up and other records and
files.
(9) Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as
they can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the
employer undue hardship, such persons may not be eligible.
§ 86-118 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-119
82:148
ARTICLE XLVI
Administrative Secretary
§ 86-120. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Administrative Secretary for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-121. Duties; qualifications.
A. The Administrative Secretary shall either assist an administrative
official of a department or autonomous government agency by doing
administrative stenographic and clerical work, usually varied and
involving some elements of trouble shooting, or, under immediate
direction of an administrative official, perform administrative
stenographic and clerical work, and supervise the office and other
clerical and related operations of a department or autonomous
government agency. The Administrative Secretary shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Administrative Secretary, an
individual shall possess five years of experience in the capacity of a
secretary to an executive or administrative official in a public or private
organization which shall have included stenography and transcribing.
Successful completion of a two-year program in secretarial science at
an accredited college or university may be substituted for two years of
the above experience.
§ 86-120 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-121
82:149

ARTICLE XLVII
Clerk Typist
§ 86-122. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Clerk Typist for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-123. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the appropriate department head, the Clerk
Typist shall type and perform routine, repetitive clerical work of a
varied nature. The Clerk Typist shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. The Clerk Typist will be required to possess a driver's license valid in
New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee
mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-122 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-123
82:151

ARTICLE XLVIII
Senior Clerk Typist
§ 86-124. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Clerk Typist for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-125. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the appropriate department head, the Senior
Clerk Typist shall perform typing and other related clerical work
requiring the exercise of independent judgment and a working
knowledge of department rules, regulations and policies and/or have
charge of the work of a small group of Clerk Typists and/or have charge
of a designated phase of the typing work of the department. The Senior
Clerk Typist shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Clerk Typist, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in clerical work, including typing.
Successful completion of a clerical training program with a
minimum of 700 clerical training hours or 30 semester hour credits
in secretarial science from an accredited college or university may
be substituted for the experience indicated above. Other course
work may include, but not be limited to, office procedures, word
processing and business English.
(2) The Senior Clerk Typist will be required to possess a driver's
license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather
than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties
of the position.
§ 86-124 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-125
82:153

ARTICLE XLIX
Principal Clerk Typist
§ 86-126. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Clerk Typist for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-127. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the appropriate department head, the Principal
Clerk Typist does clerical work, including typing of a complex and/or
technical nature requiring knowledge of department laws, regulations,
policies, and procedures, as well as the frequent exercise of
independent judgment, and/or has charge of the work of a large clerical
unit. The Principal Clerk Typist shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Principal Clerk Typist, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of typing experience in the operation of manual and/or
electrical typewriters which shall have included clerical work
containing a relatively large proportion of difficult tasks.
Successful completion of a clerical training program with a
minimum of 700 classroom training hours or 30 semester hour
credits in secretarial science from an accredited college or
university may be substituted for the experience indicated above.
Course work must include typing skills, methods and procedures;
and other courses may include office procedures, word processing
and business English.
(2) The Principal Clerk Typist will be required to possess a driver's
license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather
than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties
of the position.
§ 86-126 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-127
82:155

ARTICLE L
Clerk Stenographer
§ 86-128. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Clerk Stenographer for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-129. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the appropriate department head, the Clerk
Stenographer takes and transcribes dictation and performs routine,
repetitive, and other noncomplex clerical work of a varied nature as a
beginner at the entrance level of employment. The Clerk Stenographer
shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Clerk Stenographer will be required to possess a driver's license
valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than
employee mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the
position.
§ 86-128 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-129
82:157

ARTICLE LI
Senior Clerk Stenographer
§ 86-130. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Clerk Stenographer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-131. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the appropriate department head, the Senior
Clerk Stenographer shall perform stenographic and other clerical work
varied in nature, but requiring a knowledge of rules, policies, and
procedures and the exercise of independent judgment. The Senior
Clerk Stenographer shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Clerk Stenographer, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in taking and transcribing dictation.
Successful completion of a clerical training program with a
minimum of 700 classroom training hours or 30 semester hour
credits in secretarial science from an accredited college or
university may be substituted for one year of the experience
indicated above. Course work must include typing skills, methods
and procedures. Other courses may include, but not be limited to,
office procedures, word processing and business English.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-130 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-131
82:159

ARTICLE LII
Principal Clerk Stenographer
§ 86-132. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Clerk Stenographer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-133. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the appropriate department head, the Principal
Clerk Stenographer does stenographic and other related clerical work,
varied in nature and requiring knowledge of department laws and
regulations and the frequent exercise of independent judgment, and/or
supervise the work of a clerical unit or be responsible for complex
clerical work. The Principal Clerk Stenographer shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Principal Clerk Stenographer,
an individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in stenographic and clerical work or one
year of supervisory stenographic and clerical experience.
Successful completion of a clerical training program with a
minimum of 700 classroom training hours or 30 semester hour
credits in secretarial science from an accredited college or
university may be substituted for one year of the experience
indicated above. Course work must include typing skills, methods
and procedures. Other courses may include, but not be limited to,
office procedures, word processing and business English.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-132 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-133
82:161

ARTICLE LIII
Public Safety Telecommunicator
§ 86-134. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Public Safety Telecommunicator for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-135. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the appropriate department head, the Public
Safety Telecommunicator shall receive and respond to telephone or
other electronic requests for emergency assistance, including law
enforcement, fire, medical or other emergency services, and/or
dispatch appropriate units to response sites. The Public Safety
Telecommunicator shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Public Safety Telecommunicator, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in work involving the receiving,
transmitting and relaying of video display and/or radio messages
and in the receiving, relaying and recording of complaints and
requests for emergency assistance, which shall have included the
use of video display, data processing, automatic number
identification, automatic location identification, switching
equipment or other computer-oriented equipment.
(2) Appointees to positions at public safety answering points and at
some public safety dispatch points must have received training and
certification by the Office of Emergency Telecommunications
Services (OETS) in the Department of Law and Public Safety as
required by N.J.A.C. 17:24-1.1 to 11.4.
(3) A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey, only if the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-134 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-135
82:163

ARTICLE LIV
Public Safety Telecommunicator Trainee
§ 86-136. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Public Safety Telecommunicator
Trainee for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-137. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-138. Successful candidates; cause for separation.
Appointees who successfully complete the twelve-month training period will
be eligible for promotion under the Department of Personnel procedure to
the title of Public Safety Telecommunicator. The inability of an employee
in this title to attain a level of performance warranting advancement and,
where applicable, certifications by the Office of Emergency
Telecommunications Services (OETS) will be cause for separation.
A. Under close supervision as a trainee and productive worker, the Public
Safety Telecommunicator Trainee shall receive and respond to
telephone or other electronic requests for emergency assistance,
including law enforcement, fire, medical or other emergency services
and/or dispatches appropriate units to response sites. The Public Safety
Telecommunicator Trainee shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Public Safety Telecommunicator
Trainee, an individual shall possess the following:
(1) Appointees to positions at public safety answering points and at
some public safety dispatch points must attain training and
certification by the Office of Emergency Telecommunications
Services (OETS) in the Department of Law and Public Safety as
required by N.J.A.C. 17:24-1.1 to 11.4.
(2) A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey, only if the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-136 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-138
82:165

ARTICLE LV
Senior Public Safety Telecommunicator
§ 86-139. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Public Safety
Telecommunicator for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-140. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the appropriate department head, the Senior
Public Safety Telecommunicator shall take the lead in receiving and
responding to telephone or other electronic requests for emergency
assistance, including law enforcement, fire, medical, or other
emergency services and/or dispatches appropriate units to response
sites. The Senior Public Safety Telecommunicator shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Public Safety
Telecommunicator, an individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in work involving the receiving,
transmitting and relaying of video display and/or radio messages
and in the receiving, relaying and recording of complaints and
requests for emergency assistance which shall have included the
use of video display, data processing, automatic number
identification, automatic location identification, switching
equipment, or other computer-oriented equipment.
(2) Appointees to positions at public safety answering points and at
some public safety dispatch points must have received training and
certification by the Office of Emergency Telecommunications
Services (OETS) in the Department of Law and Public Safety as
required by N.J.A.C. 17:24-1.1 to 11.4.
(3) A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey, only if the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-139 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-140
82:167

ARTICLE LVI
Municipal Recycling Coordinator
§ 86-141. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Recycling Coordinator for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-142. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall plan, develop, implement and
coordinate the recycling program of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall also perform other related
work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Municipal Recycling Coordinator, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in the management of a solid waste,
recycling, or resource recovery program.
(2) A driver's license valid in the New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-141 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-142
82:169

ARTICLE LVII
Recycling Program Aide
§ 86-143. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Recycling Program Aide for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-144. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the
Recycling Program Aide shall assist in the provision of information to
the public about the community recycling program. The Recycling
Program Aide shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Recycling Program Aide shall possess a driver's license valid in
New Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee
mobility, is necessary to perform essential duties of the position.
§ 86-143 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-144
82:171

ARTICLE LVIII
Recycling Operator
§ 86-145. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Recycling Operator for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-146. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the
Recycling Operator shall operate, adjust and maintain machinery used
in shredding, baling, crushing, and/or compacting solid waste material.
The Recycling Operator may also operate mechanical equipment such
as front-end loaders, forklifts, and bulldozers to move, lift, load and/or
transport said material. The Recycling Operator shall also perform
other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Recycling Operator, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience involved in controlling the operation of
large-scale industrial equipment and machines.
(2) A valid commercial driver's license (CDL) and applicable
endorsements for the class and type of vehicle being operated.
(3) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-145 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-146
82:173

ARTICLE LIX
Truck Driver
§ 86-147. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Truck Driver for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-148. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under direction, the Truck Driver shall drive a truck with a gross
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of less than 26,000 pounds to transport
nonhazardous materials, equipment or people. The Truck Driver shall
also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Truck Driver, an individual shall
possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in driving a truck with a gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) of less than 26,000 pounds.
(2) A valid commercial driver's license (CDL) and applicable
endorsements for the class and type of vehicle being operated.
(3) A driver's license valid in New Jersey.
§ 86-147 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-148
82:175

ARTICLE LX
Truck Driver, Heavy
§ 86-149. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Truck Driver, Heavy, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-150. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Truck
Driver, Heavy, shall drive a truck with a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) over 26,000 pounds to transport materials, equipment or
people. The Truck Driver, Heavy shall also perform other related work
as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Truck Driver, Heavy, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in driving a truck with tandem/dual rear
axles and a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of at least 26,000
pounds and auxiliary equipment such as snow plow, salt spreader,
power takeoff, winch, and lift body.
(2) A valid commercial driver's license (CDL) and applicable
endorsements for the class and type of vehicle being operated.
(3) A driver's license valid in New Jersey.
§ 86-149 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-150
82:177

ARTICLE LXI
Laborer
§ 86-151. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Laborer for the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
§ 86-152. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Supervisor of Public Works, the Laborer shall
perform varied types of manual and unskilled laboring work and may
drive a truck in connection with laboring work on occasion. The Laborer
shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Laborer shall possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey.
§ 86-151 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-152
82:179

ARTICLE LXII
Mechanic
§ 86-153. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Mechanic for the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
§ 86-154. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Mechanic shall perform varied mechanical work involved in the repair,
maintenance, and servicing of motor vehicles and/or construction
equipment, working with various machines and hand tools common to
the trade. The Mechanic shall perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Mechanic, an individual shall possess
the following:
(1) Three years of experience in the maintenance and repair of various
types of motor vehicles and/or construction equipment such as
bulldozers, tractors, cranes, road graders, power shovels, or
similar equipment. Possession of a certificate showing successful
completion of a vocational-educational training program in
automotive mechanics, approved by the New Jersey Department of
Education, may be substituted for one year of experience indicated
above. In addition, possession of a certificate as an automotive
mechanic, issued by the National Institute for Automotive Service
Excellence, may be substituted for one year of experience indicated
above.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform
essential duties of the position.
(3) The Mechanic may also be required to possess a valid commercial
driver's license (CDL) and applicable endorsements for the class
and type of vehicle being operated.
§ 86-153 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-154
82:181

ARTICLE LXIII
Senior Mechanic
§ 86-155. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Mechanic for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-156. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Senior
Mechanic shall take the lead over one or more employees engaged in
performing varied mechanical work involved in the repair,
maintenance, and servicing of motor vehicles and/or construction
equipment, and working with various machine and hand tools common
to the trade. The Senior Mechanic shall perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Mechanic, an individual must
meet the following requirements:
(1) Possess four years of varied experience in the maintenance and
repair of various types of motor vehicles and/or construction
equipment, such as bulldozers, cranes, road graders, power
shovels or similar equipment. Possession of a certificate showing
successful completion of a vocational-educational training program
in automotive mechanics, approved by the New Jersey Department
of Education, may be substituted for one year of experience
indicated above. In addition, possession of a certificate as an
automotive mechanic, issued by the National Institute for
Automotive Service Excellence, may be substituted for one year of
experience indicated above.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform
essential duties of the position.
(3) The Senior Mechanic may also be required to possess a valid
commercial driver's license (CDL) and applicable endorsements for
the class and type of vehicle being operated.
§ 86-155 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-156
82:183

ARTICLE LXIV
Sanitation Worker
§ 86-157. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Sanitation Worker for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-158. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Sanitation Worker shall perform arduous tasks involved in loading
garbage and refuse from sidewalks and curbs into trucks. The
Sanitation Worker shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Sanitation Worker shall possess a driver's license valid in New
Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility,
is necessary to perform essential duties of the position.
§ 86-157 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-158
82:185

ARTICLE LXV
Sanitation Driver
§ 86-159. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Sanitation Driver for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-160. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Sanitation Driver shall drive, clean, service and make minor repairs to a
sanitation truck. The Sanitation Driver may occasionally perform
manual and unskilled laboring work in connection with sanitation truck
driving. The Sanitation Driver shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Sanitation Driver, an individual shall
possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in driving a truck with tandem/dual rear
axles and a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of at least 26,000
pounds and with auxiliary equipment such as snow plow, salt
spreader, power takeoff, winch, lift body or hydraulic lifting device.
(2) A valid commercial driver's license (CDL) and applicable
endorsements for the class and type of vehicle being operated.
(3) A driver's license valid in New Jersey.
§ 86-159 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-160
82:187

ARTICLE LXVI
Senior Clerk Bookkeeper
§ 86-161. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Clerk Bookkeeper for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-162. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Senior Clerk Bookkeeper shall
perform bookkeeping and other related clerical work requiring the
exercise of independent judgment and a working knowledge of
department rules, regulations and policies, and/or has charge of the
work of a small group of Clerk bookkeepers, and/or has charge of a
designated phase of the bookkeeping work of the department. The
Senior Clerk Bookkeeper shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Clerk Bookkeeper, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in work involving the keeping of varied
types of records of a bookkeeping nature.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-161 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-162
82:189

ARTICLE LXVII
Principal Clerk Bookkeeper
§ 86-163. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Clerk Bookkeeper for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-164. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the CFO, the Principal Clerk Bookkeeper shall
perform bookkeeping and other related clerical work requiring
knowledge of department rules, regulations and policies, and the
frequent exercise of independent judgment, and/or has charge of the
activities of a large group of clerical workers in a large bookkeeping
unit or a designated phase of the bookkeeping work of a large
department. The Principal Clerk Bookkeeper shall also perform other
related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Clerk Bookkeeper, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in work involving the keeping of varied
types of records of a bookkeeping nature.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-163 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-164
82:191

ARTICLE LXVIII
Payroll Clerk
§ 86-165. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Payroll Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-166. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Payroll Clerk does routine
clerical work involved in and relating to the review, verification, and
preparation of payroll, or payroll and personnel records. The Payroll
Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. The Payroll Clerk shall possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey,
only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is
necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-165 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-166
82:193

ARTICLE LXIX
Payroll Clerk, Typing
§ 86-167. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Payroll Clerk, Typing, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-168. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Payroll Clerk, Typing, does
routine clerical work involved in and relating to the review, verification,
and preparation of payroll, or payroll and personnel records. The
Payroll Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other related work and typing
as required.
B. The Payroll Clerk, Typing, shall possess a driver's license valid in New
Jersey, only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility,
is necessary to perform the essential duties of the position.
§ 86-167 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-168
82:195

ARTICLE LXX
Senior Payroll Clerk
§ 86-169. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Payroll Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-170. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Senior Payroll Clerk performs the
more difficult and complex clerical work involved in and relating to the
review, verification, and preparation of payroll, or payroll and personnel
records, and/or takes the lead in a small clerical payroll unit. The Senior
Payroll Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Payroll Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in work involving processing payroll, or
payroll and personnel activities.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-169 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-170
82:197

ARTICLE LXXI
Senior Payroll Clerk, Typing
§ 86-171. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Payroll Clerk, Typing, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-172. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Senior Payroll Clerk, Typing,
performs the more difficult and complex clerical work involved in and
relating to the review, verification, and preparation of payroll, or payroll
and personnel records, and/or takes the lead in a small clerical payroll
unit. The Senior Payroll Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other related
work and typing as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Senior Payroll Clerk, Typing, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in work involving processing payroll, or
payroll and personnel activities.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-171 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-172
82:199

ARTICLE LXXII
Principal Payroll Clerk
§ 86-173. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Payroll Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-174. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Principal Payroll Clerk performs
complex and highly responsible clerical work involved in and relating to
the review, verification, and preparation of payroll, or payroll and
personnel records which require the frequent exercise of independent
judgment, and/or supervises a small group of clerical workers in a
payroll or payroll and personnel unit. The Principal Payroll Clerk shall
also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Principal Payroll Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in work involving payroll processing, or
payroll and personnel work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-173 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-174
82:201

ARTICLE LXXIII
Principal Payroll Clerk, Typing
§ 86-175. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Principal Payroll Clerk, Typing, for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-176. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the supervision of the CFO, the Principal Payroll Clerk, Typing,
performs complex and highly responsible clerical work involved in, and
relating to, the review, verification, and preparation of payroll, or
payroll and personnel records which require the frequent exercise of
independent judgment, and/or supervises a small group of clerical
workers in a payroll, or payroll and personnel unit. The Principal Payroll
Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other related work and typing as
required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Principal Payroll Clerk, Typing, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in work involving payroll processing, or
payroll and personnel work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-175 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-176
82:203

ARTICLE LXXIV
Violations Clerk
§ 86-177. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Violations Clerk for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-178. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Court Administrator, the
Violations Clerk has the charge of and performs the most difficult and
responsible work involved in collecting fees for traffic violations in the
Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Court. The Violations Clerk shall
also perform other related work as required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Violations Clerk, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in record keeping or maintenance of
records.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-177 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-178
82:205

ARTICLE LXXV
Violations Clerk, Typing
§ 86-179. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Violations Clerk, Typing, for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-180. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Municipal Court Administrator, the
Violations Clerk, Typing, has the charge of and performs the most
difficult and responsible work involved in collecting fees for traffic
violations in the Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Court. The
Violations Clerk, Typing, shall also perform other related work and
typing as required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Violations Clerk, Typing, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) Two years of experience in record keeping or maintenance of
records.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform the
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-179 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-180
82:207

ARTICLE LXXVI
Police Records Clerk
§ 86-181. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Police Records Clerk for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-182. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Chief of Police, the Police Records Clerk shall
perform responsible and varied clerical work of moderate complexity
involving the processing and keeping of varied police records. The
Police Records Clerk shall also perform other related work as required.
B. To be appointed to the position of Police Records Clerk, an individual
shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in clerical work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform in
essential duties of the position.
§ 86-181 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-182
82:209

ARTICLE LXXVII
Public Works Superintendent
§ 86-183. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Public Works Superintendent for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-184. Duties; qualifications.
A. The Public Works Superintendent shall perform administrative and
supervisory duties in planning and organizing the installation,
maintenance and repair of various public works facilities. The Public
Works Superintendent shall also perform other related work as
required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Public Works Superintendent,
an individual shall possess the following:
(1) Five years of supervisory experience in the construction,
maintenance, and repair of streets, sewer, water, sanitation, or
other public works facilities, or similar heavy construction or
maintenance work. Satisfactory completion of college level credits
in engineering courses at an accredited college or university may
be substituted for up to two years of experience on the basis of 30
semester hour credits being equivalent to one year of experience.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform
essential duties of the position.
(3) Where the position involves responsibility for supervision and
administration of water supply and/or sewage treatment system,
appointees will be required to possess a license of the appropriate
grade issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection to operate a public water, sewage treatment plant, and/
or public water supply system.
§ 86-183 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-184
82:211

ARTICLE LXXVIII
Public Works Repairer
§ 86-185. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Public Works Repairer for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-186. Duties; qualifications.
A. Under the direction of the Supervisor of Public Works, the Public Works
Repairer performs routine work involved in the construction,
maintenance and repair of streets, sewers, water, sanitation, and other
public facilities, and may be required to operate, check, service and
make minor repairs to trucks and other maintenance/construction
equipment. The Public Works Repairer shall also perform other related
work as required.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Public Works Repairer, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in the construction, maintenance, and
repair of streets, sewers, water, sanitation, or other public works
facilities, or similar heavy construction or maintenance work.
(2) A driver's license valid in New Jersey, only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform
essential duties of the position.
(3) Appointees may be required to possess a valid commercial driver's
license (CDL) and applicable endorsements for the class and type
of vehicle being operated.
§ 86-185 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-186
82:213

ARTICLE LXXIX
Compensation for All Positions Established
§ 86-187. Compensation.
Compensation for all positions established in the Township Code for the
Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be as set forth in the Salary Ordinance
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, as amended from time to time, unless
otherwise provided for in the Code or by contract.
§ 86-187 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-187
82:215

ARTICLE LXXX
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Added 1-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
§ 86-188. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township of Little Egg Harbor's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act of 1985.14
§ 86-189. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Township of Little Egg Harbor to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-190. Establishment of position and compensation; powers and
duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, including the following responsibilities which may
not be contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Township of Little Egg Harbor's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing
providers, administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units the Township of Little
Egg Harbor's Fair Share Plan;
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq.
§ 86-188 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-190
82:217
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Township of Little Egg Harbor as
described in Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Little Egg Harbor may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any
agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, except for those responsibilities which
may not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the
Township of Little Egg Harbor contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including
the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
§ 86-190 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-190
82:218
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor when referring households for certification to
affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners:
§ 86-190 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-190
82:219
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 86-190 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 86-190
82:220
ARTICLE LXXXI
Housing Inspector
[Added 5-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
§ 86-191. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Housing Inspector for the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 86-192. Duties; qualifications.
§ 86-193. through § 86-198. (Reserved)
A. Under the direction of the Construction Code Official, the Housing
Inspector shall perform inspections of buildings for health and safety
violations, inspect hotels and/or multiple dwellings to detect and
eliminate fire hazards and to enforce provisions of relevant fire safety
codes and related regulations, and any other related work as required
by the Construction Official and the Township Administrator.
B. In order to be appointed to the position of Housing Inspector, an
individual shall possess the following:
(1) One year of experience in building inspection, building repair,
building maintenance, construction, construction inspection, and/
or other work concerned with building structures and/or building
repair.
(2) A driver’s license valid in New Jersey in such situations where the
operation of a vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary
to perform essential duties of the position.
(3) Knowledge of approved inspection methods involved in preventing
and eliminating blight and restoring and/or eliminating subnormal
housing accommodations.
(4) Knowledge of state and municipal housing codes and zoning
ordinances.
§ 86-191 NATURAL LANDS TRUST ADVISORY § 86-193
82:221
Chapter 90
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26.
Ethics — See Ch. 40.
Hospitalization plan — See Ch. 65.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 86.
Sick leave trust fund — See Ch. 116.
§ 90-1. Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual adopted.
The Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor has adopted
and enacted a Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual and an Employee
Handbook. The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual applies to all
officials, appointees, employees, volunteers and independent contractors.
The Policies and Procedures Manual is not a contract and is intended to
provide guidelines covering public service by Township employees. The
manual shall be kept on file in the Township Clerk's office for inspection
and review by all employees of the Township, as well as the general public,
during normal business hours.
§ 90-2. Amendments to Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
The Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor reserves
the right to rescind or revise, without notice, and at the sole discretion
of the governing body, any policies and provisions of the manual. In the
event there is a conflict between the manual and any collective bargaining
agreement, personnel services contract, federal law or state law, the terms
and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail.
§ 90-3. Residency requirements.15
A. Appointment. All officers and employees appointed to positions of
classified service under Title 11 of the New Jersey Statutes for the
Township shall be bona fide residents of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor. A "bona fide resident," for the purposes of this section, is a
person having a permanent domicile within the Township, and one
which has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or
claiming a previous residence acquired outside of the Township.
B. Eligibility of applicants for positions and employments in the classified
service of the Township. The Township Committee hereby limits the
eligibility of applicants for positions and employments in the classified
service of the Township to bona fide residents, except as otherwise
provided herein or by law.
15.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 86, Art. II, Residency Requirement.
§ 86-193 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 90-3
90:222
C. Unavailability of qualified residents for available specific positions or
employments.
(1) Whenever the Township Committee shall, by resolution, determine
that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified
residents for available specific positions or employments, the
Township shall advertise for other qualified applicants, who shall
be classified as follows:
(a) Class 1: other residents of Ocean County.
(b) Class 2: other residents of counties contiguous to Ocean
County.
(c) Class 3: other residents of the state.
(d) Class 4: all other applicants.
(2) The Township shall first appoint all those in Class 1 and then those
in each succeeding class in the order above listed after all qualified
applicants in the preceding class, or classes, have been appointed
or have declined an offer of appointment.
D. Specific positions and employments requiring special talents or skills;
filling without reference to residency. Whenever the Township
Committee shall determine, by resolution, that there are certain
specific positions or employments requiring special talents or skills
which are necessary for the operations of the Township and which are
not likely to be found among the residents of the Township, such
positions or employments so determined shall be filled without
reference to residency. Any such resolution shall set forth in detail the
reasons upon which such a determination is made.
E. Preference in promotion to bona fide residents. When promotions are
based on merit, as determined by suitable promotion tests or other
objective criteria, officers and employees who are bona fide residents
shall be given preference over a nonresident in any instance when all
measurable criteria are equal. The preference granted by this section
shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preference granted
pursuant to any other provision of law.
F. Preemption by order of court or of state or federal agency to eliminate
discrimination. Any requirements concerning eligibility, appointment or
promotion contained in this section shall be subject to any order issued
by any court or by any state or federal agency pursuant to law with
respect to a requirement of action to eliminate discrimination in
employment based upon race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital status or sex.
§ 90-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 90-3
90:223
Chapter 93
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management service — See Ch.
33.
Mutual aid for police services — See Ch. 78,
Art. I.
§ 90-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 90-3
90:224
ARTICLE I
Establishment; Organization
§ 93-1. Establishment; appointment of personnel.
§ 93-2. Organization of Department.
A. There is hereby created and established in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor a police department, which shall be known as the "Little Egg
Harbor Township Police Department." The Police Department is
established in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et
seq.
B. The Mayor and Township Committee shall provide for the appointment
of a Chief of Police and officers and personnel, as they shall deem
necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the Police
Department. The Mayor and Township Committee shall determine the
terms of office and compensation, and prescribe the powers, functions
and duties of all such members, officers and personnel as permitted by
law.
A. Appropriate authority.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the
Township Committee shall designate an appropriate authority to
whom the Chief of Police will be directly responsible. The Township
Committee shall designate the appropriate authority by resolution
and, in the absence of a resolution designating the appropriate
authority, the Township Committee shall act as the appropriate
authority.
(2) The appropriate authority shall be responsible to develop
appropriate rules and regulations for the government of the Police
Department and for the discipline of its members, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
(3) The appropriate authority shall have such duties and
responsibilities as are set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
B. Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police
Department, and he/she shall be directly responsible to the appropriate
authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the
Police Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to the policies
established by the appropriate authority:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the Police
Department, and its officers and employees.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
§ 93-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-2
90:225
§ 93-3. Qualifications for appointment.
No person shall be appointed by the Township Committee to be a member
of the Police Department until duly certified by a licensed physician to be
in good health, able-bodied, and of sound mind; nor unless the applicant
shall possess all other qualifications as to age, residence and citizenship, as
required by law.
§ 93-4. Compensation.
All officers, members and employees of the Police Department, whether fulltime,
part-time, temporary, or special, shall receive only such salary, wage,
or compensation as the Township Committee may fix and determine.
§ 93-5. Application for appointment.
Application for appointment to the Police Department shall be in writing
upon a form prescribed by the Township Committee, and any misstatement
or incomplete disclosure therein shall be sufficient grounds for dismissal
from the Department.
§ 93-6. Probationary appointments.
Appointments to the Police Department shall be first made for a
probationary period of at least one year; such probationary period, however,
shall count as service if the permanent appointment is subsequently made
in due course and immediately following said probationary period. Such
probationary appointments may be revoked at any time within one year
from the date thereof by vote of a majority of the Township Committee.
§ 93-7. Duties and authority of officers.
All officers and members of the Police Department shall have the duty
and authority to preserve the peace and safety of the Township, prevent
disorders, protect public and private property, enforce the laws of the State
of New Jersey and all Township ordinances, and perform such other duties
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(4) Delegate such of his/her authority as he/she may deem necessary
for the efficient operation of the Police Department, to be exercised
under his/her direction and supervision.
(5) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority, in such form
as shall be prescribed by the appropriate authority, on the
operation of the Police Department during the preceding month,
and make such other reports as may be requested by such
authority.
C. Such other officers and personnel as the Township Committee deems
necessary for proper operation of the Police Department.
§ 93-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 93-7
90:226
of a similar or incidental nature as may be from time to time assigned by
the Township Committee.
§ 93-8. Outside employment.
Every officer and member of the Police Department shall devote his/her
whole time and attention to the business of the Department, and he/she
is expressly prohibited from following any other calling or being employed
in any other business during the hours in which he/she is on duty. He/she
may, however, accept any respectable employment, except at a place where
alcoholic beverages are sold, at any time that he/she is not on duty, provided
that such employment shall not affect his/her efficiency as a police officer,
nor reflect adversely upon his/her character or that of the Department.
§ 93-9. Tenure of office; dismissal.
A. All regular officers and members of the Police Department shall hold
office during good behavior, and shall not be dismissed except for just
cause and in the manner prescribed by law. In the event of any
disciplinary proceedings against any member of the Police Department
below the rank of Chief of Police, the appropriate authority, or his/her
designee, shall be the sole hearing officer and person in charge of all
such proceedings. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and
binding. The right of appeal shall be to the New Jersey Superior Court
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-150, or to the New Jersey Department of
Personnel pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq., and as applicable.
B. In the event of any disciplinary proceedings against the Chief of Police,
the Township Committee or its designee shall be designated as the
hearing authority and in charge of all such proceedings. The decision of
said hearing authority shall be final and binding. The right of appeal
shall be to the New Jersey Superior Court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-150, or to the New Jersey Department of Personnel pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq., and as applicable.
C. In the event the appropriate authority designates a hearing authority
other than himself/herself pursuant to Subsection A above, and the
designated hearing authority is an officer of the Little Egg Harbor
Township Police Department (e.g., Chief of Police), only a person of
greater rank than the person charged may be so designated for that
purpose. If a designated hearing authority is utilized pursuant to
Subsection B above for hearings involving charges against the Chief of
Police, it must be the appropriate authority, or special counsel.
Whenever special counsel is designated to be the hearing authority
pursuant to either Subsection A or B above, prior approval must be
obtained by resolution of the Township Committee.
D. In the event a police officer or employee is to be charged in a
disciplinary action, and said police officer or employee is subordinate to
the rank of the Chief of Police, only the Chief of Police or his/her
designee may initiate such charges. In the event the office of the Chief
§ 93-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-9
90:227
§ 93-10. Adoption of rules and regulations.
of Police is vacant, then the appropriate authority, or his/her designee,
shall function as the charging authority. Failure to initiate charges when
same are indicated may constitute a neglect or dereliction of duty, but
the function of the charging authority may not be circumvented.
E. In the event the Chief of Police is to be charged in a disciplinary action,
the appropriate authority or special counsel named by the Township
Committee to act on his/her behalf shall be the charging authority.
F. Whenever any person, whether police officer, special counsel, or the
appropriate authority, serves in an investigative capacity, and/or as the
charging authority relevant to a Township Police Department
disciplinary action, he/she may not thereafter be designated, or serve
as, the hearing authority in that same disciplinary action.
G. Any police officer or employee seeking to appeal disciplinary charges
shall do so in writing submitted to the office of the Chief of Police. Said
appeal shall be filed within five days, not including Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, of the date said charges were served upon said police
officer or employee. When charges are filed against the Chief of Police,
he/she shall, within five days, not including Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, file said appeal with the appropriate authority. However, all
police officers or employees are put on notice that a failure to submit
the required written request for an appeal may constitute an act of
insubordination and may affect the police officer's or employee's rights
pertaining to statutory time lines and discovery proceedings, as well as
other legal rights and remedies appurtenant thereto. In either event,
the appropriate authority shall schedule a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this article and state statute. A preliminary notice of
disciplinary action served on any police officer or employee shall
contain the date, time, and location for a prospective hearing, as
required by statute. Said hearing date may be postponed at the
discretion of the hearing authority within the statutory time lines. Any
postponement beyond the statutory thirty-day time line would generally
require a waiver of the thirty-day rule by the police officer or employee
and a formal request for said postponement.
A. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, adopt appropriate rules
and regulations for the regulation, control and management of the
Police Department as recommended by the appropriate authority. Said
rules and regulations will be in manual form and shall be called the
"Rules and Regulations of the Police Department for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor" and shall govern the conduct of, and be binding
upon, the entire membership of said Police Department, including the
Chief and all subordinates. Said rules and regulations shall provide for
penalties and forfeitures for violations thereof.
B. The rules and regulations, which shall include all parts of the Police
Ordinance of the Code for the Township of Little Egg Harbor, shall be
§ 93-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 93-10
90:228
§ 93-11. Continuation of office.
Police officers regularly employed by the Township of Little Egg Harbor at
the time of the passage of this chapter shall continue as, and be deemed to
be, members of the Police Department of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 93-12. Officers and employees of Department. [Amended
5-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 93-13. Employment of off-duty police officers.
distributed in manual form as follows: a serialized copy will be issued
to, and signed for, by every police officer and employee of the Police
Department. A copy will be maintained by the Township Clerk for
personnel designated as special officers, and to provide public access
to same.
C. All police officers and employees who are assigned a manual shall be
responsible for its maintenance and care. The manual shall remain the
property of the Township, and upon separation from the Police
Department, each police officer and employee is bound to return same
to the Township. Each police officer and employee will be responsible
for the security of his/her manual, and loss of the same may constitute
neglect of duty and result in disciplinary action. All manuals shall be
kept current, and supplementary pages concerning additions, revisions,
or amendments shall be promptly and properly inserted. No Police
Department operating policies will be inserted as part of this manual
unless, and until, properly assimilated by the appropriate authority.
D. Each police officer, and each civilian employee, is duty-bound to
thoroughly familiarize himself/herself with the provisions of the Police
Manual. Failure to comply shall be considered neglect of duty.
E. In the event neglect of duty is charged against a member for failure to
observe the rules and regulations, or Police Department procedures or
orders, ignorance of any provision of this manual will not be accepted
as an excuse.
A. There are hereby created and continued the offices of Chief, Deputy
Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, and patrolman in the Police
Department.
B. There are hereby created and continued the following positions which
are civilian in character: Public Safety Telecommunication Operators;
Senior Public Safety Telecommunication Operators; Public Safety
Telecommunication Operators/Typist; Senior Public Safety
Telecommunication Operators/Typist; Administrative Secretary; Clerk
Typist; Clerk.
A. Any person or entity desiring to retain the services of police officers of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor for off-duty police-related activities
§ 93-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-13
90:229
shall be required to enter into a contract with the Township of Little
Egg Harbor. Said contract shall include, but not be limited to, the
nature of the duties to be performed, the location of said duties, the
date and hours of service, the rate of payment for services of the
officers, administrative fees to the Township of Little Egg Harbor, and
fees for the use of Township-owned equipment. The Chief of Police
shall require the payment of 100% of the estimated amount due the
Township for the assignment of such off-duty officer, or officers, from
the person or entity requesting such assignment, in advance of
providing such officer or officers. The Chief of Police is hereby
empowered to execute a contract for off-duty police-related activities
on behalf of the Township, in accordance with this section.
B. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the assignment of all off-duty
police-related activities and the billing of all compensation due the
Township. The Chief of Police shall be authorized to designate other
members of the Police Department, as needed, to assist him/her in the
assignment of off-duty police-related activities.
C. All persons or entities shall pay to the Treasurer of the Township such
hourly sum as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the
Township Committee, as compensation for such service. The Township
shall remit to the member of the Police Department performing such
duties 90% of said hourly rate, as predetermined from time to time by
resolution of the Township Committee, and the remaining 10% shall be
retained by the Township for administrative expenses, as established by
resolution of the Township Committee.
D. If additional work time is required due to unanticipated circumstances,
and such work is approved by the Police Chief, the private entity shall
be liable for payment to the Township for all such additional hours
worked.
E. Any invoice from the Township for any balance due, or a credit for any
refund, if any, shall be issued by the Township Treasurer. Payments due
from a private entity shall be made within 10 days of receipt of the
invoice from the Township.
F. Each person or entity who shall employ off-duty police officers pursuant
to this section shall be responsible for maintaining his/her or its own
insurance coverage. Said insurance coverage shall include, but not be
limited to, general liability and automobile liability, and shall name the
Township of Little Egg Harbor as an additional insured. In addition,
such policy shall provide for a minimum coverage of $1,000,000 for any
one claim, or $2,000,000 for any aggregate claims. Proof of said
insurance coverage shall be provided to the Township prior to the
assignment of any off-duty police officers to said person or entity. The
person or entity shall provide for the aforementioned for any and all
officers, vehicles and/or equipment that are utilized in the off-duty
assignment.
§ 93-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 93-13
90:230
§ 93-14. Residency requirements. [Amended 9-10-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
G. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to
order any police officer engaged in off-duty assignments within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor to respond to an emergency situation
within the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, shall also have the right to order any off-duty assignment to
be terminated whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk
to the health, safety, and welfare of the off-duty officer and/or the
citizens of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. In the event that a police
officer is assigned to an emergency situation, the Police Chief, or his/
her designee, shall make note of said emergency situation, as well as
the time said officer was removed from said off-duty assignment. In a
situation where an off-duty police officer is called to an emergency
situation, said person or entity shall not be responsible for the payment
of the officer's hourly rate, administrative fee, or any other fees to the
Township until such time as said police officer and/or equipment
returns to the assignment with the off-duty employer.
H. Any person or entity requesting the services of off-duty police officers
shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for any and all claims and damages which may arise from the
off-duty police officer's employment by said person or entity.
A. All police appointees are subject to a residency preference. The
following rules shall be applicable for employment of those individuals.
The appointing authority shall classify all the duly qualified applicants
to be filled from the following classes:
(1) Residents of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(2) Other residents of Ocean County.
(3) Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) All other qualified applicants.
B. The appointing authority shall first appoint all those police applicants in
Class 2 and then those in each succeeding class in the above order.
§ 93-13 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-14
90:231

ARTICLE II
Special Law Enforcement Officers
§ 93-15. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.9 shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 93-16. Position established.
There is hereby established the position of special police officer in and for
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 93-17. Determination of eligibility.
Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed, the Chief of Police
or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement official of the
Township, shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of the applicant
and report these determinations, in writing, to the Mayor and Committee.
§ 93-18. Appointment; residency requirement.
§ 93-19. Qualifications.
A. Special law enforcement officers may be appointed for terms not to
exceed one year. Said appointment may be revoked by the Mayor and
Committee for cause after adequate hearing, unless the appointment is
for four months or less, in which event the appointment may be revoked
without cause or hearing. Nothing herein shall be construed to require
reappointment upon the expiration of the term. The special law
enforcement officers so appointed shall not be members of the police
force of the Township, and their powers and duties shall cease at the
expiration of the term for which appointed.
B. Special law enforcement officers shall be residents of the State of New
Jersey. [Amended 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
A. No person may be appointed as a special law enforcement officer unless
the person:
(1) Is a resident of this state during the term of appointment;
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(3) Is sound in body and of good health;
(4) Is of good moral character;
§ 93-15 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-19
90:233
§ 93-20. Training course and certification requirements.
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him/her unfit to perform the duties of his/her
office; and
(6) Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers in the Township or, with
regard to a special law enforcement officer hired for a seasonal
period which required psychological testing of its full-time police
officers, has successfully undergone a program of psychological
testing approved by the Police Training Commission established in
the Department of Law and Public Safety, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:17B-70.
B. Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer shall
have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be filed with the
Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
C. No person shall be appointed to serve as a special law enforcement
officer if that person serves as a special law enforcement officer in
another municipality; nor shall any permanent, regularly appointed fulltime
police officer of any other municipality in this state be appointed
as a special law enforcement officer. No public official with
responsibility for setting law enforcement policy, or exercising
authority over the budget of any municipality in this state, or
supervision of the Police Department of a municipality in this state,
shall be appointed as a special law enforcement officer.
D. Any person who, at any time prior to his/her appointment, had served as
a duly qualified, fully-trained, full-time officer in any municipality in this
state and who is separated from that prior service and in good standing
shall be eligible to serve as a special law enforcement officer consistent
with the guidelines promulgated by the Police Training Commission. If
the Police Training Commission waives the training requirements
mandated by statute, the Mayor and Committee, if they so choose, may
appoint such person as a special law enforcement officer.
A. No person may commence his/her duties as a special law enforcement
officer unless he/she has successfully completed the training course
and certification requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11, unless such
training requirements have been waived by the Police Training
Commission.
B. All special law enforcement officers appointed in service on the
effective date of this section may continue in service if, within 24
months of the effective date of this section, they will have completed all
training and certification requirements of this section.
§ 93-19 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 93-21
90:234
§ 93-21. Classification of officers.
There are hereby established two classifications of special law enforcement
officers.
§ 93-22. Uniforms.
Every special law enforcement officer, prior to the commencement of his/
her duties, shall be furnished with a uniform which shall identify the
officer's function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat and
appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or name tag
and the name of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The uniform shall also
include an insignia issued by the Police Training Commission which clearly
indicates the officer's status as a special law enforcement officer and the
type of certification issued by the Commission. All special law enforcement
officers, prior to the commencement of duties, shall be in uniform properly
displaying the appropriate insignia.
§ 93-23. Return of equipment and uniform upon termination.
Whenever a special law enforcement officer's appointment is revoked, or
a special law enforcement officer is not reappointed upon the expiration
of the term, the special law enforcement officer shall return to the officer
in charge of the station house all Township-issued uniforms, badges and
equipment within 15 days of the revocation or expiration of term.
§ 93-24. Firearms.
The special law enforcement officers shall carry and return firearms
pursuant to the guidelines established in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14(b).
§ 93-25. Conduct of officers.
Special law enforcement officers shall comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to the conduct and decorum required of permanent, regularly
A. Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class One officers
shall have the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons and
petty disorderly person's offenses, violations of municipal ordinances,
and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of a firearm
by an officer of this class shall be strictly prohibited, and no Class One
officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the carrying or
use of a firearm.
B. Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly appointed,
full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class
may be authorized only after the officer has been fully certified as
successfully completing training as prescribed by the Police Training
Commission.
§ 93-21 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-25
90:235
appointed police officers of the Township, as well as any rules and
regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of special law
enforcement officers.
§ 93-26. Performance of duties.
§ 93-27. Hours of employment; classification of Township as resort
community.
§ 93-28. Limitation of use of officers.
Special law enforcement officers may be employed only to assist the
Township law enforcement unit, and may not be employed to replace or
substitute for full-time regular police officers, or in any way diminish the
number of full-time officers employed by the Township.
A. A special law enforcement officer shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, other
chief law enforcement officer of the Township, and shall perform his/her
duties only in the Township unless in fresh pursuit of any person
pursuant to Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes.
B. The Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law
enforcement officer of the Township may authorize special law
enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same powers and
authority as permanent, regularly appointed police officers of the
Township, including but not limited to the carrying of firearms and the
power to arrest, subject to rules and regulations. Any such
authorization shall not be inconsistent with the certification
requirements of § 93-20 herein.
A. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16(a) and (c) regarding the
maximum hours of employment of special law enforcement officers is
hereby incorporated as if stated in full herein.
B. For the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16(a) and (c), Little Egg Harbor
Township is a resort community.
§ 93-25 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 93-28
90:236
ARTICLE III
Citizens on Patrol
[Added 3-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
§ 93-29. Creation.
To enhance the individual and collective safety and general welfare of
all citizens of Little Egg Harbor Township, the Citizens on Patrol (COPs)
program is hereby established under the guidance and supervision of the
Police Department of Little Egg Harbor Township.
§ 93-30. Appointment.
§ 93-31. Duties.
§ 93-32. Liaisons.
A. Members of COPs shall be appointed by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
B. Members of COPs shall serve without compensation.
C. Application for appointment to the COPs program shall be in writing on
a form supplied by the Little Egg Harbor Township Police Department.
The application shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of
the applicant, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United States,
and whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime(s),
disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and
the date(s) thereof.
D. Applicants to the COPs program shall be required to submit to a
criminal history background check with periodic background check
updates performed by the Little Egg Harbor Township Police
Department.
A. The Chief of Police shall prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct
of the COPs program.
B. Volunteers in the COPs program serve at the will and pleasure of the
Chief of Police.
A. The Mayor shall annually appoint a member of the governing body to
serve as liaison to the COPs. The liaison shall report to the governing
body and the public on a monthly basis to advise on activities of the
COPs.
B. The Chief of Police shall select a member of the Little Egg Harbor
Township Police Department to serve as liaison from the Police
Department to the COPs. The liaison shall report to the Chief of Police
on a regular basis to advise on the activities of the COPs.
§ 93-29 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 93-32
90:237
Chapter 97
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 97-1. Creation of Department.
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works for the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, County of Ocean, State of New Jersey.
§ 97-2. Superintendent/Director of Public Works designated;
appointment.
§ 97-3. Accountability to Township Committee.
The Superintendent/Director of Public Works shall be responsible to the
Township Committee and will perform such duties as the Township
Committee may from time to time designate. The Township Committee shall
appoint a member of the Township Committee to serve as liaison to the
Department.
§ 97-4. Powers and duties of Superintendent/Director.
The Superintendent/Director shall:
A. There is hereby created and established in the Department of Public
Works a Superintendent/Director of Public Works, who shall be
designated by the Township Committee, and shall receive such salary
as the Township Committee may determine from time to time, and shall
be paid in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Salary
Ordinance of the Township.
B. The Superintendent/Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and shall serve for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on
December 31 of that year, or until a successor has been appointed and
qualified. A person holding the office of Superintendent/Director of
Public Works full-time for five consecutive years shall have tenure of
office as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6.
A. Have full charge and management of the Department and of the other
officers and employees in said Department, subject to Title 11 of the
New Jersey Statutes, and subject to the legislative power of the
municipality. Such charge shall include the power to hire, fire,
discipline and promote employees within the Department of Public
Works, subject to law.
B. Direct all Department operations, the maintenance and inventory of
Department equipment, the preparation and administration of the
Department's budget, the monitoring of all Department purchases, and
all other duties that the Township Committee may assign.
§ 93-32 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 97-4
97:238
§ 97-5. Functions of Department.
The functions of the Department of Public Works shall include, but not be
limited, to the following:
C. Render to the Township Committee such reports, recommendations,
drawings or other documents as may be required, at regular stated
intervals or upon special request therefor. The Superintendent/Director
shall prepare and present to the Township Committee short- and longrange
recommendations for improvements to the infrastructure of the
Township and in other areas that are within the functions and duties of
the Department.
D. Have the authority to delegate any of the duties set forth in this chapter
to any other qualified employee within the Department and shall make
appropriate assignments within said Department in pursuance of this
duty.
E. Make a final determination as to disciplinary action with respect to any
employee, in addition to final determination as to the granting of
scheduled salary increases, and authority to approve or disapprove the
transfer of employees into or out of the Department, subject only to
Title 11 of the New Jersey Statutes and the legislative powers of the
Township Committee.
F. Have complete control over the internal policies, procedures, rules,
regulations and organization of the Department, subject only to the
applicable statutes, and shall coordinate the work of the Department
with other departments of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
G. Be directly accountable to the Township Committee of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
H. Formulate, amend, or modify and recommend Department policies and
procedures and rules and regulations to the Township Committee. The
Township Committee may then adopt the recommended policies and
procedures and/or rules and regulations by resolution of the
Committee. Upon adoption, these policies and procedures and/or rules
and regulations shall govern the management and operation of the
Department.
I. Oversee the operation and administration of public docks, including
coordination of requests and complaints with regard to the Township
docks, and periodically inspect public docks to ensure compliance with
the Township dock lease agreements.
A. The construction and maintenance of Township roads and storm drains.
B. The construction and maintenance of Township parks, buildings,
grounds, docks and lakes.
§ 97-4 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 97-5
97:239
§ 97-6. Additional departmental positions.
In addition to the Superintendent/Director of Public Works, the Township
Committee may authorize positions within the Department by ordinance as
deemed necessary by the Township Committee. These additional positions
shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Department of Personnel rules
and regulations as promulgated within Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated.
§ 97-7. Effect on current employees.
All current employees of the Township of Little Egg Harbor who are
employed in the Public Works Department, performing one or more of
the operations and functions designated in § 97-5, shall be deemed to be
employees of the Department of Public Works.
Chapter 100
ROBIN HOOD SANDY RELIEF FUND COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Super Storm Sandy Recovery and
Reconstruction Task Force — See Ch. 118.
§ 100-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Robin Hood Sandy Relief Fund Committee,
which shall be an advisory body responsible for assisting the Township in
the identification and qualification of residents in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for storm relief funding provided by the Robin Hood Relief Fund.
§ 100-2. Membership; alternates.
C. The collection and disposal of recyclable material and refuse
throughout the Township as required.
D. The maintenance and repair of Township vehicles.
E. Additional operations and functions as the Township Committee may
from time to time designate.
A. The Robin Hood Sandy Relief Fund Committee shall consist of five
members, who shall service without compensation. The members shall
be appointed by the Township Committee. A Chair and secretary shall
be elected annually from among the members of the Committee. The
Chair shall establish the meeting schedule.
B. There shall be two alternate members, who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee.
§ 97-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 100-3
97:240
§ 100-3. Term of office; vacancies.
§ 100-4. Meetings.
There shall be not less than four meetings a year. The Chair shall preside at
all meetings of the Committee.
§ 100-5. Duties of members.
Committee members shall design procedures for the disbursement of the
Robin Hood Relief Fund grant monies. The Committee shall identify
potential recipients and eligible projects for receipt of the monies. The
monies shall be used to procure vouchers for the direct purchase of eligible
items and/or to pay contractors directly for work completed on eligible
projects. The Committee shall report its determinations and
recommendations to the Township Committee, which shall control the
disbursement of funds.
§ 100-6. Removal of members.
The Mayor or Township Committee may remove any member of the
Committee for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after
a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
§ 100-7. Powers and duties.
The task force shall:
Chapter 103
A. The term of office for the appointed members of the Committee shall be
for two years.
B. A vacancy on the Committee occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only by the Mayor.
C. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
is made.
A. Formulate such recommendations to the Mayor and Township
Committee concerning the identification and eligibility of potential
recipients of the Robin Hood Sandy Relief Fund grant.
B. Formulate procedures for the determination of eligibility for projects.
C. Keep records of its meetings and make an annual report to the
governing body.
D. Perform any other duties as directed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
§ 100-3 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-7
103:241
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 110
SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD
§ 110-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Senior Citizens Advisory Board.
§ 110-2. Membership; terms; organization.
§ 110-3. Meeting requirements; duties and responsibilities.
A. The Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall consist of 10 regular voting
members and up to five alternate voting members appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. All
members shall be residents of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and
shall be at least 55 years of age, with the exception of the Committee
Liaison. The terms of all regular voting members of the Senior Citizens
Advisory Board shall be for a term of three years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment, with the exception of the initial
members, whose terms shall be as follows: three members shall be
appointed initially for one-year terms, three members shall be
appointed initially for two-year terms, and four members shall be
appointed initially for three-year terms. The terms of the alternate
voting members shall be for one year. [Amended 5-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-09]
B. In addition to the 10 regular voting members and the alternate voting
members, which may number up to five, there shall be up to three
nonvoting ex officio members representing senior citizen service
agencies who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee. The terms of the ex officio
members shall be for one year. [Amended 5-28-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-09]
C. The Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall annually elect from its
membership a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and a Secretary. The
Committee liaison shall not be eligible to serve in any of those offices or
positions. No one shall serve in any officer position for more than three
consecutive terms.
A. Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall meet at least quarterly. Nothing
shall preclude the Board from meeting more frequently if deemed
necessary.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall be
responsible for advising the Mayor and Township Committee on matters
impacting senior citizens in the Township, including but not limited to
§ 100-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 110-3
103:242
§ 110-4. Committee liaison.
The Mayor shall annually appoint a member of the governing body to serve
as voting/liaison member of the Senior Citizens Advisory Board. The liaison
shall report to the governing body and the public on a monthly basis by
Committee report to advise on activities and recommendations of the Senior
Citizens Advisory Board.
Chapter 116
SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 86. Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
90.
§ 116-1. Established.
There is hereby established within the Township of Little Egg Harbor a
trust fund to be known as the "Sick Leave Trust Fund" pursuant to N.J.S.A.
11A:6-5 and the regulations of the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 116-2. Maintenance and responsibility for fund.
The Township Treasurer shall maintain and bear responsibility for the fund
in the same manner and to the same extent as other public funds under the
Treasurer's care. All interest earned on the fund shall accrue to the fund's
principal.
§ 116-3. Estimation of maximum exposure of fund.
The Treasurer shall annually estimate the probable maximum exposure of
the fund during the coming fiscal year. The estimate shall be based on such
factors as current salary levels, expressed intentions of employees as to
termination, past termination experience and current fund level.
the areas of medical and social services, nutrition programs,
transportation, recreation, employment opportunities, taxation and
housing. The Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall also be responsible
for sponsoring and scheduling educational programs, in conjunction
with the Recreation Director, for senior citizens on topics of interest in
the Township Community Centers. The Board shall also be responsible
for coordinating senior citizen programs and interacting with the other
senior citizen organizations in the Township, such as the AARP and "Old
Guard," and the Ocean County Office of Senior Citizens.
§ 110-3 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 116-4
116:243
§ 116-4. Inclusion of fund exposure in annual operating budget.
The Township Committee shall include as part of the recommended annual
operating budget for the coming fiscal year the amount over and above the
current balance in the fund needed to cover the Treasurer's estimate as to
fund exposure for the coming fiscal year.
§ 116-5. Eligibility requirements.
All employees terminating their Township service shall be eligible for
payment from the fund of a portion of the accumulated sick leave unless
they:
§ 116-6. Collective bargaining agreements.
The portion of sick leave to be compensated, and the maximum dollar
amount thereof, shall be computed in accordance with the current contract
then in effect between the Township and its various employees under
collective bargaining agreements.
§ 116-7. Payment of valid claims.
All valid claims shall be calculated and paid as of the employee's actual date
of termination.
§ 116-8. Payment from operating budget.
In the event that the amount of any valid claim on this fund would exceed
the cash balance in the fund at the time payment is due, payment shall be
made from the current funds of the operating budget.
Chapter 118
SUPER STORM SANDY RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION
TASK FORCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Robin Hood Sandy Relief Fund
Committee — See Ch. 100.
A. Were dismissed from service.
B. Resigned while under suspension.
C. Resigned without giving the notice required by the Township's
personnel policy and regulations.
§ 116-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 118-1
116:244
§ 118-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Super Storm Sandy Recovery and
Reconstruction Task Force, which shall be an advisory body responsible
for assisting the Township in the identification and remediation of current
and potential obstacles to the rapid recovery and reconstruction of the
community from the impact of Super Storm Sandy.
§ 118-2. Membership; chairperson.
§ 118-3. Term of office; vacancies.
§ 118-4. Meetings.
There shall be not less than four meetings a year. The Chair shall preside at
all meetings of the task force.
§ 118-5. Duties of members.
Task force members shall work to fulfill the mission of the task force,
under the leadership and direction of the Chair. Members shall attend
business meetings and shall use their talents and resources to support the
achievement of task force goals.
§ 118-6. Removal of members.
The Mayor or Township Committee may remove any member of the task
force for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a
hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person
or by counsel.
A. The Super Storm Sandy Recovery and Reconstruction Task Force shall
consist of eight members, who shall service without compensation. The
membership shall consist of the Mayor, the Township Administrator or
Assistant Township Administrator, the Emergency Management
Coordinator, the Floodplain Administrator, and four members to be
appointed by the Mayor who are residents of the Township, one of
which must be a real estate broker. A Chair and secretary shall be
elected annually from among the members of the task force. The Chair
shall establish the meeting schedule.
B. There shall be two alternate members, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
A. The term of office for the appointed members of the task force shall be
for three years.
B. A vacancy on the task force occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only by the Mayor.
C. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
is made.
§ 118-1 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 118-7
116:245
§ 118-7. Powers and duties.
The task force shall:
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 123
ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 123-1. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that is determined to be
abandoned pursuant to the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act,
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof.
OWNER — The holder or holders of title to an abandoned property.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The person designated by the municipality pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 or any other officer of the municipality qualified to carry
out the responsibilities set forth in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act and designated by the Mayor.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized and
authorized to do business under the New Jersey Statutes which shall have
as one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential
or nonresidential buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the
restoration of abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of
urban neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified
by virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior
activities set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. to carry out the rehabilitation
of vacant buildings in urban areas.
A. Formulate such recommendations to the Mayor and Township
Committee concerning the identification and remediation of current
and potential obstacles to the rapid recovery and reconstruction of the
community from the impact of Super Storm Sandy.
B. Seek alternative sources of funding for recovery and reconstruction for
the community.
C. Keep records of its meetings and make an annual report to the
governing body.
D. Perform any other duties as directed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
§ 118-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-2
116:246
§ 123-2. Inventory of abandoned property; list to be maintained.
The Township of Little Egg Harbor may direct the public officer to identify
abandoned property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property
list throughout the Township. Each item of abandoned property so identified
shall include the block and lot, the name of the owner of record, the street
address of the lot, and the basis for the determination that the property is
abandoned.
§ 123-3. Abandoned property criteria.
A. The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." The Township
of Little Egg Harbor may add properties to the list at any time, and may
delete properties at any time when the public officer finds that the
property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned property.
B. An interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned property list following that procedure set forth at N.J.S.A.
55:19-105.
A. Any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria
may be deemed to be abandoned property upon a determination by the
public officer that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;
(3) At least one installment of property taxes remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of the Revised Statutes as of the date of determination of the
public officer pursuant to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 for one or more of the
following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
§ 123-2 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-3
116:247
§ 123-4. Establishment of abandoned property list.
property; or the Township has secured the property in order to
prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds has created potential health and safety hazards, and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. Exceptions.
(1) A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78
et seq. so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the
building was previously legally occupied as residential space and
none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at least
six months at the time of the determination of abandonment by the
public officer.
(2) A property used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed abandoned
only if it meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-81.
A. The public officer shall identify abandoned property within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor for the purpose of establishing an
abandoned property list. The abandoned property list shall include, for
each abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot number, the
name of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.
The public officer may add properties to the abandoned property list at
any time, and may delete properties at any time when he or she finds
that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Township of Little Egg Harbor has purchased
or taken assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate which
has been placed on the abandoned property list may be removed if the
owner of the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the
property within 30 days after the property is placed on the list;
provided, however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate
§ 123-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-4
116:248
foreclosure proceedings within six months after the property was first
placed on the list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned
property list in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list and any
additions or deletions thereto by authorizing the publication of the list
in the official newspaper of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, which
publication shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after
publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property
included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify
property determined to be abandoned, setting forth the owner of
record, if known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The
public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out
a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or
property tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of
the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64d. When the owner of record is
not known for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be
mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the
factual basis for the public officer's finding that the property is
abandoned property, as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54, and shall specify the information relied upon in making such
finding. In all cases a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be
filed by the public officer in the office of the Ocean County Clerk. This
filing shall have the same force and effect as a formal notice under
N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned with the name of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor as "plaintiff" and the name of the
property owner as "defendant," as though an action had been
commenced by the Township against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his or her
property on the abandoned property list by appealing that
determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt
of the certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice
was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the public officer
shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was published or
posted, whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on
the abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer
shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a
request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice, the public
officer shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any
property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned
property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned property,
can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list.
The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation such as, but not limited to, photographs, repair invoices,
bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be
§ 123-4 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-4
116:249
§ 123-5. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
that the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is
defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The public officer shall decide
any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal
and shall promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons
therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer pursuant to Subsection D of this section
by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary trial proceeding in the Superior Court, Ocean County. Such
action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of
decision mailed by the public officer. The sole ground for appeal and
new hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in
question is not an abandoned property as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the Court may
extend the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined by him or her or on
appeal not to be abandoned and may, in his or her discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever he or she deems such removal
appropriate under the circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
of Little Egg Harbor shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy
with respect to properties on the list, at any time after at least one
property has been placed on the list and following the expiration of the
period for appeal with respect to that first property or upon the denial
of an appeal brought by the property owner of that first property.
A. An owner may request removal of his or her property from the
abandoned property list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying
all taxes and Township liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner, and reviewed and approved by the public
officer, stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost of
the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of both the public officer and
Township Committee that the conditions rendering the property
abandoned have been remediated in full; provided, however, that
§ 123-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-5
116:250
§ 123-6. Sale of restricted tax liens.
where the public officer finds that the owner is actively engaged
in remediating the conditions because of which the property was
determined to be abandoned, as evidenced by significant
rehabilitation activity on the property, the public officer may grant
an extension of time of not more than 120 days for the owner to
complete all work, during which time no further proceedings will
be taken against the owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the
Township, which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other Township liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list, or, if
an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax Sale
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following the
expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The Township of Little Egg Harbor may, at its option, require that the
sale of the tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer
of a tax sale certificate held by the Township be subject to the express
condition that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform
and conclude any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the
property from the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55
and to post a bond in favor of the Township to guarantee the
rehabilitation or repair of the property. The public officer may waive a
requirement to post a bond imposed by the Township for any purchaser,
assignee or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides
documentation acceptable to the public officer that the purchaser,
assignee or transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in
§ 123-5 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-6
116:251
N.J.S.A. 55:19-80. The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of
the bond shall be added to the amount required to be paid by the owner
for redemption of the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee
of the tax sale certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the
property shall be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the
tax collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts
of monies expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of
the property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at
the delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
shall be permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes
of appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation
or repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement, holding the Township of Little Egg Harbor
harmless, has been filed with the public officer.
C. If the Township of Little Egg Harbor acquires the tax sale certificate for
a property on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written
notice to the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the
filing of the notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, the Township shall be
permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that
caused the property to be included on the abandoned property list. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day period
the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the Township in writing that
the owner or mortgagee has elected to perform the remediation itself.
When the owner or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself,
it shall be required to post bond in favor of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor in order to ensure performance. The amount and conditions of
the bond shall be determined by the public officer.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
as so certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the
remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and
right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after
the filing of any lien by the Township, except for Township taxes, liens
and assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together
with any interest thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and
recorded as a lien by the entity incurring the cost with the Ocean
County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this chapter
shall be considered a public purpose and public use for which the power
of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
§ 123-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-7
116:252
§ 123-7. Special tax sale and criteria for bidders.
A. The Township of Little Egg Harbor may hold special tax sales with
respect to those properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19 which are also on the abandoned property list.
B. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on properties at
the sale, which may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with the Township's plans and
regulations; commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or
otherwise reuse the property, consistent with the Township's plans
and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the public officer, with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee, may determine are necessary
to ensure that the properties to be sold will be rehabilitated or
otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the public interest.
C. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, may establish minimum bid requirements for a special tax
sale that are less than the full amount of the taxes, interest and
penalties due, to help ensure that the properties will be rehabilitated or
otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with the public interest.
D. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, may combine properties in said special tax sale into bid
packages, and require that bidders place a single bid on each package,
rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that are submitted.
E. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, may sell said properties subject to provision that, if the
purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been set forth as a
condition of sale or misrepresents any material qualification that has
been established as a condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto,
then the properties and any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser
shall revert to the Township, and any amount paid by the purchaser at
the special tax sale shall be forfeited to the Township.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the Township may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the Township pursuant to this section and his or her
interest in the property or properties reverts to the Township, the
Township may subsequently designate the entity previously designated
§ 123-7 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-7
116:253
§ 123-8. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
§ 123-9. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
as an eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties, and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis
of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and
conditions of the special tax sale.
G. The Township of Little Egg Harbor shall provide notice of a special tax
sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special
terms of sale established by the Township pursuant to this section.
Nothing shall prohibit the Township from holding a special tax sale on
the same day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the Township of Little Egg Harbor
acquires a tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property
list at tax sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the
right of redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months
following the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the Township of Little Egg Harbor is the purchaser at tax sale of
any property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-34, an action to foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted
in accordance with the provisions of Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remedied in
full.
A. If an entity other than the Township of Little Egg Harbor has purchased
or taken assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate on a
property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six months,
that property shall not be added to the abandoned property list under
the following limited circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Township taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due.
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either Subdivision a or b of N.J.S.A.
§ 123-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-9
116:254
§ 123-10. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure
proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
B. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
C. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the
Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of an abandoned
property according to the criteria established in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and
N.J.S.A. 55:19-82.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Township from addressing
concerns regarding the condition of the property through the Township
of Little Egg Harbor property maintenance hearing process,
established by Chapter 273 of the Township Code, irrespective of any
ongoing foreclosure proceedings.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Township of Little
Egg Harbor may be brought by the Township in the Superior Court,
Ocean County. If the Court shall find that the property is abandoned and
that the owner or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a
rehabilitation plan, then the Court may authorize the Township to take
possession and control of the property and to develop its own
rehabilitation plan for the property.
B. Where the Township has been granted possession and control, the
Township may commence and maintain those further proceedings for
the conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part
thereof, that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost
and expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control
and possession of the property as permitted by N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the Township, obtain appropriate construction permits
or, in the alternative, submit formal applications for funding the cost of
rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies providing such funding
within the initial six-month period shall be deemed clear evidence that
the owner has failed to take any action to further the rehabilitation of
the property.
§ 123-9 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-10
116:255
D. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the public officer or the
Court to be the projected cost of rehabilitation.
E. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
Court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
F. Where the Court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the public officer to act as monitor
of compliance and progress. If the owner fails to carry out any step in
the approved plan, then the Township may apply to the Court to have
the posted bond forfeited, to transfer possession of the building to the
Township to complete the rehabilitation plan, and to grant
authorization to use the bond proceeds for the rehabilitation. The
owner or other party in interest shall provide quarterly reports to the
public officer on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation and
reuse of the property.
G. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan
and posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. Their plan must be submitted within 60 days following the
Court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the
mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause
shown. If the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's
plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation.
§ 123-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-10
116:256
§ 123-11. Township rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
H. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
quarterly reports to the Court and the public officer on its activities and
progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. If the
mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material step in the
approved plan, then the public officer shall notify the Court, which may
order the posted bond forfeit, grant the Township possession of the
property, and authorize the Township to use the proceeds of the bond
for rehabilitation of the property.
I. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including Court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement; or, in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
J. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the Township may submit a plan to the Court which
conforms with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall
designate whether the Township or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall
undertake the rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-90.
A. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, may designate a qualified rehabilitation entity for the
purpose of exercising the Township's rights, where that designation will
further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with
Township's plans and objectives.
B. Regardless of whether the Township exercises its rights directly or the
public officer designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to
this section, while in possession of a property, the Township shall
maintain, safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property.
Notwithstanding the Township's possession of the property, the owner
of the property shall not be relieved of any civil or criminal liability or
any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the owner.
C. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Township of Little
Egg Harbor to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security
interests with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than
municipal liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court must find
as follows:
(1) The Township sought to obtain the necessary financing from the
senior lienholder, which declined to provide such financing on
reasonable terms;
§ 123-10 SICK LEAVE TRUST FUND § 123-11
116:257
§ 123-12. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
(2) The Township sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the
senior lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination;
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
Court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Ocean
County.
D. Where the Township has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to
act on its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide
quarterly reports to the public officer on its activities and progress
toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The Township or
qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall provide such
reports to the Court as the Court determines to be necessary. If the
Court finds that the Township or its designee has failed to take diligent
action toward rehabilitation of the property within one year from the
grant of possession, then the Court may request the Township to
designate another qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights,
or if the Township fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession
and return possession and control of the property to its owner.
E. The Township of Little Egg Harbor shall file a notice of completion with
the Court, and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage
holder or lienholder, at such time as the Township has determined that
no more than six months remain to the anticipated date on which
rehabilitation will be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of
the public officer, attesting that the rehabilitation is anticipated to be
completed within six months, and a statement setting forth the actions
as it plans to undertake consistent with the plan.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of control and possession of
the property at any time after one year from the Court's removal or
possession, but no later than 30 days after the Township of Little Egg
Harbor has filed a notice of completion with the Court or, in the event
the notice of completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of
possession, within 30 days after the Township has filed said notice.
B. The Court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the Township or affect any of the terms or conditions
under which the Township has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the Township has filed a
notice of completion or, in any event, within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition, the Court
§ 123-11 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 123-12
116:258
§ 123-13. Procedures for Township to place liens, obtain title and
sell property.
Chapter 128
ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 242.
may grant the Township title or authorize the Township to sell the
property, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
A. The public officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the Township in connection with any
proceeding under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., incurred prior to the grant
by the Court of an order of possession, which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a Township lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the
rights and status of a Township lien pursuant thereto.
B. Where the Township seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall
approve, and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court.
C. The Court may authorize the Township of Little Egg Harbor to sell the
building free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which
event all such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to
the proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, except that municipal
liens shall be paid at settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the
property shall be distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. Upon approval by the Court, the Township shall sell the property on
such terms and at such price as the Court shall approve, and may place
the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying Court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et
seq. shall be available to the Township with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the Township has established an abandoned
property list and whether or not the property at issue has been included
on any such list.
§ 123-12 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 128-1
128:259
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed, when actuated, to produce or emit
a sound or transmit a signal or message for the purpose of alerting others to
the existence of an emergency situation requiring immediate investigation
by alarm, police, fire or other agent.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system by causes other than
those to which the alarm system was designated or intended to respond.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The volunteer fire company or companies located
within the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
TOWNSHIP ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Police Chief, or
a duly designated representative, who shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter and any administrative duties regarding the
regulation and control of alarm business, agents and systems in the
Township.
§ 128-2. Submission of information by businesses with alarm
systems.
All businesses having an alarm system must submit the names, addresses
and emergency numbers of person(s) to contact if the alarm is activated to
the Township alarm administrator, and shall update and/or amend this list
monthly. This list is confidential and shall be used by the Police and/or Fire
Department when necessary to make contact due to official business.
§ 128-3. False alarms.
§ 128-4. Appeals.
An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a fine to the alarm
administrator. The filing of an appeal with the alarm administrator stays the
assessment of the fine until the alarm administrator makes a final decision.
The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm administrator by
setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 10 days after receipt of the
notice of a fine. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user of his or
her decision in writing within 20 days.
A. The Township alarm administrator shall keep a written record of all
false alarms which summon the Police Department or the Fire
Department to investigate.
B. After five false alarms in any new calendar year, the alarm
administrator shall charge the owner or lessee of such alarm an
administrative inspection fee as outlined in § 128-5.
A. A second level of appeal is available to the Township Administrator in
cases where the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision reached at
§ 128-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 128-4
128:260
§ 128-5. Violations and penalties; administrative inspection fees for
excessive false alarms.
Chapter 130
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse — See Ch. 5.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 261.
a lower level. The alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm
administrator to the Township Administrator by filing a written request
for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 days
after receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator. Filing of a
request for appeal shall stay the fine until the Township Administrator
has completed the review. If a request for appeal is not made within the
twenty-day period, the prior action of the alarm administrator is final.
B. The Township Administrator shall consider the evidence submitted by
any interested person(s). The Township Administrator shall make his/
her decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented.
The Township Administrator must render a decision within 30 days
after the request for an appeal is filed. The Township Administrator
shall affirm or reverse the assessment of the fine. The decision is final
as to administrative remedies of the municipality.
A. The following administrative inspection fee shall be applicable as a
result of excessive false alarms:
(1) Zero to four: no fee.
(2) Fifth false alarm: $100.
(3) Sixth false alarm: $150.
(4) Seventh false alarm: $200.
(5) Eighth false alarm: $250.
(6) Ninth false alarm: $300.
(7) Tenth false alarm: $350.
B. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be cause for
court action against the responsible party or parties.
§ 128-4 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 128-5
128:261

ARTICLE I
Liquor Licenses; Regulations
§ 130-1. Word usage.
For the purpose of this article, relevant words and phrases herein shall
have the same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 130-2. Issuance of licenses.
The governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor may, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14 and 33:1-20, issue
retail consumption, seasonal retail consumption, retail distribution, and
club licenses.
§ 130-3. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this article shall be issued by the governing body
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, which shall also administer the
provisions of this article.
§ 130-4. License required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without having obtained a license in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and the provisions of this article.
§ 130-5. Hours of sale; exceptions.
§ 130-6. Prohibited delivery or service.
No delivering or serving of any alcoholic beverage shall be made, permitted
or suffered on any licensed premises during any period when the sale of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited hereby.
§ 130-7. Determination of time.
The hours fixed herein shall be Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight
saving time depending upon the time standard in effect in the State of New
Jersey.
A. Except as otherwise permitted herein, all hotels, motels, restaurants,
taverns or stores engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption either on or off the premises shall be permitted to engage
in such sale except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. On Sunday, sales are permitted except between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
C. On the first day of January, sales may be extended throughout the day.
§ 130-1 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 130-8
128:263
§ 130-8. Licenses subject to additional provisions.
Each and every license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be issued
subject to statutory provisions, the rules and regulations of the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and also subject to any and
all rules and regulations to be adopted by the governing body of this
municipality.
§ 130-9. License fees.
The annual license fees for licenses in this municipality shall be and are
hereby fixed as follows:
§ 130-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
Upon conviction, after hearing, of any violation of any provision of this
article or any statute, rule or regulation aforesaid, any license issued or
created by this municipality may be suspended or revoked in accordance
with rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter promulgated by the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 130-11. Issuance of new liquor licenses.
§ 130-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Plenary retail consumption license: $2,500.
B. Plenary retail distribution license: $2,500.
C. Club license: $188.
A. New liquor licenses may be issued in accordance with the requirements
of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14 and in accordance with the procedures set forth
in N.J.S.A. 33:1-19.1, as well as any other statute or administrative
regulation governing the issuance of said license.
B. The Township may, by resolution, authorize the issuance of plenary
retail consumption or plenary retail distribution licenses by public sale
to the highest qualified bidder pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-19.3.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or
any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
§ 130-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 130-12
128:264
B. The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 130-12 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 130-12
128:265

ARTICLE II
Consumption and Possession by Underage Persons on Private
Property
§ 130-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the consumption and possession
of alcoholic beverages on private property by persons under the legal age
to purchase alcoholic beverages in accordance with the provisions of P.L.
2000, c. 33.16
§ 130-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling,
or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 130-15. Violations and penalties; postponement or suspension of
driving privileges.
A. Any person under the legal age who, without legal authority, knowingly
possesses or knowingly consumes any alcoholic beverage on private
property shall be punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350
for any subsequent offense. The court may, in addition to the fine
authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privilege of the defendant.
B. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this article. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less
than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including a
suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2.
§ 130-13 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 130-15
128:267
§ 130-16. Exceptions.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that, if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privileges of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this article. Upon receipt
of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. This article does not prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume beverages.
B. This article does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance
enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2 shall be construed to preclude
the imposition of a penalty under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any
other section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful
alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 130-15 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 130-16
128:268
ARTICLE III
Consumption Prohibited In Certain Areas
[Added 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
§ 130-17. Consumption prohibited. [Amended 12-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-17]
No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage in or
upon:
§ 130-18. Consumption or possession in places where public is
invited.
§ 130-19. Exception for sealed containers.
No person shall have in his or her possession, or possess any alcoholic
beverage in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park,
playground or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by
the Township government, unless the same is contained within a closed or
sealed container.
§ 130-20. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 130-17, 130-18 and 130-19,
the governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor may, by resolution,
permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a
designated park, recreation area or other public place at a designated time
or times in connection with a special event, series of events or observance
A. A public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public parking place,
park, playground, recreation area or any other public or quasi-public
place.
B. A public conveyance.
C. Any private property, not his own, without the express permission of the
owner or other person having authority to grant such permission.
A. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on or upon any place to which
the public at large is generally invited; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of
alcoholic beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail
consumption liquor license.
B. No person shall have in his or her possession, or possess any alcoholic
beverage in or upon any place to which the public at large is generally
invited, unless the same in contained within a closed or sealed
container; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages within the licensed
premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor license.
§ 130-17 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 130-20
128:269
which has been authorized by the governing body of the Township, which
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall, in addition, comply
with any applicable ordinances, laws or regulations.
§ 130-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by community service
of not more than 90 days or any combination of fine, imprisonment and
community service, as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 130-20 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 130-21
128:270
Chapter 134
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 261.
Pet waste — See Ch. 271.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 338.
§ 130-21 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 130-21
128:271

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
§ 134-1. Definitions.
§ 134-2. Requirement for disposal of pet waste.17
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding, selling, breeding or training of dogs is carried, except pet
shop.[Added 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel
wherein animals, including but not limited to dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, rabbits, hamsters or gerbils are kept or displayed chiefly for
the purpose of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and
companionship, rather than for business or research purposes.[Added
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
A. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
17.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 271, Pet Waste.
§ 134-1 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-2
128:273
§ 134-3. Owner responsible for control of dogs.
The owner of any dog or dogs in the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall
be responsible to control the dog or dogs such that no dog shall be allowed
to run at large on private property, other than the property of its owner
or keeper, or on any of the public streets or public places of this Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person who is capable of controlling
it and the dog is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not
more than six feet long.
§ 134-4. Control during hunting or training; dogs running at large
in woods or fields; violations and penalties.
Any dog while engaged in hunting or training for hunting shall be in the
immediate control, custody or management of its owner or keeper. The
owner, lessee or keeper of a dog found running at large in the woods or
fields shall be liable to a penalty of $20 for each offense.
§ 134-5. Responsibility for damages.
The owner or keeper of any dog shall be responsible for the damages done
by such dog.
§ 134-6. Licensing of dogs; fees.
private, unless said property is owned or possessed by said pet owner
and/or keeper or permission has been granted from the owner of said
private property.
B. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which has attained or
shall attain the age of seven months or shall possess a set of permanent
teeth, within the Township, unless he first obtains a license and official
metal registration tag therefor, issued by the Board of Health upon
application and payment of the prescribed fee.
B. The license shall contain the name and address of the owner of such
dog; a short description of the dog, indicating the breed, sex and
markings; the number of such license; and shall bear the signature of
the Township Clerk or his or her designee. Said license and official
metal registration tag shall be procured during the month of June in
each year, and said registration tag shall thereafter be securely
fastened to a collar or harness placed upon said dog. [Amended
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
C. License and registration fees. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-08]
§ 134-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-6
128:274
(1) The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay to
the Township a fee of $12 for each dog. If the person applying for
the license and registration tag presents a certificate signed by a
licensed veterinarian stating that the dog has been spayed or
neutered, the fee shall be reduced to $9 for a one-year license.
Each license and tag shall be renewed annually. Of the above fees,
the Township's portion shall be $7.80 per license year and the
remainder of the funds shall go to the State of New Jersey, as
required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. Each license tag shall be
renewed either prior to or upon the expiration of the license
previously issued, and for each animal renewal, a fee for the license
and registration tag shall be paid. Said license and registration
tags and renewal thereof shall expire on June 30 in the year stated
on the license.
(2) A person applying for a license for a potentially dangerous dog
shall pay to the Township a fee of $500 in addition to the fees
provided for in §134-6C(1).
D. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued
by any other municipality shall be accepted by the Township as
evidence of compliance with this section.
E. Dogs used as guides for handicapped persons and commonly known as
"Seeing Eye" dogs, "hearing ear" dogs or "service" dogs, as provided in
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, shall be licensed and registered as other dogs herein
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
F. Application forms for license and uniform official metal registration
tags designed by the State Department of Health shall be furnished by
the Township, and licenses shall be numbered serially and shall bear
the year of issuance and the name of the Township.
G. The owner of any newly acquired dog which has attained or shall attain
the age of seven months or shall possess a set of permanent teeth shall
apply for a license and registration tag for such dog within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment.
H. Any person who shall bring or shall cause to be brought into the
Township any dog licensed in another state for the current licensing
year and bearing a registration tag and shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 90
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each
such dog. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog.
§ 134-6 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-6
128:275
§ 134-7. Acts constituting nuisance. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-08]
§ 134-8. Impounding of dogs at large; disposal; adoption.
I. No person except an official or agent in the performance of his duties
shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the
consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a
dog for which it was not issued.
A. Allowing any dog to run at large in this Township shall be considered a
nuisance.
B. Owning, keeping or harboring more than three dogs on property of less
than one acre shall be considered a nuisance.
C. No person shall own any dog or other animal which habitually barks,
howls, cries or makes other noise over a prolonged period of time,
whether during the day or night. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the normal and occasional barks, cries, howls or other noises associated
with any one such animal. In imposing a sentence for a conviction under
this section, the Judge may take into consideration the constantness,
steadiness and frequency of the complained-of acts, the period of time
over which such acts occurred, attempts by the owner to stop such acts,
the causes for such acts, the degrees that such acts interrupted or
interfered with any neighbor's enjoyment and use of his or her premises
and the owner's prior convictions under this section. There shall be no
violation of this section when the complained-of acts were committed by
any animal other than a dog, or dogs, and such acts occurred upon
property in use for farming or agricultural activities, including raising
livestock, poultry or small animals and such use is legally permitted on
said property. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or
interfere with the right of persons to use their property for farming or
other agricultural uses when such uses are lawful pursuant to the Code
of Little Egg Harbor Township.
A. In the event that any dog shall be found running at large upon any
public or private property, other than the property of the person
owning, keeping, or harboring said dog in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, such dog shall be forthwith taken and
impounded by the police, Dog Warden or other duly authorized official
or agent of this Township and shall be kept and confined for a period of
time of not more than 10 days and shall then be destroyed in a manner
causing as little pain as possible and consistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 4:22-19 or offered for adoption; provided, however, that:
(1) Notice is given as set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 and the animal
remains unclaimed; or
(2) The person owning, keeping or harboring the animal has not
claimed the animal and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
§ 134-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-8
128:276
§ 134-8.1. License for kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound. [Added
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
detention, including maintenance cost not exceeding $4 per day, or
the person does not produce a license and registration tag for a dog
which was unlicensed at the time of seizure.
B. If adopted, at the time of adoption, the right of ownership in the animal
shall transfer to the new owner.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Township for a license entitling
him or her to keep or operate such establishment. Any person holding
such a license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for
dogs or cats owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments.
Such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner of different
premises.
B. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or proposed to be located, as well as the purpose or purposes
for which is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written
approval of the local municipal and health authority showing
compliance with the local and state rules and regulations governing
location and sanitation at such establishment. The application will also
describe the maximum number of dogs, cats or other animals to be
accommodated by such establishment at any one time.
C. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment has been maintained, and all
such licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year and be
subject to revocation by the municipality upon the recommendation of
the State Department of Health and Senior Services or the Township for
failure to comply with the rules and regulations of said board, after the
owner has been afforded a hearing by either the state department or
Township, except as provided below in this section.
D. Any person holding such license shall be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment since licenses shall not be transferable to another or
different premises.
E. Review of pet shop licenses; suspension or revocation.
(1) The license for a pet shop shall be subject to review by the
Township upon the recommendation of the State Department of
Health and Senior Services, or the local health authority, for failure
by the pet shop to comply with the rules and regulations of the
state department or local health authority governing pet shops, or
if the pet shop meets the criteria for recommended suspension or
revocation provided under Subsection (c) or (d) of N.J.S.A. 56:8-96,
§ 134-8 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-8.1
128:277
§ 134-8.2. Kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound license fees. [Added
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be as follows:
§ 134-8.3. Kennel reports to State Health Department. [Added
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
The Township shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of all
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the
licenses therefore are issued. The list shall include the name and address of
each licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 134-8.4. Control of animals off kennel premises. [Added
7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
No dog or other animals kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall
be permitted off the premises except on a leash, in a crate, or other safe
control.
after the owner of the pet shop has been afforded a hearing
pursuant to Subsection (e) of N.J.S.A. 56:8-96.
(2) The Township, based on the criteria for the recommendation of the
local health authority provided under Subsections (c) and (d) of
N.J.S.A. 56:8-96, may suspend the license for 90 days or may revoke
the license if it is determined at the hearing that the pet shop:
(a) Failed to maintain proper hygiene and exercise reasonable
care in safeguarding the health of animals in its custody; or
(b) Sold a substantial number of animals that the pet shop knew, or
reasonably should have known, to be unfit for purchase.
F. The Township may issue a license for a pet shop that permits the pet
shop to sell pet supplies for all types of animals, including cats and
dogs, and sell animals other than cats and dogs, but restricts the pet
shop from selling cats or dogs, or both.
G. Every pet shop licensed in the state shall submit annually, and no later
than May 1 of each year, records of the total number of cats and dogs,
respectively, sold by the pet shop each year to the Township in which it
is located, and the Township shall provide this information to the local
health authority.
A. Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs: $10.
B. Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $25.
C. Pet shop: $10.
D. Shelter/pound: no fee.
§ 134-8.1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-9
128:278
§ 134-9. Chief Animal Control Officer.
§ 134-10. Animal Control Officer.
A. Position created. There is hereby created the position of Chief Animal
Control Officer.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Chief Animal Control Officer shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, and shall serve a term of office of three years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the
third year, or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified. The
Chief Animal Control Officer shall be reappointed unless for good
cause.
C. Duties. The duties of the Chief Animal Control Officer shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
(1) Heading the Animal Control Department and reporting to and
being directly responsible to the Township Administrator.
(2) Enforcing the provisions of the Township animal control ordinances
and the state statutes, including the taking into custody,
impounding, adoption, etc., of animals.
(3) Administering and enforcing rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the
Department and its officers and personnel.
(4) Implementing, exercising and discharging the functions, powers
and duties of the Department.
(5) Delegating duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel of the Department.
(6) Overseeing the administration of the Animal Control Department,
including but not limited to the keeping of needed records and files.
(7) Reporting annually, or as needed, to the Township Administrator on
the operations of the Department.
(8) Performing such other related tasks as are required by the Mayor
and Township Council.
D. Qualifications. To be appointed to the position of Chief Animal Control
Officer, an individual must meet the following requirements:
(1) Hold a certified animal control officer's certificate from the State of
New Jersey.
(2) Have three years' of animal control experience involving the
enforcement of ordinances and/or statutes, including the taking
into custody, impounding, adoption, etc., of animals.
§ 134-9 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-10
128:279
§ 134-11. Animal Cruelty Investigator.
A. Position created. There is hereby created the position of Animal Control
Officer.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Animal Control Officer shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, and shall serve a term of office of three years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of the
third year, or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified. The
Animal Control Officers shall be reappointed unless for good cause.
C. Duties. The duties of the Animal Control Officer shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Reporting directly to the Chief Animal Control Officer.
(2) Enforcing the provisions of the Township animal control ordinances
and the state statues, including the taking into custody,
impounding, adoption, etc., of animals.
(3) Assuming and performing all duties and responsibilities of the
Chief Animal Control Officer in his absence.
(4) Assisting the Chief Animal Control Officer in formulating and
implementing policy, regulations, goals and objectives of the
Animal Control Department.
(5) Overseeing personnel and equipment to ensure that both meet
Department standards and safety requirements.
(6) Overseeing the supervision of the Assistant Animal Control
Officers.
(7) Performing such duties as directed by the Mayor and Township
Council.
D. Qualifications. To be appointed to the position of Animal Control Officer,
an individual must meet the following requirements:
(1) Hold a certified animal control officer's certificate from the State of
New Jersey.
(2) Have one year of animal control experience involving the
enforcement of ordinances and/or statutes, including the taking
into custody, impounding, adoption, etc., of animals. A person must
hold a certified animal control officer's certificate from the State of
New Jersey.
A. Position created. There is hereby created the position of Animal Cruelty
Investigator.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Animal Cruelty Investigator shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
§ 134-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-11
128:280
§ 134-12. Violations and penalties.
Council, and shall serve a term of office of three years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 1 of the
third year, or until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
C. Duties. The duties of the Animal Cruelty Investigator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
(1) Enforce all laws and ordinances enacted for the protection of
animals including, but not limited to, animal control, animal
welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and local ordinances.
(2) Conduct investigations and initiate and prosecute complaints and/
or violations of animal control, animal welfare or animal cruelty
laws of the State of New Jersey, as well as local ordinances.
(3) Engage in the apprehension and arrest and detection of offenders
who have violated animal control, animal welfare and animal
cruelty laws of the state as well as local ordinances.
(4) Working in consultation and cooperation with the Little Egg Harbor
Police Department, the Chief Animal Control Officer and other
animal cruelty investigators under the direction of the Chief Animal
Control Officer as well as the Business Administrator, when
applicable, and when necessary cooperatively determining whether
probable cause exists for the application and issuance of a search
or arrest warrant and implementing same.
D. Qualifications. To be appointed to the position of Animal Cruelty
Investigator, a person must hold a certified animal control officer
certificate from the State of New Jersey and have and maintain the New
Jersey State Animal Cruelty Investigators Certification pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
A. Any person who violates, fails or refuses to comply with § 134-6 of this
article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50
for each offense, except for the first offense the penalty shall be not less
than $1 nor more than $50, as determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge.
B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service, as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The combination of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 134-11 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-12
128:281
C. The violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 134-12 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-12
128:282
ARTICLE II
Dog Tethering
[Adopted 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
§ 134-13. Tethering restricted.
A. It shall be unlawful to chain or tether unneutered or unspayed dogs in
any manner within the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful to chain or tether sick or injured dogs.
C. Neutered or spayed dogs may be tethered; such tethering may only be
performed if the following conditions are met:
(1) Dogs may be tethered for no more than six consecutive hours on
any day and never between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2) Dogs may not be tethered at vacant or unoccupied structures. A
competent adult must be present at the property for the duration of
any dog tethering.
(3) The tether must be at least 15 feet long and have a functioning
swivel on both ends.
(4) The tether may weigh no more than 1/8 of the dog's weight.
(5) The tether must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness.
The use of training collars, choke chains, prong collars, slip collars
or any other type of collar which tightens as the dog pulls is
prohibited for the purpose of connection of a dog to a tether.
(6) The area accessible by the dog on a tether must be free from
possible entanglements, including but not limited to trees, poles,
stakes or fences.
(7) The tether must not allow a dog within five feet of any potentially
dangerous places or obstructions such as pools, walls, vehicles,
roadways, trees or any other objects upon which an animal could
harm itself.
(8) Multiple dogs may not be tethered within the same yard unless the
tethers are configured such that they shall not become entangled.
D. The yard inside which a dog is tethered must be equipped with a
suitable shelter:
(1) Dog shelters shall be of a size such that the dog can stand or lay
comfortably within the shelter.
(2) Dog shelters shall be weatherproof and ventilated.
(3) Dog shelters shall be made of solid materials with a solid floor
raised at least two inches from the ground.
§ 134-13 ALARMS, FIRE AND BURGLAR § 134-13
128:283
§ 134-14. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township Animal Control Officer and/
or the Township Police Department.
§ 134-15. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
violations and penalties set forth at § 134-12.
(4) Dog shelters shall be equipped with bedding material consisting of
hay, straw or their equivalent.
(5) Clean drinking water shall be available as a liquid. Snow or ice is
not a suitable alternative for water.
§ 134-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 134-15
128:284
Chapter 141
BINGO AND RAFFLES
§ 141-1. Licenses authorized.
Under and subject to the terms conditions and restrictions of this chapter,
the Raffles Licensing Law (P.L. 1954, c. 5)18, the Bingo Licensing Law (P.L.
1954, c. 6)19, the Legalized Games of Chance Control Law (P.L. 1954, c. 7)20
and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated or to be adopted
and promulgated hereafter by the Legalized Games of Chance Control
Commission of the State of New Jersey, licenses shall be issued in this
municipality to bona fide organizations or associations as described in said
laws.
§ 141-2. Investigation of applicants.
The governing body of this municipality shall make an investigation of
the qualifications of each applicant as directed in N.J.S.A. 5:8-53, which
provides for raffle licensing, and N.J.S.A. 5:8-27, which provides for bingo
licensing. In this municipality, the governing body of this municipality is
and shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of making the initial
investigation and compiling a report thereon in writing.
§ 141-3. Duration and effect of license.
No bingo license or raffle license issued under each respective licensing law
shall be issued for a period of more than one year, nor shall a license be
issued for the holding, operation and conduct of any game of chance which
may be licensed under the other of said licensing laws.
§ 141-4. Hearing on application.
No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
governing body until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant,
at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications
of the applicant and the merits of the application.
§ 141-5. Form of license.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Control Commission.
§ 141-6. Control and supervision of games; Sunday raffles.
A. The governing body of the municipality issuing any license under this
chapter and either of said licensing laws shall have and exercise control
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
§ 134-15 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 141-6
141:285
§ 141-7. Minimum age of participants.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any manner in any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted
pursuant to any license issued by this municipality, except that a person
under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play a game of chance when
the prize offered and awarded consists of merchandise only and does not
include cash or money.
§ 141-8. Maximum number of games per month; alcoholic
beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued by this municipality more often than authorized by
regulation promulgated by the Control Commission nor in any room or
outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are sold or served during the
progress of the game or games.
§ 141-9. Adherence to statutory provisions.
All conditions, restrictions, regulations or rules relating to the licensing
and conduct of games of chance shall be in accordance with the New
Jersey Raffles Licensing Law, Bingo Licensing Law, Legalized Games of
Chance Control Law and the rules and regulations of said State Control
Commission.
§ 141-10. Duties of Township Clerk.
The Township Clerk shall, on behalf of the municipality:
and supervision over all games of chance so licensed in accordance with
the said licensing laws.
B. The Township Committee may authorize the holding of a raffle on
Sunday when, in its opinion, the raffle cannot be held on any other day
of the week to meet the needs of the organization requesting the same.
If the Township Committee determines that the raffle can be held on a
Sunday, the license issued by the Township shall specifically provide
that the raffle can be held on Sunday.
A. File with the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission a
certified copy of this chapter within 10 days after its adoption.
B. On or before the first day of February in each year or at any other time
or times which said Commission may determine, make report to the
Commission of the number of licenses issued in this municipality under
each of said licensing laws and the names and addresses of the
licensees, the aggregate of the license fees collected, the names and
addresses of all persons detected for violation of each of said laws or of
the rules and regulations adopted by the State Control Commission, of
all persons prosecuted for such violations and the result of each such
§ 141-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 141-10
141:286
§ 141-11. License fee for raffles.
The license fee for raffles shall be a fee as prescribed by regulation as
promulgated by the Control Commission.
§ 141-12. License fee for bingo.
The license fee for bingo shall be a fee as prescribed by regulation as
promulgated by the Control Commission for each occasion upon which any
game or games are to be conducted under such license.
§ 141-13. Unlicensed games prohibited.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall conduct, operate,
run, participate in or attend at any unlicensed raffle or bingo game in this
municipality.
§ 141-14. Violation of regulatory laws.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall violate any of the
terms or provisions of any one or more of the following:
§ 141-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days and/or
by a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, in the discretion
of the Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 141-16. Suspension or revocation of license.
A conviction hereunder after hearing shall be proper ground, in the
discretion of the governing body, to suspend or revoke a license issued
pursuant to this chapter if any has been issued and is outstanding. This
provision for suspension or revocation of license by the governing body shall
prosecution and the penalties imposed therein, during the preceding
calendar year or the period for which the report is required.
A. Bingo Licensing Law, P.L. 1954, c. 6 (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.).
B. Raffles Licensing Law, P.L. 1954, c. 5 (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.).
C. Legalized Games of Chance Control Law, P.L. 1954, c. 7 (N.J.S.A. 5:8-1
et seq.).
D. This chapter.
§ 141-10 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 141-16
141:287
be available in addition to those remedies available for initiation by the
Control Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-30.
Chapter 145
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "House
Numbering Ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor."
§ 145-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting or
having access to any street in the Township of Little Egg Harbor in order
to assist the general public and emergency services, public and private, in
identifying any property in case of emergency or otherwise.
§ 145-3. Applicability.
All residential, commercial, industrial or other structures erected or to be
erected within the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall display identification
numbers as provided herein and in accordance with specifications provided
herein.
§ 145-4. Determination and assignment of house numbers.
§ 145-5. Responsibility of owners.
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every structure which now fronts
or which may hereafter front upon any public or private street within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor who has been assigned a house number prior
to the effective date of this chapter shall, at his own expense, within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter, cause the authorized and assigned
A. House numbers shall be determined and assigned by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor. The owner of any structure requiring a house
number for which structure such a number has not been assigned as of
the effective date of this chapter will be notified by the Township when
such number is assigned to said structure.
B. Whenever any person files an application with the Planning Board or
Zoning Board to subdivide a parcel of property, the Board shall request
the Township Police Department to assign the house numbers of the
proposed new lots. The applicant shall be responsible for the payment
of all costs incurred by the Township Police Department in determining
the assignment of the house numbers for the applicant's subdivision.
These costs shall be paid prior to the adoption of a resolution approving
the application. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
§ 141-16 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 145-5
141:288
number of such structure to be permanently and conspicuously placed in
accordance with the specifications set forth herein. Any owner who has not
been assigned a number prior to the effective date of this chapter shall,
within 30 days after notice of assignment of such number, comply with the
requirements of this section.
§ 145-6. Number specifications.
House or building numbers shall be:
§ 145-7. Placement on posts, rods or mailboxes.
If numbers affixed to the front of the building would not be visible from the
street, regulations may be satisfied if the owner, occupant or lessee shall
provide the Arabic numerals, as required by these regulations, upon a post,
rod or other type of fixture of substantial nature or a mailbox at or near
the frontage with the same number affixed thereof and so located upon the
same, so that the number may be conspicuous and visible from the street
upon which the building fronts. When the provisions of this section have
been complied with, the owner, occupant or lessee of the house or building
shall not be otherwise obligated to affix Arabic numerals to said house or
building and shall be permitted, at his option, to utilize cursive numbers or
no numbers at all upon the house or building.
§ 145-8. Garden apartments and townhouse condominium
complexes.
Garden apartment and townhouse condominium complexes shall provide
such building and apartment numbers as are provided for in the regulations.
§ 145-9. Withholding of certificate of occupancy.
Any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after the effective date
of this chapter shall have the certificate of occupancy withheld until it is
assigned a house number and said number is affixed to said structure in
accordance with this chapter.
A. In Arabic numerals.
B. A minimum height of three inches for residential properties and a
minimum height of six inches for commercial and industrial properties.
C. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building so
as to be clearly visible from the street.
D. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street and shall be
reflective to light for visibility at night.
E. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs
and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers
from the street upon which the building fronts.
§ 145-5 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 145-10
141:289
§ 145-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 148
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 156.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
§ 148-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the Township of Little Egg Harbor
which are so old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy is inimical to the welfare of the residents of said municipality
and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the people of this
municipality, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or
demolition of such building or buildings or parts thereof.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
The words "governing body," "public authority," "public officer," "owner,"
"parties in interest" and "building," whenever used or referred to in this
chapter, shall have the meanings and be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.4.
§ 148-3. Compliance required.
No owner or parties in interest shall continue the existence, use or
occupancy of any building or buildings or parts of buildings in violation of
the findings and declarations of § 148-1 hereof.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or by community service of not more than 90
days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service
as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 145-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 148-4
148:290
§ 148-4. Appointment of public officer.
The public officer hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter shall be the Director of the Department of
Community Development or his designee.
§ 148-5. Service of complaint and notice of hearing.
Whenever a petition shall be filed with the public officer by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that any
building is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public
officer that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his
designated agent at a place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of said complaint, that the owner and parties
in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of
law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer or
his designated agent.
§ 148-6. Order for repair or removal.
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building or buildings under consideration are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 148-7. Repair or closing by Township.
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the
said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order;
and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to alter, repair or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed; thereupon, the public officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with
§ 148-4 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 148-7
148:291
§ 148-8. Removal by Township.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for the receipt of bids therefor.
§ 148-9. Determination of costs; lien.
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceedings taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
municipality, and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from
the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or
demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such building.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall
be filed with the public officer or other custodian of the records of tax
liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to
the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of the
Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment and summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
§ 148-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 148-10
148:292
§ 148-10. Conditions warranting finding of unfitness for habitation.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of such municipality; such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing
the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural
defects or uncleanliness; or failure to comply with the requirements of the
building code or the certificate of occupancy.
§ 148-11. Methods of service of complaints or orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
the public officer or his legal agent shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be
made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published
in the municipality or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed
and published in the county and circulating in the municipality in which the
buildings are located. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the County Clerk of Ocean County.
§ 148-12. Powers of public officer.
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as shall
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of the chapter.
§ 148-10 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 148-13
148:293
§ 148-13. Advertisement for bids.
Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax shall be
taken only after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor, unless the
action is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
Chapter 151
BULKHEAD CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of docks — See Ch. 165.
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAGOON — Any natural, man-made, or man-improved body of water
providing access for watercraft to any property.
MARINE BULKHEAD — Any bulkhead or retaining wall which retains earth
(or other materials) on one side and is exposed to water in a lagoon on the
other side.21
TOWNSHIP BULKHEAD ENGINEER — A New Jersey licensed professional
engineer appointed by the Township Committee to review and approve or
deny applications submitted under this chapter.
TOWNSHIP BULKHEAD INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed by the
Township Committee to inspect the condition and construction of bulkheads
under this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
WATERFRONT LOT — Any lot which has a lagoon or other body of water
along all or part of any of its boundary lines.
§ 151-2. Permits required.
A. No marine bulkhead shall be altered, constructed, reconstructed, or
installed, and no fill shall be placed on any waterfront lot, unless and
until a permit has been obtained from the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
B. No marine bulkhead shall be altered, constructed, reconstructed, or
installed, and no fill shall be placed on any waterfront lot, unless and
until a permit has been obtained from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, and from any other governmental agency
with jurisdiction.
21.Editor's Note: The definition of "Township Bulkhead Board of Appeals Committee," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-18.
§ 148-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 151-3
148:294
§ 151-3. Applications for permits.
§ 151-4. Permit approval.
§ 151-5. Conformance to standards.
A. Application for a bulkhead permit shall be submitted to the Township
Construction Office and shall be on the form provided by the Township.
B. All proposed new, altered, replacement, or reconstructed marine
bulkheads in the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be designed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
C. Applications shall be accompanied by signed and sealed plans and
specifications, showing the size, shape, configuration, materials,
dimensions, and location of the bulkhead(s), including existing and
proposed bulkheads.
D. All plans shall be based upon an accurate, current survey of the
premises prepared by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor.
E. Applications shall be accompanied by fees as established by the
Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
F. Applications shall be accompanied by copies of permits from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection regarding the proposed
bulkhead, and/or other documentation verifying that the proposed
bulkhead has been approved by the Department or is in conformance
with the Department's rules and regulations governing bulkheads.
A. The Township Bulkhead Engineer shall review the application and plans
and grant or deny the application within 20 business days upon receipt
of a complete application.
B. The review by the Township Bulkhead Engineer shall be in conformity
with this chapter, consistent with the minimum standards and
specifications contained herein.
A. The design engineer shall certify on the plan the type of water (i.e.,
freshwater or saltwater) to which the exposed side of the marine
bulkhead will be exposed.
B. All bulkhead designs shall take into account the following minimum
factors:
(1) Soil type(s) and conditions in front of the wall.
(2) Soil type(s) and conditions behind the wall.
(3) Water depth in front of the wall (to mud line and to firm bottom,
with allowance for future dredging, if needed).
(4) Water depth behind the wall.
§ 151-3 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 151-5
148:295
(5) Tide fluctuations.
(6) Sheet pile and face pile (if used) embedment depth.
(7) Sheet pile and face pile (if used) exposed length above bottom of
lagoon and above water.
(8) Sheet pile anchorage conditions behind wall.
(9) Currents, scour, and wave action potential.
(10) Use of the wall and land behind the wall (boat anchorage, davit
attachments, special loadings, driveways, buildings, surcharges,
etc.).
(11) Drainage behind the wall.
(12)Wall backfill materials.
(13) Slope behind the wall.
(14) Type and strength of materials used in the wall.
C. All marine bulkheads shall be generally of the deep-water, anchored (or
"navy") type, unless otherwise approved by the Township Bulkhead
Engineer, which typically consists of the following elements:
(1) Face piles (tapered, round piles seaward of all other bulkhead
components).
(2) Sheet piles (sheathing).
(3) Walers (horizontal beams between face piles and sheetpiles).
(a) One at the top of the wall.
(b) One at or right above low tide (if needed for design conditions).
(c) Intermediate (if needed for design conditions).
(4) Steel tie rods with ogee washers and nuts, through the face piles
and sheet piles, and tied into deadmen, drag, and/or anchor piling.
(5) Key logs, deadmen, drag, and/or anchor piles for tie rod anchorage.
(6) Wall caps.
D. If the bulkhead will be constructed of interlocking vinyl sheet piles, and
will utilize a design in which face piles will not be used, the design shall
be subject to the approval by the Township Bulkhead Engineer. Such
bulkheads, however, shall include all other bulkhead elements listed in
this chapter for marine bulkheads.
E. All marine bulkheads shall be installed by contractors who are
equipped, experienced, qualified, and competent to install such
structures and shall be constructed in a good workmanlike manner.
§ 151-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 151-5
148:296
§ 151-6. Commencement of construction; notification; inspections.
F. All development on waterfront properties abutting lagoons shall
provide for marine bulkheading along the entire lagoon frontage. Only
marine bulkheads are permitted along such lagoon frontages; in no
case shall bank slopes, riprap, revetments, sod, vegetated, or other
types of bank stabilization be permitted.
G. Only clean fill shall be used for fill behind or on the landward side of the
bulkhead.
H. All bulkheads shall be constructed to tie into existing bulkheads on
either or both sides, if any exist, or shall be constructed with returns (at
90° to the main bulkhead) into the protected property, to prevent
flanking of the main bulkhead. If the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection do not permit either of these
alternatives, then the Department's determination shall govern.
I. On and after January 1, 2004, wood that has been pressure-treated with
chromated copper arsenate (CCA) shall no longer be permitted for use
as sheet piles in any marine bulkhead constructed or reconstructed in
Little Egg Harbor Township if commercial production of such wood has
been discontinued.
(1) Thereafter, CCA shall only be permitted for:
(a) Use as walers, face piles, deadmen, anchor piles, wall caps; or
(b) For repair of sheet piles in an existing marine bulkhead which
was originally constructed of such materials.
(2) In the event the repair of an existing marine bulkhead will
constitute more than 50% of the surface area of the existing sheet
piles exposed between the upper and the lowest waler in the
bulkhead, then CCA-treated wood shall not be permitted for use
therein.
A. No construction shall commence before and unless a permit for
construction has been obtained in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The permittee shall notify the Township Bulkhead Inspector at least two
business days before construction is to commence or recommence on
any bulkhead for which a permit has been issued.
C. Any work performed without notification to the Township Bulkhead
Inspector is subject to removal by and at the cost and expense of the
permittee.
D. The Township Bulkhead Inspector shall inspect the materials delivered
to the job site and verify that they are in conformance with the permit
issued for that work, in size, quantity, and quality. If such materials do
not conform to permit requirements, they shall be marked as "rejected"
§ 151-5 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 151-6
148:297
§ 151-7. Final inspection.
§ 151-8. Utilities.
§ 151-9. Minimum standards.
and removed from the job site by the permittee and shall not be
incorporated into the bulkhead construction.
E. The Township Bulkhead Inspector shall make periodic visits to the job
site to verify that the work is proceeding in accordance with permit
requirements.
F. The permittee and the contractor shall provide safe and adequate
access to the site of the work for the Township Bulkhead Inspector for
purposes of making the required inspections.
A. The permittee shall notify the Township Bulkhead Inspector of the
completion of the work done under the permit issued.
B. The Township Bulkhead Inspector shall, within five business days of the
notification, make an inspection of the completed work to determine if
it conforms to the approved plans issued with the permit.
C. If it is in conformance, the permittee will be so advised, and the permit
file shall be marked as "completed."
D. If it is not in conformance, the permittee will be so advised and will be
provided with a list of specific deficiencies requiring correction. The
permittee shall then advise the Township Bulkhead Inspector when
corrections have been made, and a reinspection will be made.
A. It is the responsibility of the permittee to protect all existing utilities at
the bulkhead site.
B. The permittee shall obtain current utility mark-out from all applicable
utilities prior to commencement of construction.
A. Materials.
(1) All materials incorporated into bulkheads constructed within the
Township shall conform to the requirements contained herein.
(2) Wood that has been treated with creosote shall not be used in any
bulkhead regulated by these requirements, except for back system
components (anchor piles, drag piles, and deadmen).
(3) On or after January 1, 2004, wood that has been treated with
chromated copper arsenate (CCA) shall not be used as sheet piles
in any bulkhead regulated by these requirements, if commercial
production of such wood has been discontinued, except to repair an
existing structure as regulated in § 151-5I.
§ 151-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 151-9
148:298
(4) On or after January 1, 2004, only vinyl shall be used as sheet piles
in any bulkhead regulated by these requirements, if commercial
production of CCA-treated wood has been discontinued, except to
repair an existing structure as regulated in § 151-5I.
(5) Wood.
(a) Material. All wood used in marine bulkhead construction shall
be Southern Pine (or a wood of equivalent strength and
durability approved by the Township Bulkhead Engineer) and
graded by a recognized lumber grading agency, meeting the
following minimum standards:
[1] Round piles: ASTM D 25, minimum eight-inch tip diameter,
natural taper, spaced a maximum of five feet on center, and
driven a minimum of eight feet into solid bottom, or
greater if determined by the design engineer.
[2] Square or sawn piling: not permitted.
[3] Walers: Marine Framing Grade No. 2 minimum six inch by
six inch with a maximum spacing of four feet between top
and bottom walers, and with intermediate walers if
required by the design engineer.
[4] Sheet piles: Seawall Grade No. 2, clearly marked "This
Side Seaward," tongue and groove, minimum two-inch
nominal thickness, or greater if determined by the design
engineer. Length shall be determined by the depth of the
water six feet from the bulkhead and shall be driven a
minimum of five feet into solid bottom or greater if
determined by the design engineer.
[5] Cross-bracing: Marine Framing Grade No. 2.
[6] Split Pile Caps: No. 1 Dense.
[7] Stringers: No. 1.
[8] Decking: No. 1 or Premium.
[9] Handrails: No. 1, No. 1 Dense, or Select Structural.
[10]Wallcaps: No. 1.
[11] Anchor piles: ASTM D 25, minimum eight-inch tip
diameter, natural taper, and length and depth as
determined by the design engineer.
[12]Key logs: minimum six inch by eight inch or eight-inch
diameter and 16 feet long, continuous for the entire length
of the bulkhead with four-foot overlaps.
§ 151-9 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 151-9
148:299
(b) Preservative. All wood used in bulkhead construction shall be
pressure-treated in accordance with the following
specifications:
[1] Round piles: saltwater 2.5 CCA, AWPA C3 and C18.
[2] Walers: saltwater 2.5 CCA, AWPA C2 and C18.
[3] Sheet piles: saltwater 2.5 CCA, AWPA C2 and C18.
[4] Cross-bracing: saltwater 2.5 CCA, AWPA C2 and C18.
[5] Split pile caps: 0.60 CCA, AWPA C2 and C18.
[6] Stringers: 0.60 CCA, AWPA C2 and C18.
[7] Decking: 0.25 CCA.
[8] Handrails: 0.25 CCA.
[9] Wallcaps: 0.25 CCA.
(c) Installation. All wood materials shall be installed in strict
accordance with the specifications, recommendations, and
installation instructions of the Southern Pine Council (SPC) as
contained in the current edition of the SIC Marine
Construction Manual. The design engineer shall certify that
the particular type, length, thickness, and shape of bulkhead is
adequate and appropriate for the loads and conditions
anticipated at the site.
(6) Vinyl.
(a) Vinyl used in bulkheading shall be extruded from rigid, impact
modified, weatherable, UV resistant, polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
Such PVC shall meet the minimum requirements of ASTM
D-4216 for cell classification, current edition, and shall be
rated by the manufacturer to resist rot, decay, marine borer,
termite, and ultraviolet deterioration on a prorated basis for a
minimum of 50 years from the date of installation.
(b) Vinyl bulkheads shall consist of the following minimum
components: interlocking PVC sheet piles; one or more
horizontal beams as walers; and an anchoring system
consisting of tie rods and anchors.
(c) Components of vinyl bulkhead systems which will consist of
wood or metal parts shall conform to the standards of this
chapter for wood or metal components.
(d) The design engineer shall certify that the particular type,
length, thickness, and sectional shape of vinyl sheetpile used is
adequate and appropriate for the loads and conditions
anticipated at the site.
§ 151-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 151-9
148:300
§ 151-10. Maintenance of bulkheads and waterfront lots; duty to
repair.
(e) All vinyl materials shall be installed in strict accordance with
the specifications, recommendations, and installation
instructions of the vinyl sheetpile manufacturer.
(7) Steel.
(a) Galvanized steel.
[1] All tie rods shall be ASTM A-36 steel, three-fourths-inch
minimum diameter, hot-dipped galvanized steel, per ASTM
A-153 with 2.0 ounces of zinc per square foot with
matching hexagonal nuts (ASTM A-307) and cast iron ogee
washers (ASTM A-47).
[2] All bolts shall be five-eighths-inch minimum diameter, hotforged
bolts, with hexagonal heads (ASTM A-307), with
matching hexagonal nuts and washers.
[3] Stainless steel: if stainless steel is used for tie rods or
hardware, it shall be 300 series stainless steel, with
matching hexagonal nuts and washers.
[4] All hardware (including plates and turnbuckles) shall be of
the same materials and protective coatings as the tie rods.
A. All private bulkheads and waterfront lots with the Township of Little
Egg Harbor shall be maintained so that they shall not pose a danger to
the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the Township.
B. All bulkheads and waterfront lots shall be kept in a state of repair which
will prevent erosion or damage to abutting, adjacent, or adjoining
properties, or the lagoon on which it fronts.
C. Whenever a bulkhead and waterfront lots has deteriorated to such a
degree that it poses a danger to the property, or to abutting, adjacent,
or adjoining properties, or to the lagoon on which it fronts, the owner
shall be required to make the necessary repairs to correct such
conditions.
D. The indications that a bulkhead has deteriorated shall include (but not
be limited to):
(1) Members which are bowed, bent, leaning, leaking.
(2) Holes in the sheet piles.
(3) Settlement or sinkholes in the ground landward of the bulkhead.
(4) Bulkhead backfill deposited in the lagoon seaward of the bulkhead.
(5) Other indications that it is structurally unsound or unsafe.
§ 151-9 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 151-10
148:301
§ 151-11. Appeals. [Amended 12-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Township Committee shall review appeals from the decisions of the
Township Bulkhead Inspector, assisted by the Township Bulkhead Inspector
as an advisor. Appeals shall be filed in writing on forms provided by the
Township at the Construction Office. The Committee shall hold a de novo
hearing within 10 days thereafter, and its decision shall be final. The
applicant shall be permitted to attend the hearing and to produce evidence
in support of the appeal.
§ 151-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 151-13. Fees. [Amended 1-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
E. When notified by the Township Bulkhead Inspector of a deteriorated
bulkhead, a property owner shall submit a plan of corrective action to
the Township no later than 30 days from the receipt of the notice.
F. Upon approval of the plan of corrective action by the Township
Bulkhead Engineer, the property owner shall complete all necessary
repairs within 120 days.
G. If permits are required from state or federal government agencies, such
permits shall be immediately applied for upon receipt of Township
approval.
H. In the event the property owner fails to submit a corrective action plan,
or fails to implement such plan following approval by the Township, he
shall be liable for the penalties and violations contained herein.
A. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,250 and/or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days for each violation.
B. Each day of a violation shall be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as a separate offense.
A. A fee of $240 shall be paid by the applicant to the Township of Little
Egg Harbor to cover the administrative costs for processing and
reviewing the permit and inspecting the work.
B. A fee of $110 shall be paid by the applicant to the Township of Little
Egg Harbor for the materials inspection required in § 151-5D. This fee
shall cover zoning ($60) and the initial materials inspection and one
reinspection ($50). If any particular project requires materials
inspections beyond the initial and one reinspection, each additional
reinspection shall be subject to a fee of $25 to be paid to the Township.
§ 151-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 151-13
148:302
Chapter 154
BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 130.
Licensing — See Ch. 217.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
§ 154-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor
recognize the rights inherent in the United States Constitution which
guarantee freedom of expression, as well as the position of the courts in
protecting that freedom by invalidating any attempt by local ordinance to
restrict particular uses based upon their content. However, the Mayor and
Township Committee also recognize their duty to protect the health, safety,
welfare and morals of the residents and the citizens of Little Egg Harbor
Township and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations providing for
the licensing of adult-oriented establishments, including, but not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult mini motion-picture establishments, adult motionpicture
theaters and adult cabarets. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Additionally, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
§ 154-2. Findings.
A. It has been demonstrated that the establishment of adult businesses in
business districts which are immediately adjacent to and which serve
residential neighborhoods has a deleterious effect on both the business
and residential segments of the neighborhood, causing blight and a
downgrading of property values. It has also been demonstrated that
there is a statistically significant correlation between sex-oriented and
alcohol-oriented adult entertainment businesses and high crime rates.
The Township Committee is particularly persuaded and impressed by
studies conducted in Minneapolis, St. Paul, Indianapolis, Phoenix and
Los Angeles.
B. The Township Committee further deems it necessary to provide for
licensing and regulation of adult-oriented businesses in light of existing
problems experienced by the residents and citizens within the Township
of Little Egg Harbor as evidenced by the Uniform Crime Reporting
System.
§ 151-13 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-2
154:303
§ 154-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection
or viewing, books, films, videocassettes, compact disks, DVD's, magazines
or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities, sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined below,
and, in conjunction therewith, having facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, as defined below, including adult-oriented films, movies or
live performances, for observation.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment, whether or not same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption, which regularly features:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display or dance of any type that has, as its dominant theme,
or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or
simulated specified sexual activities, sexual conduct or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, or the removal of articles of clothing or appearing
partially or totally nude. Adult entertainment is distinguished from
C. The Township Committee further determines that it is well known that
adult-oriented businesses have been and are being used by patrons of
said establishments for engaging in sexual acts, including, but not
limited to, intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation and masturbation,
resulting in unsafe and unsanitary conditions. It is particularly well
known that such conduct occurs in adult-oriented establishments which
install booths with doors in which patrons can view adult-oriented
movies or videotape or film or view other forms of adult entertainment.
D. The prevalence of such conduct by patrons of adult businesses is
especially disconcerting when viewed in relation to the ever-increasing
number of reported cases of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS). AIDS is a sexually transmitted disease that destroys the body's
immune system, is almost always fatal and has no known cure. The viral
agents responsible for AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases
have all been isolated at one time or another from semen.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by sexual conduct or by specified sexual activities;
or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact disks, DVD's, slides
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities, sexual conduct or
specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 154-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-3
154:304
conventional entertainment by the fact that access by minors to such
entertainment is excluded by virtue of age under the pornography statutes
of the State of New Jersey.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having,
as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities,
sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having, as
its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on,
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities,
sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, but is not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini motion-picture
theaters or adult cabarets, and further means any premises to which public
patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are physically
arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls
separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented material, or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or
not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for
a profit, direct or indirect.
COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, New Jersey.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance, showing or exhibition of
the male or female genitals or vulva, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage or female breast below the top of the nipple.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing or other devices or
covering covers no more than the genitals, pubic region or nipples of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female or the breasts of the human female whether alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex or an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.
§ 154-3 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-3
154:305
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The simulated or actual:
§ 154-4. License required; application; inspection.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts below the point immediately above
the nipple; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely or
completely covered.
B.
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
or
A.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; or
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated
or maintained in the Township of Little Egg Harbor without first
obtaining a license to operate issued by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
B. A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or
corporation that desires to operate more than one adult-oriented
establishment must have a license for each.
C. No license or interest in the license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
D. All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for a license within 90 days of
the passage of this chapter. If an application is not received within said
ninety-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall
cease operations.
E. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Township Clerk. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
F. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the Ocean County Health Department,
§ 154-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-4
154:306
§ 154-5. Issuance of license; grounds for refusal to issue license.
Zoning Office, Fire Inspector and Building Official. The result of said
inspections must be made available to the applicant no later than 30
days from the date of application for the license.
G. The applicant for a license shall include upon the form provided by the
Township Clerk the following information under oath:
(1) Name and address, including any and all aliases.
(2) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(3) Whether the applicant has ever had an adult-oriented
establishment license revoked or suspended, the reason for such
revocation or suspension and the business entity or trade name
under which the applicant operated that was subject to the
suspension or revocation.
(4) Whether the applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to a
crime involving prostitution; promotion of prostitution; obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to minors; sexual
performance by a child; possession of child pornography;
indecency with a child; sexual assault; aggravated sexual assault;
incest; solicitation of a child; public lewdness or indecent exposure,
as provided and described in the New Jersey Criminal Code.
H. The fact that an applicant possesses a valid mercantile license pursuant
to other provisions of the Township Code of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of
obtaining an adult business license as provided herein.
A. The Township Committee shall approve the issuance of a license by the
Township Clerk to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an
application unless the Township Committee finds one or more of the
following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age or is under a legal disability.
(2) The applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in the payment to
Little Egg Harbor Township of taxes, or fees, fines or penalties
assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to a
sexually oriented business.22
(3) An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of
operating an adult-oriented establishment without a license, within
five years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a
22.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 217, Art. II, Conditional Renewals.
§ 154-4 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-5
154:307
§ 154-6. Fee for initial license and renewal license; term of license;
renewal.
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.
(5) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
license by the Township to operate an adult-oriented establishment
within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person whose
license to operate an adult-oriented establishment has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(6) The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business has been
denied by the Ocean County Health Department, Zoning Office,
Fire Official or the Building Official as not being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances, provided that the applicant was
provided the results of said inspections no later than 30 days from
the date of application for the license.
(7) The license fee required herein has not been paid.
(8) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime
or misdemeanor involving prostitution; promotion of prostitution;
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to
minors; sexual performance by a child; possession of child
pornography; indecency with a child; sexual assault; aggravated
sexual assault; incest; solicitation of a child; public lewdness or
indecent exposure, as provided and described in the New Jersey
Criminal Code. The fact that the conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or the
applicant's spouse.
B. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the adult-oriented establishment. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented
establishment so that it may be easily read at any time.
A. The initial fee for an adult-oriented establishment license shall be
$2,500 in addition to any other applicable fees. The fee shall accompany
the application for the license.
B. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked,
and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the
Township Clerk upon a form provided by said Township Clerk and shall
provide such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as
is required for an application for a new license.
C. A license renewal fee of $1,000 shall be submitted with the application
for renewal.
§ 154-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-7
154:308
§ 154-7. Right of inspection.
§ 154-8. License suspension.
The Township Committee may suspend a license for a period not to exceed
30 days if it determines that a licensee or an agent or employee of a licensee
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 154-9. License revocation.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Ocean County Health Department, Office of the Fire
Inspector, Zoning Office, Construction Office, Code Enforcement Office,
Office of the Township Administrator, and the Township Committee to
inspect the premises of an adult-oriented establishment, for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
B. A person who operates an adult-oriented establishment or his agents or
employees commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by any of the above representatives at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
A. The Township Committee may revoke a license for any of the following
reasons:
(1) A licensee provided false or misleading information on the initial or
renewal application or material facts were omitted from said
application during the application or renewal process.
(2) A licensee or an agent or employee thereof has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.
(3) A licensee or an agent or employee thereof has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises.
(4) A licensee or an agent or employee thereof knowingly operated the
adult-oriented establishment during a period of time when the
licensee's license was suspended.
(5) Within the twelve-month license period, the licensee committed
one or more of the offenses enumerated in other parts of this
chapter (§§ 154-4 and 154-5) for which a conviction has been
obtained.
(6) The licensee or an agent or employee thereof has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed
premises.
(7) A licensee is delinquent in payment to Little Egg Harbor Township
for taxes, or fees, fines or penalties related to the adult-oriented
establishment.
§ 154-7 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-9
154:309
§ 154-10. Formal legal complaint; hearing.
§ 154-11. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another person,
partnership or corporation, nor shall a licensee operate an adult-oriented
establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
§ 154-12. Physical layout of adult-oriented establishments.
Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or
members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult
entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
B. The operator or licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible
to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location
or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an
adult-oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation
of the license.
A. If it is determined that a valid basis for suspending or revoking a license
exists, then, before revoking or suspending the license, the Township
Administrator shall cause a formal legal complaint to be served upon
the licensee in question, and said final legal complaint shall clearly
state the charges brought against said licensee. This formal legal
complaint may be served by personal service, certified mail or regular
mail in the event that personal service is refused. If the whereabouts of
the licensee is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the Township Administrator shall
make an affidavit to that effect and then serve such complaint by
publishing same once each week for two consecutive weeks in at least
one official newspaper annually designated by the Township
Committee.
B. The formal legal complaint shall further state the charges, and it shall
contain a notice that a hearing shall be held before the Mayor and
Township Committee or its duly authorized representative at a place
therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of said formal legal complaint, that the licensee and parties in
interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the formal legal
complaint and to appear in person or by their attorney and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the formal legal complaint and
that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law shall not be
controlling at the administrative hearing.
A. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and
shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.
§ 154-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-12
154:310
§ 154-13. Responsibilities of operator.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements in addition to those requirements imposed
by the construction code:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(2) Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying
same.
(3) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(4) The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleanable.
(5) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use,
shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times, as measured
from the floor.
C. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
A. The owner, operator or licensee shall maintain a register of all agents
and employees, showing the name, any aliases used, home address,
age, birth date, date of employment and termination and duties of each
agent and employee. The above information on each agent and
employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a
period of three years following termination.
B. The owner, operator or licensee shall make the register of agents and
employees available immediately for inspection by the representatives
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor at all reasonable times.
C. Every act or omission by an agent or employee constituting a violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
the owner, operator or licensee if such act or omission occurs either
with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the owner, operator or
licensee as a result of the negligent failure of the owner, operator or
licensee to supervise the agent's or employee's conduct, and said
owner, operator or licensee shall be punishable for such act or omission
in the same manner as if the owner, operator or licensee committed the
act or caused the omission.
D. Any act or omission of any agent or employee constituting a violation of
the provision of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
§ 154-12 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-13
154:311
§ 154-14. Regulations concerning employees.
§ 154-15. Adult cabarets.
Adult cabarets shall comply with the following additional regulations:
owner, operator or licensee for purposes of determining whether the
license of the owner, operator or licensee shall be revoked, suspended
or renewed.
E. The owner, operator or licensee shall not allow any minor to loiter
around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow any
minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein.
F. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
G. The owner, operator or licensee shall ensure compliance of the
establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
A. An adult-oriented establishment as defined herein shall not employ any
person under the age of 18 years. A person under the age of 18 years
commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of an adult-oriented establishment.
B. An agent or employee commits an offense if he or she appears in a state
of nudity or knowingly allows another person to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of an adult entertainment establishment which can be
viewed from public right-of-way.
C. No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity holding the
license shall employ any person in or about the licensed premises who
has not been issued an identification card by the Police Department of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(1) All persons employed in or about any licensed premises shall carry
an identification card issued by the Police Department at all times
while in the course of their employment and shall exhibit the same
upon the request of any authorized Little Egg Harbor Township
official.
(2) Any person desiring to obtain an identification card shall report to
the Police Department where application forms shall be completed.
The applicant shall pay a fee of $10 for an identification card.
(3) The Police Department shall issue an identification card to each
employee, which card shall contain the name, address and a
photograph of the employee. A copy of the identification card and
photograph shall be maintained on file by the Police Department.
D. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or licensee to ensure that all
of its employees comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 154-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-15
154:312
§ 154-16. Hours of operation.
§ 154-17. Exclusions and exemptions.
§ 154-18. Adult entertainment at licensed commercial
establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages.23
A. All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is
raised at least three feet from the level of the floor.
B. No dancing shall occur closer than 10 feet to any patron or customer.
C. No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle
or caress any dancer.
D. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer, and no
dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
A. Adult entertainment establishments may be open for business daily
from 10:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. Adult entertainment establishments shall remain closed for business
except during the hours fixed as open for business by this chapter.
A. All private schools and public schools, as defined by New Jersey
statutes, located within the Township of Little Egg Harbor are exempt
from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in
accordance with a sex education curriculum.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under the provisions of this chapter that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so as an art class model in a
private school or public school within the boundaries of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
C. It is a defense to prosecution under the provisions of this chapter that
each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale
or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or licensee of a commercial
establishment located in the Township of Little Egg Harbor, at which
alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on
the premises:
(1) To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to expose to the public view with less
than a full opaque covering that area of the human breast at or
below the top of the nipple;
(2) To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which
23.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 130, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 154-15 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-18
154:313
§ 154-19. Violations and penalties.
is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of
the human female breast as described in Subsection A(1) above;
(3) To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to expose, exhibit or show to the public
view with less than a full opaque covering his or her genitals or
vulva, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage;
(4) To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which
is intended to give the appearance of or simulate his or her genitals
or vulva, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage;
(5) To suffer or permit the depiction or showing of the covered male
genitalia in a discernibly turgid state.
B. It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a
commercial establishment located in the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, to expose to the public view with less
than a full opaque covering that area of the human breast at or below
the top of the nipple, or to employ any device or covering which is
intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the
human female breast as described herein.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a
commercial establishment located in the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, to expose, exhibit or show to the public
view with less than a full opaque covering his or her genitals or vulva,
pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ any
device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or
simulate his or her genitals or vulva, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a
commercial establishment located in the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, to depict or show in the public view the
covered male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, or to employ any
device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or
simulate the covered male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of no less
than $100 and no more than $2,000, by imprisonment not to exceed 90
days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service, as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
§ 154-18 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 154-19
154:314
§ 154-20. Retail display of obscene material.
It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.1 to display or permit to be displayed at his business
premises any obscene material as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, at a height of
less than five feet or without a blinder or other covering placed or printed
on the front of the material displayed. The public display of the obscene
material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly
made or permitted the display.
Chapter 156
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
Rental property — See Ch. 279.
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting
the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 154-19 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 154-20
154:315

ARTICLE I
Rental Units
§ 156-1. Inspection upon initial occupancy or change of occupancy.
[Amended 3-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; 6-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
All buildings, structures and units thereof that are leased or rented,
regardless of term, in the Township of Little Egg Harbor, for living or
sleeping purposes, commercial or business purposes, or any other purpose
shall be inspected by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee on every initial
occupancy or change of occupancy, but there shall not be more than one
such inspection fee of each leased or rented building, structure or units
thereof in any calendar year.
§ 156-2. Compliance with standards required.
All buildings, structures and units thereof which are inspected pursuant to
this article shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Township
ordinances and the applicable provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq., the Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq., the Rooming and Boarding
House Act of 1979, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 156-3. Responsibility of owner, agent or manager. [Amended
6-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
The owner, rental agent or manager of all buildings and structures and
units thereof which are subject to inspection pursuant to this article shall be
responsible for notifying, in writing, the Zoning Officer or his/her designee
that such premises are leased or rented or being offered to be leased or
rented so that an inspection or reinspection may be made.
§ 156-4. Issuance of certificate. [Amended 6-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
Upon completion of an inspection of the premises and the same being
determined by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee to comply with this
article, a rental certificate of occupancy shall be issued. A copy of the
certificate shall be posted by the owner, rental agent or manager of the
inspected property in each separate leased or rented unit. No tenant shall
occupy any building, structure or any units thereof until a rental certificate
of occupancy has been issued.
§ 156-5. Notification of violations. [Amended 6-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
In the event that the Zoning Officer or his/her designee determines after
an inspection that the premises in question are in violation of this article,
the Zoning Officer or his/her designee shall notify, in writing, the owner,
rental agent or manager of the violations noted. Upon the correction of
§ 156-1 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 156-5
154:317
the violations, the owner, rental agent or manager shall notify, in writing,
the Zoning Officer or his/her designee that the corrections have been made
so that a reinspection of the property may occur. If, upon reinspection of
the property, the Zoning Officer or his/her designee determines that the
previous violations were not corrected or new violations exist, then the
Zoning Officer or his/her designee shall again, in writing, notify the owner,
rental agent or manager of the inspected property of the violations, and this
process shall continue until all violations have been corrected.
§ 156-6. Service of notice.
Service shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy
thereof is delivered to the owner, rental agent, or manager personally; or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone
in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
contents thereof; or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner
at the last known address with return receipt requested; or, if the certified
or registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been
delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice; and there shall be at least one publication
of such notice in a local newspaper of general circulation.
§ 156-7. Revocation of certificate. [Amended 6-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
If, subsequent to the issuance of a rental certificate of occupancy, the
Zoning Officer or his/her designee learns or becomes aware of violations of
this article, an inspection shall be made of the subject premises. If violations
are found to exist, then notification in writing shall be given to the owner,
rental agent or manager, and said person shall have 10 days from service
of notice to correct all deficiencies noted therein. In the event that the
same have not been corrected within 10 days, then the rental certificate
of occupancy may be revoked by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee by
mailing a revocation by certified mail to the owner, rental agent or manager
and to the tenant or tenants, and the premises will be vacated.
§ 156-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or by community service as determined in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of
the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
§ 156-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 156-8
154:318
§ 156-9. Fees.
B. The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The owner of the inspected property shall be charged a fee for each
inspection as follows:
(1) Each dwelling unit: $35.
(2) Boardinghouses:
(a) One to five rooms: $20.
(b) Six to 15 rooms: $25.
(c) Sixteen to 25 rooms: $30.
(d) Twenty-six to 35 rooms: $40.
(e) Thirty-six or more rooms: $50.
(3) Any unit not used for living or sleeping purposes, and used for
commercial, business or any other purpose: $50. [Added
3-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
B. The term "dwelling unit" shall be defined as a single unit providing
complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and
sanitation.
C. The term "room" shall mean a single habitable unit used or intended to
be used for living and/or sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
D. The aforesaid fees shall be paid to the Zoning Officer or his/her
designee prior to any inspection being made hereunder. [Amended
6-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
§ 156-8 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 156-9
154:319

ARTICLE II
Acquisition Prior to Transfer of Title
§ 156-10. Certificate required. [Amended 3-12-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-04; 6-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
No single-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a multifamily dwelling or
building or structure used for commercial or business purposes, may be
sold and title transferred until a continued certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee or appropriate subcode
official, or their agents, stating that said property so described therein
complies with the Uniform Construction Code for a continued certificate of
occupancy.
§ 156-11. Fees for inspections. [Amended 3-12-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-04]
The fee for initial inspection as required by § 156-10 hereof shall be $25
per dwelling unit, and $50 for any other commercial or business unit. Any
subsequent inspection that is required shall cost an additional $15 per
inspection.
§ 156-12. Purpose.
This article is adopted in order to protect the health, safety and welfare
of those purchasing improved property within the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, County of Ocean, State of New Jersey.
§ 156-12.1. Temporary waiver of certificate of occupancy. [Added
5-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
A purchaser of any property regulated by this chapter may waive the seller's
responsibility to obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to the transfer of
title; provided, however, that such waiver shall be in writing on forms
provided by the Township. Such waiver shall state that the buyer is fully
aware that he, she or it is assuming full responsibility for obtaining a
certificate of occupancy prior to the occupancy of the property. An
application for a waiver of the certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied
by a fee of $25.
§ 156-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or by community service as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 156-10 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 156-13
154:321
Chapter 159
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 156.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 273.
§ 159-1. Adoption of regulations.
The regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code as
promulgated by the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, pursuant to the authority of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act (P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended),24 together with
any subsequent amendments, changes or supplements thereto, is hereby
adopted in and for the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 159-2. Enforcing agency.
There is hereby established in the Township of Little Egg Harbor a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Little
Egg Harbor Township Building Department." The Construction Official shall
be the chief administrator of the Building Department, and the Building
Subcode Official shall administer the building subcode. The Little Egg
Harbor Township Building Department is hereby designated as the
Electrical Subcode Official and the Plumbing Subcode Official for the
purpose of administering the electrical and plumbing subcodes.
§ 159-3. Construction Board of Appeals.
Any appeals from decisions of the enforcing agency shall be heard by the
Construction Board of Appeals of Ocean County.
§ 159-4. Adoption of fee schedule. [Amended 4-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-07; 3-10-2011 by Ord. No. 3022-01; 6-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
A. The following fee schedule is hereby adopted and established for the
following construction and subcode fees:
(1) Building subcode fees. The minimum fee for any permit issued
under this section shall be $60.
(a) New construction. Fees for new construction shall be based
upon the volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 156-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 159-4
154:322
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. Use groups and types of
construction are as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 6 of
the building subcode.
[1] New construction shall be 0.040 per cubic foot of volume
for all Use groups, except Use groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4,
A-5, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, which shall be 0.030 per cubic
foot of volume.
[2] Structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) shall be 0.011 per cubic foot of
volume, with the maximum fee for such structures on
farms not to exceed $1,602.
(b) The fees for renovations, alterations, reroofing, repairs, and
site construction associated with premanufactured
construction, and the external utility connections for
premanufactured construction shall be based on estimated
cost of the work. To determine estimated cost, the applicant
shall submit to the Construction Official such cost data as may
be available produced by the homeowner, the architect or
engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating firm, or by
the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall
be submitted. The Construction Official shall make the final
decision regarding estimated cost.
Estimated Cost of Work Fee
$1 to $50,000 $35 per $1,000
$50,001 to $100,000 Add $26 per $1,000
Over $100,000 Add $22 per $1,000
(c) Additions. Fees shall be computed on the same basis as for new
construction for the added portion.
(d) Combination renovations and additions. Fees shall be
computed separately in accordance with §§ 159-4A(1)(a) and
159-4A(1)(b).
(e) Temporary structures. The fee for temporary structures,
towers, fences greater than six feet in height, open decks not
attached to a principal or accessory structure and similar
structures for which volume cannot be computed shall be $60.
(f) Decks.
[1] The fee for 200 square feet or less shall be $100.
[2] The fee for 201 square feet or greater shall be $100 plus
$2 per additional square foot.
(g) Construction trailers. The fee shall be $100.
§ 159-4 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 159-4
154:323
(h) Pools and hot tubs.
[1] Use group R-5:
Aboveground: $100.
In-ground: $200.
[2] All other use groups: $300.
(i) Siding.
[1] Use group R-3 and R-5: $60.
[2] All other use groups: Calculated by Subsection A(1)(b)
above.
(j) Tents: The fee for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more
than 30 feet in any dimension shall be $129.
(k) Retaining walls.
[1] For walls associated with a Class 3 residential structure:
[a] Surface area of 550 feet or less: $106.
[b] Surface area of 551 feet or greater: $210.
[2] For any wall not associated with a Class 3 residential
structure the fee shall be based on the cost of
construction.
(l) Photovoltaic systems.
[1] Systems up to 10kw: $150.
[2] Systems greater than 10kw: $150 plus $15 for each
kilowatt above 10.
(2) Plumbing subcode fees. The minimum fee for any permit issued
under this section shall be $60.
(a) Fixtures and appliances. The fee per fixture for fixtures and
appliances shall be $15, except as provided for in
§ 159-4A(2)(b).
(b) Special devices. The fee per device for grease traps, oil
separators, water-cooled air-conditioning units, refrigeration
units, utility service connections, backflow preventers, steam
boilers, hot-water boilers (excluding those for domestic water
heating), gas piping, gas service entrances, active solar
systems, sewer pumps, interceptors and fuel oil piping shall be
$75.
(c) Water connection:
§ 159-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 159-4
154:324
[1] Use group R-5: $75.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(d) Sewer connection:
[1] Use group R-5: $75.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(e) Propane and similar tanks:
[1] Use group R-5: $75.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(f) Pool drains:
[1] Use group R-5: $75.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(3) Fire protection subcode fees. The minimum fee for any permit
issued under this section shall be $60.
(a) The fee for fire protection and hazardous equipment,
sprinklers, standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), preengineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances
not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust
systems, incinerators and crematoriums shall be as follows:
[1] One to 20 heads: $91.
[2] Twenty-one to 100 heads: $168.
[3] One hundred one to 200 heads: $321.
[4] Two hundred one to 400 heads: $831.
[5] Four hundred one to 1,000 heads: $1,150.
[6] Over 1,000 heads: $1,469.
(b) One to 12 detectors, $60; in addition, for each 25 detectors,
$17.
(c) Standpipe, each: $321.
(d) Independent pre-engineered systems: $129.
(e) Gas- or oil-fired appliance not connected to the plumbing
system, each: $60.
(f) Commercial kitchen exhaust system, each: $100.
(g) Incinerator, each: $511.
§ 159-4 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 159-4
154:325
(h) Crematorium, each: $511.
(4) Electrical subcode fees. The minimum fee for any permit issued
under this section shall be $60.
(a) Fixtures or receptacles. The fee for receptacles and fixtures
which shall include lighting outlets, wall switches, electric
discharge fixtures, convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers,
alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors, communications
outlets, light standards eight feet or less in height including
luminaries, emergency lights, electric signs, exit lights or
similar electric fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes or less
including motors or equipment rated less than one horsepower
(hp) or one kilowatt (kw) shall be as follows:
[1] One to 25: $60.
[2] For each 25 additional: add $25.
[3] For each receptacle rated from 30 to 50 amperes: $25.
[4] For each light standard greater than eight feet in height:
$25.
(b) Motors or electrical devices, each:
[1] Greater than one horsepower or kilowatt to 10 horsepower
or kilowatts: $25.
[2] Greater than 10 horsepower or kilowatts to 50 horsepower
or kilowatts: $50.
[3] Greater than 50 horsepower or kilowatts to 100
horsepower or kilowatts: $200.
[4] Greater than 100 horsepower: $500.
(c) Transformers and generators, each:
[1] Greater than one kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $25.
[2] Greater than 10 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $50.
[3] Greater than 45 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $200.
[4] Greater than 112.5 kilowatts: $500.
(d) Service panels, service entrance or subpanel, each:
[1] One ampere to 225 amperes: $75.
[2] Greater than 225 amperes to 400 amperes: $150.
[3] Greater than 400 amperes to 1,000 amperes: $250.
[4] Greater than 1,000 amperes: $500.
§ 159-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 159-4
154:326
(e) Pools.
[1] Use group R-5:
[a] Permit for installation of new aboveground swimming
pool, spa, hot tub or fountain: $75.
[b] Permit for installation of new in-ground swimming
pool: $100.
[2] All other use groups:
[a] Permit for installation of new swimming pool, spa, hot
tub or fountain: $250.
[b] Annual inspection of public swimming pool, spa, hot
tub or fountain: $60.
(f) Signs: $60.
(g) Installation of single- and multiple-station smoke or heat
detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm systems in any
one- or two-family dwelling: $60.
(h) Photovoltaic systems:
[1] Systems up to 10 kilowatts: $250 flat fee.
[2] Systems greater than 10 kilowatts shall be assessed a fee
of $250 plus $25 per each additional kilowatt.
(i) Irrigation systems: $60.
(j) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors, except
those in plug-in appliances, shall be counted, including control
equipment, generators, transformers and all heating, cooking
or other devices consuming or generating electrical current.
(k) Inspection for restoration of power: $75.
(5) Mechanical fees. The minimum fee for any permit issued under this
section shall be $60.
(a) Water heater: $60.
(b) Hot air furnace: $100.
(c) Steam boiler: $100.
(d) Hot water boiler: $100.
(e) Central air conditioner: $60.
(f) Combination heat and air conditioning (including package
units): $100.
§ 159-4 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 159-4
154:327
(g) Gas, oil, hydronic piping: $75.
(h) Fuel piping connections: $75.
(i) Gas piping connections: $75.
(j) LPG tank: $75.
(k) Oil tank: $75.
(l) Aboveground tank removal: $75.
(m) In-ground tank removal: $75.
(n) Chimney/vent: $75.
(o) Fireplace: $100.
(p) Pool heater: $100.
(q) Gas conversion: $75.
(6) Fees applicable to §§ 159-4A(1) through 159-4A(5) above.
(a) Plan review fee: 20% of the amount to be charged for a new
construction permit.
(b) Basic construction fee. The sum of the parts computed on the
basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and equipment, the number of electrical
fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes
and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates provided
herein, plus any special fees.
(c) Certificates and other permits.
[1] Demolition or removal permit.
[a] Structures less than 5,000 square feet in area and less
than 30 feet in height (Use Group R-3 or R-5), and for
structures on farms, including commercial farm
buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d): $92.
[b] Fuel tanks: $92.
[c] All other use groups: $168.
[2] Sign permit.
[a] Pylon signs shall be $6 per square foot for the first 100
square feet, $5 per square foot for the next 400 square
feet, and $4 per square foot thereafter.
[b] Ground signs or wall signs shall be $3 per square foot
for the first 100 square feet, $2 per square foot for the
§ 159-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 159-4
154:328
next 400 square feet, and $1 per square foot
thereafter.
[3] Certificate of occupancy: $39.
[a] Certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use: $168.
[b] Certificate of continued occupancy issued under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c): $168.
[c] Renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy: $39.
[4] Application for variation under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10.
[a] Class 1 structure: $821.
[i] Class 2 and Class 3 structures: $168.
[b] Resubmission of an application for a variation:
[i] Class 1 structure: $321.
[ii] Class 2 and Class 3 structures: $91.
[5] Annual permits.
[a] Construction permit. The fee for a construction permit
shall be a flat fee based upon the number of
maintenance workers who are employed by the
facility, and who are primarily engaged in work that is
governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers and
clericals shall not be considered maintenance workers
for the purpose of establishing the annual
construction permit fee.
[b] Annual permits may be issued for building, fire
protection, electrical and plumbing.
[c] One to 25 workers (including foreman), each: $933.
[d] Each additional worker over 25: $329.
[e] Prior to the issuance of an annual permit, a training
registration fee of $196 per subcode and a list of not
more than three individuals to be trained per subcode
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Department
of Community Affairs, Bureau of Code Services,
Education Unit, along with a copy of the construction
permit. Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer,
State of New Jersey."
[6] Reinstatement of lapsed permit: $60 per subcode.
§ 159-4 BUSINESSES, SEXUALLY ORIENTED § 159-4
154:329
§ 159-5. Waiver of permit fees to promote accessibility for disabled
persons.
[7] Elevator devices, where applicable, shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6.
[8] Cross connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to testing and require reinspection, each: $60.
[9] Relocation of structures permit. The following fees shall be
assessed for relocation of buildings and structures to a
new location, including premanufactured:
Estimated Cost of Work Fee
$1 to $50,000 $35 per $1,000
$50,001 to $100,000 Add $26 per $1,000
Over $100,000 Add $22 per $1,000
B. A schedule of the instruction and subcode fees established by this
chapter shall be posted in the office of the Construction Official and
shall be made available to the public. Any fees not mentioned in the
above fee schedule shall be the same as the fees assessed by the State
of New Jersey as delineated within N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 or applicable
regulation.
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of
the facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or a sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his/her own living unit.
C. For the purposes of this section, "disabled person" means a person who
has the total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial
gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or
mental impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the
Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a
60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this subsection,
"blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better
eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered
as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
§ 159-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 159-5
154:330
Chapter 162
CURFEW
§ 159-5 CURFEW § 159-5
162:331

ARTICLE I
Curfew During Halloween Week
§ 162-1. Preamble.
§ 162-2. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinance Regulating
the Presence and Conduct of Minors on Streets and Public Places."
§ 162-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. Juvenile delinquency has increased in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor; and there has been an increase of abuse and damage to parks,
playgrounds, and other property of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. There is need for governing the conduct of minors in the Township for
the purpose of alleviating the problem of juvenile delinquency, and it is
in the public interest to reduce noises and disturbances at late hours
and to prevent the reckless and noisy operation of motor vehicles at late
hours within the Township.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CUSTODIAN — Any person over the age of 18 who is loco parentis to a
juvenile.
GUARDIAN — Any person other than a parent, who has legal
guardianship of a minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
PARENT — The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park,
playground or place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose.
A public place shall include but not be limited to any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom,
shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or
entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or
immediate area of the above.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 162-1 CURFEW § 162-4
162:333
§ 162-4. Curfew in effect at end of October.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll or play in
any public place either on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in
any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the Township between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the days of October 25 through October
31 of each year unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having custody or control of such minor or unless the
minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed
or permitted by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor or where the presence of such minor is connected
with or required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or
occupation.
§ 162-5. Exceptions for special functions; advance registration
required.
Any minor attending a special function or entertainment of any church,
school, club, or other organization that requires such minor to be out at a
later hour than that called for above shall be exempt from the provisions
of § 162-4 of this article, provided the church, school, club or other
organization shall register in advance with the Chief of Police or his
designate to have the minors stay out to this later hour. The registrant shall
state the time the function or entertainment shall end, and the minors who
attend the function shall be required to be in their homes or usual places of
abode within 1/2 hour after the function is ended.
§ 162-6. Warning to be given; notification of parents; refusal of
minor to cooperate.
A. Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of § 162-4, shall
ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor that
he is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once
to his or her home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall
report such action to the Chief of the Police Department who in turn
shall notify the parents, guardian, or person having custody or control
of such minor.
B. If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any police
officer or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and
address, or if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he
or she is in violation of curfew, he or she shall be taken to the Police
Department, and the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take
charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person above
cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the
minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities.
§ 162-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 162-7
162:334
§ 162-7. Violations and penalties.
Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in
accordance with the juvenile court law and procedure.
§ 162-7 CURFEW § 162-7
162:335

ARTICLE II
Curfew
§ 162-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person other than a parent to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot, or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 162-9. Curfew established for juveniles; exceptions.
§ 162-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violator of this article shall be required to perform community service
and may be subject to a fine of up to $1,250. If both a juvenile and the
juvenile's parent or guardian violate this article, they shall be required to
perform community service together.
A. It is hereby unlawful for a juvenile of any age under 18 years to be on
any public street or in any public place in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless
accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian or unless engaged in,
or traveling to or from, a business or occupation which the laws of this
state authorize a juvenile to perform. It shall also be unlawful for any
parent or guardian to allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any
public street or in any public place during these hours.
B. A juvenile shall be permitted to engage in errands involving medical
emergencies and to attend extracurricular school activities and other
cultural, educational and social events sponsored by religious or
community-based organizations after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
§ 162-8 CURFEW § 162-10
162:337
Chapter 165
DOCKS, USE OF
§ 165-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation.
§ 165-2. Permit required.
No person shall dock a boat at the public dock slips in the Township of Little
Egg Harbor without first having obtained a permit for such privilege in
the manner hereinafter provided, nor shall any person use, take or occupy
one or more boat slips or spaces until a permit for that purpose has been
obtained.
§ 165-3. Use restricted.
No person shall use the public docks or any part thereof as a boat slip or
space, except that portion of said dock now or hereinafter set apart for boat
slips or spaces.
§ 165-4. Application; requirements for receipt of permit.
§ 165-5. Issuance of permit.
If the applicant meets all of the qualifications set forth in this chapter
and boat slips are available, the Township Clerk or authorized designee
shall issue a permit for the boat slip, designating thereon that the boat
shall utilize said slip or space. Said permit shall be issued only after the
applicant has executed a lease agreement with the Township of Little Egg
A. Any person desiring to obtain a permit for use of the public boat slips
shall do so by filing an application with the Township Clerk or
authorized designee for a permit for the use of said dock slip or space.
B. In order to receive a permit for a boat slip or space, the applicant must
meet the following requirements:
(1) Present proof that the applicant is a permanent resident of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, or owns a house and property, or a
commercial building and property, within the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
(2) Present proof of a valid New Jersey boat registration or a Coast
Guard certificate for the boat which is to be docked at the slip.
(3) Pay the required rental fee as set by the Township Committee by
resolution.
§ 162-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 165-5
165:338
Harbor concerning said boat slip. The lease agreement shall be in the form
approved by the Township Committee by resolution. After the execution
of the lease agreement and the issuance of a permit, no other boat shall
occupy the slip, except the boat designated on the permit, without the
consent of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, which must be given in
writing.
§ 165-6. Authorization to act on applications.
The Township Clerk or authorized designee shall have the right and power
to act upon all applications for the issuance of permits, which right and
power of the Township Clerk or authorized designee shall, however, be
subject to final approval of the Township Committeeperson in charge of
docks.
§ 165-7. Time limit for permits.
All permits issued shall be for a period of one year commencing April 1
through March 31, inclusive.
§ 165-8. Refunds.
Refunds will be made on a prorated schedule based upon the remaining
months left in the rental period. Said refunds will only be made in the
following instances upon the request of the applicant or the applicant's
representative:
§ 165-9. Availability of slips; waiting list.
§ 165-10. Prohibition on transfer of permit.
Permits issued by the Township for the use of boat slips cannot be
transferred to another individual under any circumstances; provided,
however, that if a permit is issued to a husband and wife, upon the death of
A. Death of the named applicant.
B. Entire loss of the boat for which the permit was issued.
A. Rental slips will become available on April 1 of each year and shall first
be offered to those persons who held permits for said slips at the end of
the previous year. Rental slips that become available due to the failure
of the previous permit holder to make application for the same, or for
any other reason, will be issued to applicants on a waiting list. Names
will be listed on the waiting list in the chronological order that they
applied for the permit.
B. There shall be an original and two copies of said waiting list. The
original shall be kept in a safe in the Township Clerk's office. Both the
Township Clerk, or authorized designee, and the Township
Administrator shall keep a copy of said list.
§ 165-5 DOCKS, USE OF § 165-10
165:339
either the husband or the wife, the permit can be transferred to the name
of the surviving spouse.
§ 165-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,250, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days and/or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days. The continuation of such
violation for such successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 169
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse — See Ch. 5.
§ 165-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 165-11
169:340
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Areas; Drug-Free Public Buildings and Parks
§ 169-1. Maps adopted.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Maps produced by the Little Egg
Harbor Township Engineers are hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the locations and areas within the municipality of
property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on
or within 1,000 feet of such school property. The Township also approves
the said map for the purposes of affixing and establishing the location and
boundaries of all areas within 500 feet of any public building or public park,
as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
§ 169-2. Continuation of provisions.
The Drug-Free Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 169-1 of this
article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the
locations and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which
is used for school purposes, and the location and boundaries of all areas
within 500 feet of any public building or public park as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1, until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect
any additions or deletions with respect to the locations and boundaries of
school property and drug-free zones.
§ 169-3. Duties of School Board or school officials.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 169-4. Copies on file; availability.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and keep on file
the original maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 169-1 of this article,
and to provide at a reasonable cost true copies thereof to any person,
agency, or court which may from time to time request such copies, along
with a certification that such copies are true copies of the maps approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that true
copies of such maps and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Ocean County Prosecutor.
§ 169-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 169-5
169:341
§ 169-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 169-1 of this article were prepared and are intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state
and that, pursuant to state law, such maps shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location and boundaries of all areas within 500 feet of any
public building or public park as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
B. Except as otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted maps, all of the property depicted on the maps approved and
adopted herein as school property were owned by or leased to a school
or school board and were being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the maps
approved and adopted pursuant to § 169-1 of this article. The failure of
the maps approved herein to depict the locations and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes, and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Maps,
have been complied with.
§ 169-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 169-5
169:342
Chapter 170
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Alliance Committee On Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse — See Ch. 5.
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
90.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 130.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 169.
§ 170-1. Purpose; general policy statement.
In an effort to promote and maintain a safe, healthful, productive and
efficient environment and workplace for all employees and the public which
they serve, the Township adopts a policy against drug and alcohol abuse.
The Township has established a random drug testing policy for all safetysensitive
employees that balances our respect for the privacy of individuals
with the public interest in ensuring that workers performing safetysensitive
job functions are drug and alcohol free.
§ 170-2. Covered workers.
A. The persons to whom this policy applies and affects are all employees in
the Township who are involved in employment activities which can be
classified as "safety-sensitive." These duties are defined as those that
are so fraught with hazard that an employee's attempts to perform
them while in a state of drug impairment would pose a threat to
coworkers or the public at large.
B. Safety-sensitive activities include:
(1) Any job that requires pulling a trailer behind a pick-up truck,
Mason dump and/or dump truck.
(2) Any job that requires the operation of riding law equipment or
manpowered equipment including but not limited to lawn
equipment, chain saw and pole saw.
(3) Any job that requires the operation of heavy machinery, including
but not limited to excavation and trenching machines, backhoes,
trackhoes, loaders and riding tractors.
(4) All vehicle-maintenance personnel.
(5) All road resurfacing activities that involve the patching of any
roadway surfaces that are open to vehicular traffic.
(6) The operation of snow plows and motorized snow removal devices.
§ 169-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 170-2
169:343
§ 170-3. Drug and alcohol testing procedures.
§ 170-4. Prohibited substances.
The substances that will be tested for are: alcohol, amphetamines,
cannabinoids (THC), cocaine, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP), barbituates,
benzodiazepines, methaqualone, methadone and propoxyphene.
§ 170-5. Consequence of positive result.
C. Each employee covered under this policy will be required to participate
in random drug testing upon selection or request of management.
A. To ensure the accuracy and fairness of our testing program, all drug
testing will include a screening test, a confirmation test, review by a
Medical Review Officer, and an opportunity for the employee who tests
positive to provide a legitimate medical explanation for the positive
result or to the conduct of a hearing to contest the positive results.
B. Drugs. Testing for the presence of drugs will be conducted by analysis
of urine.
C. Alcohol. Testing for the presence of alcohol will be conducted by
analysis of breath following the federal CDL standards. The Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) has established 0.04% as
the blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level at or above which a CDL
licensee is deemed to be driving under the influence of alcohol and
subject to disqualification sanctions.
D. Confidentiality. All drug testing information will be maintained in
separate, confidential records.
A. If an employee's test results are positive, the employee is subject to
disciplinary action by the appropriate authority up to and including
termination of employment.
B. The appropriate authority means the Township Administrator or
Department Head.
C. An employee will be subject to the same consequences of a positive test
if he or she refuses the screening or the test, adulterates or dilutes the
specimen, or substitutes the specimen with that of another person, will
not sign the required forms or refuses to cooperate in the testing
process in such a way that prevents the completion of the test.
§ 170-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 170-5
169:344
Chapter 179
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire districts — See Ch. 44.
Fire and burglar alarms — See Ch. 128.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 156.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 205, Art. I.
§ 170-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 170-5
179:345

ARTICLE I
Basic Fire Prevention Code
§ 179-1. Adoption of standards.
The BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code and all amendments and
supplements thereto to the extent that the provisions of same exceed the
Uniform Fire Code are hereby adopted by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to improve the
safety of the public by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the
installation, use and maintenance of equipment, and the use and occupancy
of structures, premises and open areas; providing for the abatement of
fire hazards; and establishing and implementing standards to achieve the
said objectives. The said standards, rules, and regulations set forth in the
said code shall be and the same are hereby incorporated in this article by
reference, three copies of which have been filed in the office of the Clerk of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 179-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 179-1
179:347

ARTICLE II
Uniform Fire Code
§ 179-2. Authority for local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),25
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 179-3. Local enforcing agencies designated.
§ 179-4. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act29
and the codes and regulations adopted pursuant thereto in all buildings,
structures and premises within their respective geographic boundaries
within the Township of Little Egg Harbor, other than owner-occupied oneand
two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements
of the Uniform Safety Fire Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 179-5. Inspection of life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agencies as established by § 179-3 of this article shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 179-6. Organization of enforcing agencies; funding.
A. The local enforcing agency within the geographic boundary for Fire
District No. 1 as established by ordinance26 shall be the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 who shall jointly operate the
Bureau of Fire Prevention — District One, which is hereby created to
enforce the code within the geographic boundary of District No. 1.
B. The local enforcing agency within the geographic boundaries for Fire
District No. 2 as established by ordinance27 shall be the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 2 who shall operate the Bureau of
Fire Prevention — District Two, which is hereby created to enforce the
code within the geographic boundaries of Fire District No. 2.
C. The local enforcing agency within the geographic boundary for Fire
District No. 3 as established by ordinance28 shall be the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 3 who shall operate the Bureau of
Fire Prevention — District Three, which is hereby created to enforce
the code within the geographic boundaries of Fire District No. 3.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Fire Districts.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Fire Districts.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Fire Districts.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 179-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 179-6
179:349
§ 179-7. Fire Official; other employees and inspectors.
A. The local enforcing agency established by § 179-3 of this article for Fire
District No. 1 shall be under the supervision and control of the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 1. Such funds as may be necessary
to support the operations of the agency shall be paid from the budgets
of the Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
B. The local enforcing agency established by § 179-3 of this article for Fire
District No. 2 shall be under the supervision and control of the Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 2. Such funds as may be necessary
to support the operations of the agency shall be paid from the budgets
of the Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 2 of the Township.
C. The local enforcing agency established by § 179-3 of this article within
the Parkertown Volunteer Fire Company Number One shall be under
the direct supervision and control of the Fire Chief of said Fire
Department.
A. Appointment of Fire Official.
(1) The local enforcing agency for Fire District No. 1 shall be under the
direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the
Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 of the Township.
(2) The local enforcing agency for Fire District No. 2 shall be under the
direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the
Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 2 of the Township.
(3) The local enforcing agency within Fire District No. 3 shall be under
the direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by
the Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 3 of the Township.
B. Term of office. The appointment of the Fire Official shall continue
during good behavior and satisfactory service.
C. Inspectors and employees. The local enforcing agency shall appoint
such other inspectors and other employees as are deemed necessary.
Such inspectors and employees shall be under the supervision and
control of the Fire Official.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors, and other employees
of the local enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the agency
for inefficiency or misconduct or failure to perform duties, but each
person so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the
appointing authority consistent with recognized standards of due
process.
§ 179-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 179-8
179:350
§ 179-8. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,30 any person
aggrieved by an order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals in the County of Ocean.
§ 179-9. Additional required inspections and fees.
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to this article
and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees for those uses not defined as life-hazard uses
shall be required:
A. The following buildings, uses, and premises contained in this section
other than those that are incidental or auxiliary to the agricultural use
of farm property are subject to registration and periodic inspection
requirements as hereby established. Where two or more of the same
uses or different uses exist at the same building or premises, each one
shall be considered as separate and distinct for the purpose of this
section and shall be registered pursuant thereto.
B. Type L uses.
(1) Business use as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 500 square feet or less total gross floor
area. (Exception: Any Type L uses with suppression/detection
systems shall be classified under Type M.)
C. Type M uses.
(1) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, more than 500 square feet but less than
2,500 square feet total gross floor area.
(2) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, more than 500 square feet but less than
2,500 square feet total gross floor area.
(3) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, less than 2,500 square feet total gross
floor area.
D. Type N uses.
(1) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 2,500 square feet or more, but less than
5,000 square feet total gross floor area.
(2) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 2,500 square feet or more, but less than
5,000 square feet total gross floor area.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
§ 179-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 179-9
179:351
(3) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 2,500 square feet or more, but less than
5,000 square feet total gross floor area.
E. Type O uses.
(1) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 5,000 square feet or more, but less than
7,500 square feet total gross floor area.
(2) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 5,000 square feet or more, but less than
7,500 square feet total gross floor area.
(3) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 5,000 square feet or more, but less than
7,500 square feet total gross floor area.
F. Type P uses.
(1) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 7,500 square feet or more, but less than
10,000 square feet total gross floor area.
(2) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 7,500 square feet or more, but less than
10,000 square feet total gross floor area.
(3) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 7,500 square feet or more, but less than
10,000 square feet total gross floor area.
(4) Hotels and motels with 100 rooms or less and not defined as lifehazard
uses.
(5) Buildings where less than 100 persons assemble for the purpose of
amusement, entertainment, recreation centers and health spas.
G. Type Q uses.
(1) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 10,000 square feet or more total gross
floor area.
(2) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 10,000 square feet or more total gross
floor area.
(3) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 10,000 square feet or more total gross
floor area.
§ 179-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 179-9
179:352
§ 179-10. Adoption of permit fees.
All permit fees, as indicated within the Uniform Fire Code, Administrative
Code Title 5, Chapter 70, particularly N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9, are hereby adopted
for the purpose of setting fees for this article.
§ 179-11. Violations and penalties.
(4) Factory and industrial uses as defined in the latest edition of the
BOCA Basic National Building Code, not defined as life-hazard
uses.
H. Required inspections. All additional uses as listed in the
aforementioned schedule shall be inspected for compliance with the
provisions of this section periodically but not less than specified
therein.
(1) Type L uses: once every 12 months.
(2) Type M uses: once every 12 months.
(3) Type N uses: once every 12 months.
(4) Type O uses: once every 12 months.
(5) Type P uses: once every 12 months.
(6) Type Q uses: once every 12 months.
I. Registration fees for all additional uses. Where more than one
additional use exists under one ownership at a given location, the
highest use shall be registered at full fee and subsequent use at 1/2 the
schedule fee.
(1) Type L uses: $60 every two years.
(2) Type M uses: $60 per year.
(3) Type N uses: $75 per year.
(4) Type O uses: $100 per year.
(5) Type P uses: $125 per year.
(6) Type Q uses: $175 per year.
J. Site plans fee: $10. For the review of any site plan or subdivision for the
purpose of fire prevention as to the location of fire hydrants, fire
drafting stations, water mains, and fire lanes/zones.
A. All penalties, as indicated within the Uniform Fire Code, New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 5, Chapter 70, shall be adopted for the
purposes of enforcing this article, except those penalties imposed as
§ 179-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 179-11
179:353
hereinafter provided for violations of this article not included within the
Uniform Fire Code or authorized by the Uniform Fire Safety Act.31
B. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection A of this section, any
violations of this article, including the 1984 BOCA Basic Fire Prevention
Code and amendments and supplements thereto, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for 90 days, or both. Each
and every day that a violation of the provisions of this article shall
continue after notification thereof by the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall be deemed and considered a separate and specific violation of this
article. Such penalties as hereinabove provided shall not be exclusive,
and, in addition thereto, any violation may be abated by a civil action
instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 179-11 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 179-11
179:354
Chapter 185
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Land development — See Ch. 212.
§ 179-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 179-11
179:355

ARTICLE I
Authorization; Findings; Purpose
§ 185-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor of Ocean County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 185-2. Findings.
§ 185-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Little Egg Harbor are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 185-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-3
179:357
§ 185-4. Methods of reducing flood loss.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 185-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-4
179:358
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 185-5. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Zoning Officer's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.32
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BENCHMARK — A point of reference for the measurement of the base flood
elevation.[Added 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most-recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided, including but not limited to Flood Hazard
Area Maps, Work Maps, Preliminary FIS and FIRM.[Added 7-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-11]
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
32.Editor's Note: The definitions of "advisory base flood elevation," "advisory flood hazard
area" and "advisory flood hazard map," which immediately preceded this definition, were
repealed 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11.
§ 185-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-5
179:359
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard area, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor,
elevated above the base flood elevation by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard,
"elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition
of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA (FHA) — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to flooding from the one-percent annual chance event,
depicted on the best available Flood Hazard Map.[Added 7-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-11]
FLOOD HAZARD MAP — The best available map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas of flood
hazard applicable to the community based upon the best available
data.[Added 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 185-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-5
179:360
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 185-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-5
179:361
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348),33 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
33.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 185-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-5
179:362
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 185-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-5
179:363

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 185-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, Ocean County, New Jersey.
§ 185-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 7-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
§ 185-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $1,250, imprisoned for not more than 90 days, and/
or serve a period of community service of not more than 90 days for each
violation and, in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Little Egg
Harbor from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 185-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
Community No. 340380, shall be based upon the best available flood
hazard data prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
B. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Ocean County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel(s) 0370, 0460, 0470, 0480,
0489, 0490, 0493, 0557, 0558, 0559, 0566, 0567, 0576, 0577, 0578,
0579, 0581, 0582, 0583, 0584, 0587, 0588, 0589, 0591, 0592, 0593,
and 0594, whose effective date is September 29, 2006.
C. The best available and most-current data released by FEMA shall take
precedence over previous panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) and the flood hazard area (FHA) maps conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more-stringent requirement shall prevail.
D. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and documents are on
file at 665 Radio Road, Little Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey.
§ 185-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-9
179:365
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 185-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 185-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 185-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-11
179:366
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 185-12. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 185-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Zoning Officer and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 185-13. Designation of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 185-14. Duties and responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
Duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 185-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 185-18A are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the coastal high-hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 185-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-14
179:367
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 185-19B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 185-7,
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the Zoning
Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 185-17A, Specific standards,
Residential construction and § 185-17B, Specific standards,
Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 185-12C.
(3) In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 185-19B(1) and § 185-19B(2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
§ 185-14 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-14
179:368
§ 185-15. Variance procedure.
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 185-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the governing body, as
provided by law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 185-14 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-15
179:369
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 185-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 185-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 185-15 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-15
179:370
or victimization of the public as identified in § 185-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 185-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-15
179:371

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 185-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 185-16 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-16
179:373
§ 185-17. Specific standards. [Amended 7-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11]
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 185-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 185-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated above the base flood elevation or best
available flood hazard data, whichever is the more-restrictive
§ 185-16 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-17
179:374
standard, in compliance with applicable construction codes plus
one foot of freeboard.
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified) or at or above the base flood elevation or best available
flood hazard data, whichever is more restrictive, in compliance
with applicable construction codes plus one foot of freeboard; and
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located within an A or AE
Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation or best available
flood hazard data, whichever is the more-restrictive standard,
plus one foot; and
(b) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade one foot above the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard data
plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive; and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or best available flood hazard data plus one foot (whichever is
more restrictive) the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 185-14C(2).
§ 185-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-17
179:375
§ 185-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 185-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 185-19. Coastal high-hazard area.
Coastal high-hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 185-7. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters from tidal surges and
hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 185-17A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation or best available flood hazard data
plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 185-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
§ 185-17 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-19
179:376
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation, advisory base flood elevation or
as required by the Uniform Construction Code (NJAC 5:23),
whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided for in § 185-19B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 185-19B(1) and
(2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
§ 185-19 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-19
179:377
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural).
Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Building Subcode Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones
VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 185-19 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 185-19
179:378
ARTICLE VI
Benchmarks
[Added 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
§ 185-20. On-site benchmarks required.
It shall be a requirement for all construction in a flood hazard area that
the benchmark be carried from a known benchmark to a location on the
foundation or building structure. The benchmark shall clearly indicate the
appropriate base flood elevation for the property.
§ 185-21. Enforcing officer.
This article shall be enforced by the Township Zoning Officer and/or the
Township Construction Official and/or their designees.
§ 185-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of $1,250 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days for each violation.
B. Each day of a violation shall be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as a separate offense.
§ 185-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 185-22
179:379
Chapter 191
GARAGE AND OTHER CASUAL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 269.
§ 191-1. Purpose. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
The purpose of this chapter is to control garage sales, lawn sales, rummage
sales, or other casual sales. This chapter requires the obtaining of a permit
to conduct such sales, and limits the number of permits which may be issued
to any one person in a twelve-month period. Restrictions are established as
to hours of operation and advertising signs. Certain persons and sales are
excepted from the requirements of this chapter in § 191-8.
§ 191-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," "yard sale" or any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is, or may be, made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 191-3. License required; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Township
of Little Egg Harbor without first filing with the Township Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from the Clerk a license to
do so, which shall be known as a "garage sale license." The fee for such
license shall be and the same is hereby fixed at $5.
§ 191-4. Number of licenses limited; display of license.
A. Such license shall be issued to any one person only three times during a
twelve-month period for any one resident and/or family household. The
twelve-month period shall run from January 1 to December 31 of any
calendar year. Charitable, religious and civic organizations may be
allowed more than three licenses with the prior written approval of the
Township Administrator. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
§ 185-22 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 191-4
179:380
§ 191-5. Application information.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, garage sales shall
be limited in time to no more than three consecutive days or two
consecutive weekends (Saturday and Sunday, or Friday and Saturday).
[Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
C. Each license issued under this chapter shall state the name of the
applicant and the location of the garage sale and must be prominently
displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. The information to be filed with the Township Clerk, along with the
prescribed fee of $5, shall be as follows:
(1) Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association, or
organization conducting such sale.
(2) Name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted and the written consent of owner if applicant is other
than owner.
(3) Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
(4) Number of days of the sale.
(5) Date and nature of any past sale.
(6) If there was a past sale, the relationship or connection the
applicant had with any other person, firm, group, organization,
association, or corporation conducting said past sale, and the date
or dates of the past sale.
(7) Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's
license by any local, state, or federal agency.
(8) A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full, true and known to him or her to be
so.
B. The information contained in Subsection A above shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police, who shall review the information to determine
whether the location of the proposed garage sale would create an
undue traffic hazard. The Chief of Police shall consider factors such as,
but not limited to, whether the street upon which the house fronts has
more than two lanes, parking availability and the speed limit of the
street. If the Chief of Police determines that the proposed garage sale
shall create such traffic hazard, he or she shall advise the Township
Clerk to either deny the license or issue the license contingent upon the
satisfaction of any special conditions which the Chief of Police
determines is necessary to preserve the safety, health and welfare of
the public.
§ 191-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 191-6
179:381
§ 191-6. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 191-7. Signs.
§ 191-8. Exceptions.
A. Signs advertising a garage sale as herein defined shall be of a size not
larger than 12 inches by 12 inches and must contain, in addition to the
definition of the type of sale being advertised, the name and address of
the person conducting the sale, the number of the permit issued by the
Township of Little Egg Harbor and the dates for which such permits
were issued.
B. All signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the completion of the
sale. A newspaper advertisement of a sale shall contain the address of
the person conducting the sale.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in
number.
(4) Any sale conducted by any merchant or other business
establishment in a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by Chapter 212, Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof, or any sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor, which sale would be conducted
from properly zoned premises and would not otherwise be
prohibited by any Township ordinance.
B. Any bona fide charitable, philanthropic, educational, cultural, or other
not-for-profit organization or association may be exempted from the
two-day limitation fixed by § 191-4A herein upon demonstrating to the
Township Committee its right to such exemption, and when the
proceeds of the sale are used directly for the institution's or
organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not
sold on a consignment basis. The production of a certified copy of a
certificate of incorporation pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes
§ 191-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 191-8
179:382
§ 191-9. Enforcement.
§ 191-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 194
GRADING AND DRAINAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 156.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 185.
Land development — See Ch. 212.
Soil removal, excavation and mining — See
Ch. 290.
of New Jersey shall be presumptive evidence of the right of such
organization to this exemption.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. The person to whom such license is issued, and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted, shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the activities conducted on the premises
during all hours of the garage sale. Persons responsible for disturbance
of the peace, disorderly conduct, or impeding the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, shall be subject to all appropriate and applicable
penalties available under state and local law. All goods offered for sale
shall be removed from public view within 48 hours after the completion
of the garage sale. All persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any
member of the Police Department of the Township of Little Egg Harbor
in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
A. Any person, firm, association, or corporation convicted of violating any
provision of this chapter or any amendment or supplement thereto shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,250, imprisonment in the Ocean
County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the
Municipal Judge having jurisdiction in the matter. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate
offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter will be subject to
abatement summarily by restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 191-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 194-1
179:383
§ 194-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears in the
context, words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively described
to them in the International Residential Code, New Jersey Edition 2000 and
the International Building Code, New Jersey Edition 2000.
§ 194-2. Permit required.
In accordance with § 194-4 below, a permit for grading and drainage shall
be required prior to construction of the following:
§ 194-3. Permit fees.
§ 194-4. Plan standards.
A. A single-family dwelling. [Amended 1-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-21]
B. Any structure or improvements which the Township Engineer,
Construction Official or Zoning Officer have determined may cause an
adverse impact to any adjoining property.
A. Prior to the issuance of a grading and drainage permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Township Treasurer the sum of $75 for the permit.
B. Additional review and inspection fees shall be assessed in accordance
with the following schedule:
(1) Initial grading plan review fee: $200.
(2) Review of revised grading plan: $100.
(3) As-built review (submit with final as-built plan): $250.
(4) Review of revised as-built plan: $100.
(5) Reinspection of site/report preparation: $150.
A. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling, or any other required permits for construction
delineated under § 194-2B herein, the applicant for the permit shall
submit to the Zoning Officer the required fee as set forth in § 194-3 and
three copies of a grading plan accompanied by a certification from a
New Jersey licensed professional engineer or architect as required by
N.J.A.C. 13:40-7.3 that the plan has been prepared by said engineer or
architect and includes all of the items as delineated herein. Said
certification shall further set forth that the proposed grading and floor
elevation will not impact detrimentally upon any adjoining owner; and
further that the plan provides for proper on-site runoff that is adequate
to prevent ponding, severe erosion and positive drainage away from the
proposed building construction in accordance with Chapter 15-12.10 of
the Township Code.34 [Amended 1-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-21;
9-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
§ 194-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 194-4
179:384
B. The grading plan map prepared based on survey measurements, drawn
to a scale of not more than one inch equals 10 feet or less than one inch
equals 50 feet, shall include the following, as applicable to the proposed
construction:
(1) Property lines and dimensions based upon a current (within last
two years) outbound survey prepared by a New Jersey licensed
land surveyor.
(2) Building dimensions and proposed setback dimensions.
(3) Existing structures on the property and within 50 feet of property.
(4) Existing and proposed contour lines at one-foot intervals with
reference datum to NGVD 1929 for the property upon which the
dwelling is to be constructed. Proposed grades shall include
sufficient spot elevations at the building corners, driveway and
yard areas and extend 20 feet in all directions from the property to
clearly show impact of grading.
(5) Finished floor grades of house and garage, description of house
style (ranch, bi-level, two story), and applicable critical grade.
(6) A description of the building to be constructed (basement, crawl
space or slab construction).
(7) Where applicable, sufficient information to show impact, if any, on
adjoining properties.
(8) Total area of the tract and the total area upland or buildable area.
(9) The percentage of lot coverage by structures.
(10) The existing/proposed sidewalk/curb and fence locations including
the type of material to be used for construction.
(11) The existing/proposed driveway locations including the type of
material to be used.
(12) The location and identification of flood zones, conservation
easements, and wetland areas.
(13) Location of all existing utilities and proposed connections thereto,
and any utility relocations.
(14) The proposed method of providing water and sewer services shall
be clearly indicated.
(a) In the case of connecting to a public source for these services,
the sewer lateral and water sewer line locations shall be
shown. Utility connection permits from the appropriate utility
companies shall be provided, if required.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Land Development.
§ 194-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 194-4
179:385
(b) In the case where a septic system and/or well is proposed, the
plot plan shall include the following information:
[1] Description and location of all components of the disposal
system and/or well.
[2] Distances from structures.
[3] Distances from property lines.
[4] Separation distances from each other and other septic
disposal systems and/or wells within one-hundred-foot
radius of the lot in questions.
[5] Grade elevations and inverts required by the component
installation.
[6] Results of soil borings and permeability test, including
depth to the actual or estimated seasonal high water table
and groundwater observation.
[7] All systems shall comply with N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewerage Disposal Systems.
(15) Stormwater flow direction arrows must be provided for both on-site
and off-site conditions.
(16) Location of all existing sewer and water utilities and proposed
connections thereto, and any required utility relocations.
(17) The width of street rights-of-way, the width of street pavements and
the material composition of the street surface.
(18) A North arrow shall be shown with datum referenced.
(19) When basements are proposed, the results of soil test borings
taken to a depth of 20 feet, reflecting the nature of the subsoil
conditions, the height of the surface water table on a basis of
seasonal average and the height of the surface water table on a
basis of seasonal average and the height of the surface water table
at the maximum wet season.
(20) Septic system approval from the Ocean County Health Department,
if applicable.
(21) United States Army Corps of Engineers, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or Pinelands Commission approved
wetlands and wetlands buffer delineations by metes and bounds, if
applicable. Calculated wetland and wetland buffer areas shall be
noted.
(22) The land shall be graded so that the stormwater from each lot shall
drain directly to the street. If it is not possible to drain directly to
the street, it shall be drained to a system of interior yard drainage
§ 194-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 194-4
179:386
§ 194-5. Additional permit requirements.
§ 194-6. Foundation as-built plan.
designed in accordance with Chapter 15-12.10 of the Township
Code.
(23) Alternate elevations are permitted subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer, subject to a showing that required drainage to
the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at
all locations on the site.
(24) The minimum slope for drainage swales shall be 1 1/2%.
(25) Schedule showing zoning of property, zoning requirements and
plan provisions in relation to each zoning requirement.
(26) Submission of a development permit application in accordance
with Chapter 185, Flood Hazard Areas, of the Township Code for
any development within flood hazard areas.
(27) Proposed or existing retaining walls.
C. The Township Engineer shall review and provide either an approval or
rejection of the grading plan in writing to the applicant a maximum of
10 business days after receipt of the grading plan by the Community
Development Office.
A. For new home construction, two copies of a recent survey showing all
proposed structures, along with all setbacks and height measurement,
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer. If located in a flood hazard
area, the proposed first floor elevation or lowest structural member
elevation, as required by Chapter 185, Flood Hazard Areas, of the
Township Code, must be provided. Additional grading and drainage
information shall be in accordance with the criteria found in § 194-4
herein.
B. Prior to a foundation inspection being performed by the Building
Inspection Department, an as-built foundation location shall be
submitted for review by the Township Engineer and Zoning Officer in
accordance with the criteria found in § 194-6 herein.
C. For final zoning approval, prior to a certificate of occupancy being
issued by the Building Inspection Department, an as-built grading plan
certifying compliance with the approved grading permit and § 194-7
herein shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
A. Prior to framing or placing the modular units or pre-fab units on the
foundation as constructed, a New Jersey professional land surveyor
shall submit to the Zoning Officer three copies of a plan showing the
setbacks and elevations as to said as-built foundation and specifically
showing the top of block elevation and any other critical floor elevation.
§ 194-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 194-6
179:387
§ 194-7. Final as-built plan.
B. The foundation as-built plan shall be accompanied by a certificate from
the preparer that same conforms with the above-listed items.
A. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Zoning Officer
shall require three copies of an as-built plan be submitted, signed and
sealed by a New Jersey professional land surveyor for a final zoning
permit review. The plans utilized for a request for a final zoning permit
review shall be accompanied by a copy of the initial review plans. The
Township Engineer will, in addition to said review, cause an on-site
inspection and submit a written report to the Zoning Officer and
Construction Code Official as to the status of all improvements required
and as-built conditions that conform satisfactorily to the approved plans
and that a certificate of occupancy may be issued. In the event that the
final as-built plan does not conform to the requirements herein set
forth, a report shall be prepared by the Township Engineer indicating
conditions, which must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy. The as-built plans shall include the following:
(1) Property lines and dimensions.
(2) Existing elevations of the lot and adjacent roadway, building
corners grades, lot corner grades, drainage swale grades, as well
as contours and critical spot elevations to clearly define surface
flow.
(3) Finish floor grades of house and garage and description of house
style (ranch, bi-level, two story) and applicable critical grade.
(4) All distances from structures in relation to property lines, height of
structures.
(5) Describe building constructed; basement, crawl space or slab
construction.
(6) Where applicable, sufficient information to show impact, if any, on
adjoining properties.
(7) All completed improvements, including but not limited to walks,
drives, curbs and landscaping, shall be shown.
(8) Compliance with Chapter 185, Flood Hazard Areas, of the
Township Code for all development within flood hazard areas.
(9) Submission of a certified FEMA elevation certificate in flood hazard
areas and in accordance with Chapter 185, Flood Hazard Areas.
B. The final as-built plan shall be accompanied by a certificate from the
preparer that same conforms with the above-listed items and is
substantially in conformance with the plan previously submitted for
initial review for a building permit. One copy of each of the previously
submitted plans shall be attached. If alterations have been made, same
§ 194-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 194-7
179:388
§ 194-8. Temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO).
Chapter 196
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing and storage — See Ch. 309. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
§ 196-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:32-11 and N.J.S.A. 52:32-12, this chapter provides
for restricted parking spaces for handicapped persons in all parking
facilities under the jurisdiction of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
shall be explained by notes or attachments, with an explanation of
how the changes are different from the approval and that there are no
significant impacts to adjoining properties.
A. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, inclement weather prohibits
the completion of the improvements required on the approved grading
plan and under Chapter 15-12.10 of the Township Code, a temporary
certificate of occupancy (TCO) may be issued by the Construction
Official. The issuance of the TCO shall be conditioned upon the
following items:
(1) The estimated construction costs to complete the improvements
are placed in the applicant's attorney escrow account by the
builder. The estimated costs for the incomplete improvements shall
be determined by the Township Engineer.
(2) Written proof of the escrow amount must be given to the Township
Community Development Officer by the applicant's attorney.
(3) Proof of receipt of a conditional or permanent report of compliance
from the Ocean County Soil Conservation District, where
applicable, shall be submitted to the Construction Official.
(4) All escrowed improvements shall be completed and ready for final
inspection no later than May 1 next occurring, unless an extension
is granted by the Township Construction Official and/or Township
Engineer.
B. Lot reinspection fees, in accordance with this section, shall be paid by
the builder prior to the conversion of the TCO to a final certificate of
occupancy.
§ 194-7 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 196-2
196:389
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person to
a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity, affects
sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas
is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty coordination or reduces
mobility, flexibility, coordination and perception to the extent that facilities
are needed to provide for the safety of that person.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility, or complex used by
the general public, or to which the general public is invited, including,
but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels or motels
and public eating places, whether privately or publicly owned, except that
this term shall not include private family residences, warehouse storage
areas and all buildings conducting hazardous occupancies that involve
highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material.
§ 196-3. Owners to provide spaces.
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent
to or used in conjunction with the public buildings shall, within 90 days
of notice thereof, provide for parking spaces for handicapped persons in
accordance with the guidelines herein set forth and in a location and
manner as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 196-4. Construction guidelines.
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be constructed in
accordance with the following guidelines:
A. In all instances where parking lots are provided for public buildings or
facilities as defined herein, designated parking spaces for handicapped
persons shall be required as follows:
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of Accessible Spaces
Up to 50 1
51 to 200 2
Over 200 1% of the total spaces in lot (to nearest
whole number)
B. The location of the physically handicapped spaces shall be in an area of
the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to the
building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of
said location shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer in
conjunction and consultation with the owner. In shopping centers and
other multistore facilities, the handicapped spaces shall be as near to
§ 196-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 196-4
196:390
§ 196-5. Identification certificate.
§ 196-6. Violations and penalties.
the flagship store as possible and/or at such other locations as may be
agreeable between the Code Enforcement Officer and the owner.
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of access, along with the
following words: THESE SPACES RESERVED FOR PHYSICALLY
HANDICAPPED DRIVERS ONLY. SPECIAL VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION
REQUIRED. The lines designating the area shall be painted in
fluorescent yellow paint, and the center of the space shall have painted
thereon the capital letter H.
D. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level, paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space designated and
marked as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking
facility unless said vehicle shall have affixed thereto an identification
certificate or marker issued by the New Jersey Director of the Division
of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.5.
B. Parking in a handicapped space without the aforesaid vehicle
identification shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of the
space was not for the physically handicapped.
A. Restricted parking space violations.
(1) Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine
of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of
at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on such terms
and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)(c).
(2) Any person parked unlawfully in a parking space which is
restricted for use by a handicapped person is subject to removal
and storage of the motor vehicle at the request of an eligible
handicapped person to a law enforcement officer, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-207.5 et seq. The removal of a motor vehicle under
this subsection is subject to those provisions of the Township Code
§ 196-4 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 196-6
196:391
Chapter 205
INSURANCE
regarding removal of motor vehicles, and it shall be the obligation
of the owner of the motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs
for the removal and for any storage which may result from the
removal. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a
person under this subsection shall be in addition to any other
penalty assessed against the person.
B. Other violations.
(1) Any person violating, for the first time, any provision other than
§ 196-5 of this chapter shall be fined $100.
(2) Any person charged with a second or subsequent offense for
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter other than § 196-5 shall, upon commission hereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,250 or
by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service as determined by the
Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
(3) The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by
a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 196-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 196-6
205:392
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
§ 205-1. Conditions for payment.
§ 205-2. Resolution of agreement with owner to pay liens or costs in
installments.
The governing body of Little Egg Harbor Township may enter into an
agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all
delinquent taxes, assessments, or other municipal liens by installments
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of the tax sale lien
by installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of
the Revised Statutes, or for the payment in full of any anticipated costs
of demolition by installment, if the governing body of Little Egg Harbor
Township is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore
or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a
certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the governing body of Little
Egg Harbor Township is authorized to make full payment on the claim to the
insured person.
A. No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey which issues or renews any fire insurance policy
after the adoption of this article and the filing of same with the State
Commissioner of Insurance shall pay to any claimant a sum in excess of
$2,500 for fire damage on any real property located within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor until such time as:
(1) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens and charges
due and payable to the Township of Little Egg Harbor, as indicated
on an official certificate of search for municipal liens, shall have
been paid in full and a municipal certificate is issued stating that
the cost of demolition has been paid; or
(2) The municipality submits to the insurance company a certified copy
of a resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
B. However, if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other
than an appeal on an assessed valuation of real property, the insurance
company shall issue a draft payable to the court of record, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 17:36-10, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of the
lien or charge being contested, and the insurance company shall issue a
draft payable to the municipality for the remaining 25% of the lien or
charge being contested; provided, however, that the amount paid by the
insurance company to the court and the municipality shall not exceed
the proceeds payable under its insurance policy. Pending termination of
all proceedings, at which time all moneys and interest accrued shall be
disbursed in accordance with the final action or judgment of the court,
the 75% of the full amount of a lien or charge shall be placed in an
interest-bearing escrow account as provided in N.J.S.A. 17:36-10.
§ 205-1 INSURANCE § 205-3
205:393
§ 205-3. Priority of municipal claim.
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of the holder of a purchase money mortgage held as
a first mortgage, or an institutional lender that is the holder of a mortgage
on the fire-damaged property in which the mortgagee is listed as the holder
of an insurable interest on the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss, in
which event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount
to the municipal lien under this act only to the extent of the amount due
and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract. As used in this
section, "institutional lender" means any state or federally chartered bank,
savings bank, savings and loan association, or insurance company. Nothing
in this section shall affect the authority of the municipality to enforce a
municipal lien under any other law of this state.
§ 205-4. Interpretation of provisions.
The provisions of this article are intended to be interpreted in conjunction
with N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13, and the provisions of said
statutes and any amendments thereto are herein incorporated by reference.
§ 205-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 205-4
205:394
Chapter 212
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I, PURPOSE
§ 15-1 Purpose. 1
ARTICLE II, DEFINITIONS
§ 15-2.1. Definitions; word usage. 1
§ 15-2.2. Pinelands Area definitions. 21
ARTICLE III, ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 15-3.1. Planning Board: establishment; membership; terms; vacancies; officers. 1
§ 15-3.2. Planning Board Attorney; experts and other staff; authorization of
expenditures.
1
§ 15-3.3. Powers and duties. 1
§ 15-3.4. Adoption of rules and regulations; transcripts. 3
§ 15-3.5. Zoning Board: establishment; membership; terms; vacancies; officers. 3
§ 15-3.6. Zoning Board Attorney; experts and other staff; authorization of
expenditures.
4
§ 15-3.7. Adoption of rules and regulations. 4
§ 15-3.8. Powers and duties. 4
§ 15-3.9. Appeals and applications. 5
§ 15-3.10. Power to reverse or modify decisions. 5
§ 15-3.11. Expiration of variances. 5
§ 15-3.12. Powers granted by law. 6
§ 15-3.13. Applicability. 8
ARTICLE IV, ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 15-4.1. Designation of zoning districts. 1
§ 15-4.2. Zoning Map. 1
§ 15-4.3. Zone boundaries. 1
§ 15-4.4. R-5A Residential Zone. 2
§ 15-4.5. R-3A Residential Zone. 4
§ 15-4.6. R-1A Residential Zone. 5
§ 15-4.7. R-400 Residential Zone. 7
§ 15-4.8. R-200 Residential Zone. 7
§ 15-4.9. R-150 Residential Zone. 12
§ 15-4.10. R-100 Residential Zone. 13
§ 15-4.11. R-75 Residential Zone. 14
§ 15-4.12. R-75A Residential Zone. 15
§ 15-4.13. R-70 Residential Zone. 16
§ 15-4.14. R-50 Residential Zone. 16
§ 15-4.15. PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone. 18
§ 15-4.16. PRD Planned Residential Development Zone. 23
§ 15-4.17. MF Multi-Family Zone. 37
§ 15-4.18. NB Neighborhood Residential Zone. 41
§ 15-4.19. GB General Business Zone. 42
§ 15-4.20. HB Highway Business Zone. 45
§ 15-4.21. MC Marine Commercial Zone 47
§ 15-4.22. LI Light Industry Zone 48
ii
§ 15-4.23. SC/GB Senior Citizen/General Business Zone. 50
§ 15-4.24. WFD Waterfront Development Zone. 52
§ 15-4.24.1 Cemetery Zone 54
§ 15-4.24.2 Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone 55
§ 15-4.24.3 Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone 59
Pinelands Area Zones
§ 15-4.25. PA Preservation Area Zone. 68
§ 15-4.26. FA Forest Area Zone. 71
§ 15-4.27. FAC Forest Area Cluster Zone. 73
§ 15-4.28. PV Pinelands Village Zone. 74
§ 15-4.29. Dwellings on 3.2 acre lots. 75
§ 15-4.30. Additional provisions for cultural housing. 75
§ 15-4.31. Density transfer program. 76
§ 15-4.32. Compliance. 76
§ 15-4.33. Violations and penalties. 76
ARTICLE V, CONDITIONAL USES
§ 15-5.1. Guiding principles and general provisions. 1
§ 15-5.2. Antennas and towers. 2
§ 15-5.3. Automobile repair shop. 7
§ 15-5.4. Automobile sales establishment. 8
§ 15-5.5. Automobile service station. 9
§ 15-5.6. Car washes. 10
§ 15-5.7. Cemeteries and mausoleums. 10
§ 15-5.8. Child care centers; nursery schools; day-care centers. 10
§ 15-5.9. Churches. 11
§ 15-5.10. Commercial recreation activities. 11
§ 15-5.11. Community residences for developmentally disabled and community shelters
for victims of domestic violence.
12
§ 15-5.12. Health-care facilities. 13
§ 15-5.13. Home occupation. 14
§ 15-5.14. Home professional office. 15
§ 15-5.15. Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses. 15
§ 15-5.16. Hotels and motels. 16
§ 15-5.17. Kennels. 16
§ 15-5.18. Long-term facilities, assisted living facilities, residential health care facilities,
and continuing care retirement communities.
17
§ 15-5.19. Public utilities. 17
§ 15-5.20. Mini-storage. 18
§ 15-5.21. Truck terminals. 18
§ 15-5.22. Veterinary clinics. 19
§ 15-5.23. Sexually-oriented businesses 19
§ 15-5.24. Boat repair shop and boat storage 20
ARTICLE VI, NON-CONFORMING USES
§ 15-6.1. Continuance. 1
§ 15-6.2. Abandonment. 1
§ 15-6.3. Restoration. 1
§ 15-6.4. Reversion. 1
iii
§ 15-6.5. Alterations. 1
§ 15-6.6. Prior approved construction. 1
§ 15-6.7. District boundary changes. 2
§ 15-6.8. Pre-existing non-conforming single-family detached dwellings lots 2
§ 15-6.9. Nonconforming lots 2
§ 15-6.10. Exceptions to the front yard requirements of lots fronting on Route 9 in the
General Business (GB) Zone
3
ARTICLE VII, GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15-7.1. Application of regulations. 1
§ 15-7.2. Height. 1
§ 15-7.3. Lighting. 2
§ 15-7.4. Natural features. 2
§ 15-7.5. Principal use. 2
§ 15-7.6. Signs (general). 2
§ 15-7.7. Storage of boats, travel trailers and commercial vehicles. 4
§ 15-7.8. Yard areas. 5
§ 15-7.9. Private, residential swimming pools. 6
§ 15-7.10. Frontage on improved streets. 7
§ 15-7.11. Sight triangles at intersections. 7
§ 15-7.12. Number of principal buildings. 8
§ 15-7.13. Contiguous lot ownership. 8
§ 15-7.14. Accessory Building 8
§ 15-7.15 Private storm drain inlet retrofitting 8
ARTIVLE VIII, GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 15-8.1. Jurisdiction. 1
§ 15-8.2. Applications requiring public hearing. 1
§ 15-8.3. Time periods for decisions. 1
§ 15-8.4. Waiver of requirements and conditional approvals. 1
§ 15-8.5. Conflicts of interest. 2
§ 15-8.6. Meetings. 3
§ 15-8.7. Hearings. 3
§ 15-8.8. Notice requirements for hearings. 4
§ 15-8.9. Decisions. 5
§ 15-8.10. Payment of taxes; corporate disclosure. 5
§ 15-8.11. Reservation of public areas. 6
§ 15-8.12. Permits and approvals. 6
§ 15-8.13. Resolutions of approvals. 8
§ 15-8.14. Zoning Officer duties. 8
§ 15-8.15. Development permits and procedures. 9
§ 15-8.16. Boat lifts and davits. 10
ARTICLE IX, APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 15-9. Application requirements. 1
ARTICLE X, SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE PLANS
§ 15-10.1. Pre-application conference and concept plan procedures. 1
§ 15-10.2. Minor subdivision action. 2
§ 15-10.3. Minor subdivision filing. 3
§ 15-10.4. Major subdivision action. 3
iv
§ 15-10.5. Preliminary plat. 3
§ 15-10.6. Action by municipal agency on preliminary plat. 3
§ 15-10.7. Final plat procedure. 4
§ 15-10.8. Action by municipal agency on final plat. 4
§ 15-10.9. Filing of original tracing. 5
§ 15-10.10. Posting of maps. 6
§ 15-10.11. Sale before approval. 6
§ 15-10.12. Certificate of approval. 6
§ 15-10.13. When site plan approval required; use of Pinelands development credits. 6
§ 15-10.14. Minor site plans. 7
§ 15-10.15. Preliminary site plan procedure. 7
§ 15-10.16. Action by municipal agency on preliminary site plan. 8
§ 15-10.17. Final site plan procedure. 8
§ 15-10.18. Action by municipal agency on final site plan. 8
ARTICLE XI, DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS
§ 15-11.1. Purpose. 1
§ 15-11.2. General requirements. 1
§ 15-11.3. Blocks. 2
§ 15-11.4. Lots. 2
§ 15-11.5. Bulkheading. 4
§ 15-11.6. Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 4
§ 15-11.7. Buffers. 4
§ 15-11.8. Landscaping. 6
§ 15-11.9. Bulk storage. 16
§ 15-11.10. Floodplain regulations. 17
§ 15-11.11. Easements. 18
§ 15-11.12. Water supply and sanitary sewer facilities. 19
§ 15-11.13. Public utilities. 20
§ 15-11.14. Fire protection. 22
§ 15-11.15. Homeowners’ association. 22
§ 15-11.16. Miscellaneous performance standards. 24
§ 15-11.17. Open space and recreation. 26
§ 15-11.18. Solid waste management. 26
ARTICLE XII, IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 15-12.1. Specific design standards and construction details. 1
§ 15-12.2. Streets and streetlighting. 1
§ 15-12.3. Curbs; non-residential development. 7
§ 15-12.4. Curbs; residential development. 7
§ 15-12.5. Monuments. 7
§ 15-12.6. Planting details and tree varieties. 8
§ 15-12.7. Trees. 9
§ 15-12.8. Sidewalks; non-residential development. 16
§ 15-12.8.1 Sidewalks; residential development. 17
§ 15-12.9. Sight triangles. 17
§ 15-12.10. Grading, topsoil and seeding. 17
§ 15-12.11. Stormwater control ordinance for areas that are not within the Pinelands Area 19
§ 15-12.12. Drainage. 52
v
§ 15-12.13. Township acceptance of stormwater management system. 59
§ 15-12.14. Stormwater management maintenance fee. 59
§ 15-12.15. Driveways. 60
§ 15-12.16. Off-street parking and loading area. 61
§ 15-12.17. Fences. 71
§ 15-12.18. Groundwater quality protection: best management practices. 72
§ 15-12.19. Lighting. 73
ARTICLE XIII, SUPPLEMENTARY STANDARDS PINELANDS AREA
§ 15-13.1. Supplementary design and performance standards. 1
§ 15-13.2. Additional procedure requirements for development approval. 4
§ 15-13.3. Supplemental information requirements. 7
§ 15-13.4. Supplemental Pinelands Area design and development standards and
management programs.
10
§ 15-13.5. Stormwater control Ordinance for areas within the Pinelands area 31
ARTICLE XIV, IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
§ 15-14.1. Off-site and off-tract improvements. 1
§ 15-14.2. Recreation. 2
ARTICLE XV, SPECIFICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED
§ 15-15.1. Concept plan checklist. 1
§ 15-15.2. Subdivision plat details. 2
§ 15-15.3. Site plan checklist. 11
§ 15-15.4. Site plan details. 11
§ 15-15.5. Minor site plan details. 17
§ 15-15.6. Environmental impact statement. 19
ARTICLE XVI, DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES
§ 15-16.1. Administrative fees for all development applications. 1
§ 15-16.2. Resolution preparation fee. 3
§ 15-16.3. Escrow fees. 3
§ 15-16.4. Inspection fees for on-site and off-site improvements. 6
§ 15-16.5. General escrow fee provisions. 7
§ 15-16.6. Tax Map maintenance fee. 8
§ 15-16.7. Exemption from fees. 9
ARTCILE XVII, BONDING AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 15-17.1. Improvements to be considered. 1
§ 15-17.2. Improvement determination criteria. 2
§ 15-17.3. Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 2
§ 15-17.4. Inspection requirements. 3
§ 15-17.5. Performance guarantees. 4
§ 15-17.6. Certification of improvements; maintenance guarantee. 8
ARTICLE XVIII, MASTER PLAN
§ 15-18.1. Preparation; contents; modifications. 1
§ 15-18.2. Reexamination. 2
§ 15-18.3. Notice concerning Master Plan. 2
ARTICLE XIX, ENFORCEMENT
§ 15-19. Violations and penalties. 1
ARTICLE XX, MANDATORY DEVELOPMENT FEES
vi
§ 15-20. Mandatory Development Fees 1
ARTICLE XXI, AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 15-21. Intent 1
ARTICLE XXII,
§ 15-22. Reserved 1
ARTICLE XXIII, AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING
§ 15-23. Affirmative Marketing 1
ARTICLE XXIV SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS AND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 15-24.1 Purpose 1
§ 15-24.2 Definitions 1
§ 15-24.3 Standards for Small Wind Energy Systems 2
§ 15-24.4 Standards for Solar Energy Systems 3
§ 15-24.5 Approval Required 5
§ 15-24.6 Permit Requirements 5
§ 15-24.7 Abandonment 6
§ 15-24.8 Zoning Permit Procedure 6
§ 15-24.9 Violations 7
§ 15-24.10 Administration and Enforcement 7
§ 15-24.11 Penalties 7
Article I
1
Chapter 15, LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT Version 3/14/2013
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 15-1. Purpose. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a pattern for the use of land and buildings based on
the Land Use Element of the Master Plan and to effectuate the Master Plan as enacted in order to
encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate development of land in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people. This chapter is
intended to regulate the use of land within the zoning districts; secure safety from fire, flood,
panic and other natural and man-made disasters; provide adequate light, air and open space; limit
and restrict buildings and structures according to their type and the nature and extent of their use
and regulate the nature and extent of the use of land for trade, industry, residence, open space or
other purposes; regulate the bulk, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures; avoid a conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the County and the State; establish appropriate population densities and
concentrations contributing to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and
regions and the preservation of the environment; provide sufficient space for agricultural,
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open spaces; encourage the location
and design of transportation routes which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging
the location of such facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight; promote a desirable
visual environment; promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of land;
encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and activities shaping land
development with a view of lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient use
of land; promote orderly development of the Pinelands Area so as to preserve and protect the
significant and unique natural, ecological, agricultural, archaeological, historic, scenic, cultural
and recreational resources of the Pinelands; and implement the goals and objectives of the
Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) and the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan.
Article II
1
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 15-2.1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply throughout the Township,
including the Pinelands Area; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between a
definition of a Township wide application and a Pinelands Area definition, the Pinelands
Area definition shall control in the Pinelands Area. The term "shall" indicates a
mandatory requirement, and the term "may" indicates a permissive action. The
definitions set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law and which are not set forth in
Subsection B. below are adopted herein by reference. Where a term has been defined
both in Subsection B. below and in the Municipal Land Use Law and there is a conflict
between the definitions for said term, the definition set forth in Subsection B. below shall
govern in regard to the application of this chapter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]; [Amended 12/12/2002 by Ord. No.
2002-040]; [Amended 4/21/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-00]
ACCESSORY BUILDING – A building detached from a principal building located on
the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use.
Any building with a gross floor area in excess of 900 square feet or containing living
space shall not be considered an accessory building. An accessory building attached to a
principal building shall comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the
principal building.
ACCESSORY USE - A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the
same lot with the principal use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER - The Planning Board Engineer for Planning Board
matters; the Board of Adjustment Engineer for Board of Adjustment matters; the Zoning
Officer for Official Map matters; the Township Clerk for Township Committee matters;
and the Township Assessor for certification of subdivision approval.
ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE FACILITY – An establishment which is licensed by the
New Jersey Department of Health pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. to provide
preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative services under medical supervision
to meet the needs of functionally impaired adult patients exclusively on an outpatient
basis.
ADVERSE AFFECT - Development designs, situations or existing features on a
developer's property or any nearby property creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to
impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory or non-complying conditions, such as layout
inconsistent with the development regulations; insufficient street width; unsuitable street
Article II
2
grade; unsuitable street location; inconvenient street system; inadequate utilities, such as
water, drainage and sewerage; unsuitable size, shape and location for any area reserved
for public use or land for open space in a planned development; infringement upon land
designated as subject to flooding; and the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion
from wind or water, from excavation or grading, all as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38
and measured against the design and performance standards of this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL USE - A land use to derive income from the production, keeping or
maintenance of crops and/or raising of livestock.
ALTERATION - Any change or rearrangement in supporting members of an existing
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as
any change in use, or any change in ingress or egress, or any enlargement or diminution
of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building
or structure from one location to another. Normal repairs and maintenance shall not be
considered as an alteration.
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY - Boarding and training kennels, pounds, grooming
facilities, and similar facilities operated either as commercial facilities or on a nonprofit
or philanthropic basis (compare with definition of “Veterinary hospital”).
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY – A residence, licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Health pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:33-1 et seq., for the frail elderly that provides apartmentstyle
living units and congregate dining, personal care and supervision of selfadministered
medication. They may provide other services, such as recreational
activities, financial services and transportation. Assisted living residences, as defined
herein, shall include comprehensive personal care homes.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP – Any building, premises, and land in which or upon
which bodywork or refinishing work is performed upon vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP - A building, premises, and land in which or upon
which a business, service, or industry involving maintenance, servicing, repair, or
painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered.
AUTOMOBILE SALES – The use of any building, premises, and land for the display
and sale of new or used automobiles generally including light trucks or vans, trailers, or
recreation vehicles, which use may include any vehicle preparation or repair work
conducted as an approved accessory use.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - The use of any building, premises, and land for
the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels which use may include the servicing and
repair of vehicles or sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle
accessories as approved accessory uses.
Article II
3
AWNING – A roof-like cover that is temporary or portable in nature, which projects
from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the
elements and is periodically retracted into the face of the building.
BASEMENT – A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above
average level of the finished grade of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than six and one-half feet.
BERM - A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to screen and visually
separate, in part or entirely, one area, site or property from the view of another area.
BILLBOARD - See, “Sign.”
BOATLIFT - A frame structure, usually metal construction and electric powered,
attached to a bulkhead or pilings which is designed to elevate a boat or other type of
personal watercraft above the surface of the water.
BUFFER - An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel to the
property line, consisting of either natural existing vegetation or created by the use of
trees, shrubs, fences, berms, walls, open space, landscaped area, or a combination thereof,
designed to physically separate or screen one use of property from another so as to limit
view and/or sound in order to prevent or control adverse affects. Buildings, structures,
driveways, parking or loading areas and other uses of land shall be permitted within any
buffer area unless otherwise expressed by another section of this chapter.
BUILDABLE AREA - The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard, setback, and
open space requirements of this chapter have been met. Buildable area also does not
include wetlands, buffers, or easements of record.
BUILDING – Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended
for the temporary or permanent shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind.
BUILDING AREA – The total of areas of outside dimensions on a horizontal plane at
ground level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of unroofed
porches, terraces or steps having vertical faces, which at all points are less then three feet
above the level of the ground.
BUILDING COVERAGE – The ratio of the horizontal area measured from the exterior
surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings
on a lot to the total lot area.
BUILDING HEIGHT FOR ALL ZONES OTHER THAN R-50 AND R-70 - The vertical
dimensions measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of
the building to the highest point of the building. [Amended 4/21/2004 by Ord. No.
2004-06]
Article II
4
BUILDING HEIGHT FOR R-50 AND R-70 – the vertical dimensions measured from the
average elevation of the top of the curb, or average gutter elevation where no curbing
exists or is proposed, along lot frontage to the highest point of the building. [Amended
4/21/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-06]
BUILDING LINE (SETBACK) – A line parallel to the street line touching that part of a
building closest to the street. This line is formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior surface of the
building on any side. In the case of a cantilevered or projected section of a building, the
vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. All yard requirements are
measured to the building (setback) line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL – A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the
site on which it is situated.
BULK STORAGE - The stockpiling, warehousing or wholesaling of materials, which
may or may not be enclosed within a structure, including but not limited to sand, gravel,
dirt, asphalt, pipes, plumbing supplies, metal, concrete, lumber and insulation.
BUSINESS OFFICE - A commercial establishment, which does not offer a product or
merchandise for sale to the public, but does offer a service to the public. However,
personal services, such as barbershops and beauty shops and repair services, such as radio
and television shops, are not to be included within the definition of business office.
CALIPER - The diameter of a tree trunk measured, in inches, at breast height.
CARPORT – A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles and
enclosed on not more than three sides.
CELLAR – Non-habitable space with less than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height
of less than six and one-half feet.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY – A document issued by the appropriate
governmental authority, as designated in this chapter, which permits the occupancy or use
of a building, structure, or premises and certifies that all requirements or regulations
provided in this chapter and all other applicable requirements or regulations have been
complied with.
CHANGE OF USE – Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a
building or land such as, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Any change from a residential use to any nonresidential use;
(2) Any change in use from any permitted or existing use to any conditional use;
Article II
5
(3) Any change from nonresidential use to any other use for which any standard set
forth in this chapter is greater or more restrictive;
(4) Any increase in the number of dwelling units in a building or structure;
(5) Any change from an industrial use to any other industrial use or to any other use
category;
(6) Any change in use which increases the time periods during which the use occurs
or is operated such as from seasonal operation to year-round operation.
CHECKLIST - A list of items that must be submitted with an application to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment for the purpose of determining a complete application.
CHILD CARE CENTER- A child care facility for which a license is required from the
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CLUB – A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals,
interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications,
payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and bylaws. Any club or
organization which is commercial in nature (e.g. tennis club, health club, and racquetball
club) shall not be considered a “club” for purposes of this chapter.
CLUBHOUSE - A building, or portion thereof, used by a club or social organization and
which is not adjacent to or operated by or in connection with a public bar, tavern, café or
other public place.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED - Any
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448 (NJSA A.30: 11B-1
et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as
required, to no more than fifteen (15) developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons,
who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community,
and shall include but not be limited to group homes, halfway houses, intermediate-care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall
not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act (P.L. 1971,c. 136; NJSA 26:2H-1 et seq.) and this chapter.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE - Any shelter
approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to standards and
procedures established by regulations of the Department of Human Services pursuant to
P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:141 et seq.) providing food, shelter, medical care, legal
assistance, personal guidance and other services to no more than fifteen (15) persons who
have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who
require their shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological
welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION - An application for development, which complies in all
respects, shall be complete, for purposes of the appropriate submission requirements set
forth in this chapter.
Article II
6
CONFORMING LOT - A lot which conforms to all zone requirements for the zone in
which it is located.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT - A grant or grants to the municipality sufficient to
permit the municipality to reserve and conserve the area so defined from future
development.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - Development other than planned development or
cluster development.
DAVIT – A single or pair of curved uprights projecting over the waterway for
suspending or raising and lowering a boat or other personal watercraft.
DENSITY – The number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be developed. See
“Residential density, gross.”
DETENTION FACILITY - A stormwater system, which temporarily impounds runoff
and discharges it through a hydraulic outlet structure to a downstream conveyance
system. While a certain amount of outflow may also occur via infiltration through the
surrounding soil, such amounts are negligible when compared to the outlet structure
discharge rates and are, therefore, not considered in the facility's design. Since a
"detention facility" impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during
nonrainfall periods.
DEVELOPMENT - The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or other structure or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use of land,
for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DUPLEX – A building containing two (2) single-family dwelling units totally separated
from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.
DWELLING, ATTACHED – A one-family dwelling attached to two (2) or more onefamily
dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED - A building containing one (1) dwelling unit that is not
attached to any other dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY - A building under a single roof, with or without
firewall partitions, containing three (3) or more dwelling units and designed for
occupancy by three (3) or more households living as families.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME - A one-family dwelling on a separate lot, with open space
setbacks on three (3) sides and with a court.
Article II
7
DWELLING, QUADRUPLEX - Four (4) attached dwellings in one (1) building, in
which each unit has two (2) open exposures and shares one (1) or two (2) walls with an
adjoining unit or units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - A building containing one (1) dwelling
unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and designed for the use of a
single household, including one (1) or more people living as a family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED – A one-family dwelling attached
to one (1) other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling
located on a separate lot.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE – A one-family dwelling in a row or series (i.e. not located
over another unit) of at least three (3) attached single-family dwelling units separated
from one another by vertical common fire-resistant walls from basement to roof. Each
townhouse has its own front and rear access to the outside.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY - A building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling
units and designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) households living
independently of each other. Each dwelling unit is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending
from exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT - A building or part thereof having cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities designed, occupied, or intended as a separate living quarter by one (1) family
maintaining a household which is entirely separated from any other “dwelling unit” in the
building by vertical or horizontal floors, and with an independent means of access.
ELEVATION – (1) A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level; (2) a fully
dimensional drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building showing features such as
windows, doors, and relationship of grade to floor level.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Underground gas, electrical, telephone, telegraph, steam or
water transmission or distribution systems, including mains, drams, sewers, pipes,
conduits, and cables including the equipment and appurtenances necessary for these
systems such as fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals,
hydrants and other related equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of an adequate level of service by public utilities or
municipal or governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or welfare.
EVERGREEN TREE - A woody plant with one (1) main stem and foliage which will
remain on the plant in its green condition throughout the year and which will exhibit a
mature height of at least twelve (12) feet to fifteen (15) feet.
Article II
8
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT – That site plan and/or subdivision approval shall not be
required for the following:
(1) Construction, additions, or alterations related to single-family detached or twofamily
detached dwellings on individual lots.
(2) Interior alterations which do not increase the required number of off-street
parking spaces.
(3) Any change of use of land or structure to a use for which the standards of this
chapter are the same or less restrictive or stringent.
(4) Any increase in the total number of employees, number of employees in any shift
or the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the site not exceeding fifteen
percent (15%) of the amount existing at the time of passage of this chapter or as
set forth at the time of a previous site plan approval.
(5) Construction or installation of underground facilities which do not alter the
general use, appearance or grade of the site, provided that the underground
installation of fuel-oil tanks or tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible
liquids or materials shall have been approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(6) The construction or alteration of or addition to an off-street parking area which
provides an increase of five (5) or fewer vehicle parking spaces as compared to
the last approved and/or developed site plan or the number existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter, except in conjunction with or subsequent to any
condemnation or taking proceeding.
(7) Divisions of property, and conveyances so as to combine existing lots, which are
not considered to be subdivisions in accordance with the definition of
“subdivision” contained within this article.
(8) Home professional offices of less than five hundred (500) square feet within
existing buildings located in districts where such home professional offices are
permitted accessory used or conditional uses, provided that such office does not
require more than five (5) off-street parking spaces pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(9) Erection of a tent in any zone where tents are permitted accessory use for thirty
(30) days or less and not more than twice per calendar year.
(10) Modification to site to improve handicap accessibility not involving additional
building area.
(11) Installation of solid waste storage container(s) and enclosure(s) conforming to the
requirements of §15-11.18., Solid waste management, and subject to compliance
with any prior development approvals.
(12) Building additions that increase the square footage of the building by up to 1,000
square feet, and do not require variances or waivers from this chapter. [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]; [Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-
043]
FAMILY – A group of persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption, or
guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single household unit under a
common household management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship
Article II
9
providing organization and stability. A family organization implies a permanent and
long-term relationship as opposed to one that is short-term or transient.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - The private residence of a family care provider which is
approved and registered pursuant to the “Family Day Care Provider Registration Act,”
P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq.) in which child care services are regularly
provided to no fewer than three (3) and no more than five (5) children for no less than
fifteen (15) hours per week. A child being cared for under the following circumstances is
not included in the total number of children receiving child care services:
(1) The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or,
(2) The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between the
parents for the care of their children by one (1) or more of the parents, where no
payment for the care is being provided.
FENCE – An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination.
FLOATING HOME - Any vessel in fact used, designed or occupied as a permanent
dwelling unit, business, office or source of any occupation or for any private or social
club of whatever nature, including but not limited to a structure constructed upon a barge,
primarily immobile and out of navigation or which functions substantially as a land
structure while the same is moored or docked within the corporate limits of the
Township, whether such vessel is self-propelled or not, and whose volume coefficient is
greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet. “Volume coefficient" is the ratio of the
habitable space of a vessel measured in cubic feet and the draft of a vessel measured in
feet of depth.
FLOATING HOME MARINA - That area within the Township covered by any
waterway within the Township where one (1) or more sites or locations are rented or
offered for rent, sold or offered for sale for the location of floating homes.
FLOOD FRINGE - The portion of the flood hazard area outside the floodway based on
the total area inundated during the regulatory base flood plus 25 percent of the regulatory
base flood discharge.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The floodway and relative flat area adjoining the floodway
which has been or may be hereafter covered by flood water and which area, the improper
development and general use of which, would constitute a threat to the public’s safety,
health and general welfare. The flood hazard area shall constitute the total area inundated
by the flood hazard design flood.
FLOODPLAIN - The channel and the generally flat terrain adjoining the channel of a
stream, pond, lake or swamp which is subject to periodic flooding.
FLOODWAY - The channel of a natural stream and portions of the floodplain adjoining
the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water or flood
Article II
10
flow of any natural stream. This shall constitute the portions of the floodplain needed for
passage of the floodway design flood without appreciable rise in the water surface
profile.
FLOOR AREA - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor or several floors of a
building or structure. In the case of business or commercial buildings, floor area includes
showcase facilities and storage and sales facilities. In the case of residential buildings,
the floor area shall not include open porches or open decks, garages or basements, cellars
or other floor areas with floor-to-ceiling headroom of less than seven (7) feet three (3)
inches. In the case of multi-family dwellings, areas used for public halls, stairways,
elevator shafts, and interior vehicular parking shall not be counted as floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO – The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot
divided by the total lot area.
GARAGE – A building or structure intended or suitable for the storage of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE – A garage used as an accessory to the main building, which
provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no occupation, business or
service for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC - Any garage, other than a private garage, available to the public,
operated for gain and which is used for the equipping, adjusting, storage, rental, repair,
inspecting, grading, washing, polishing or other cleaning, maintenance and servicing of
gasoline or oil or other fuel for vehicular propulsion. This term shall include gasoline
filling and motor vehicle service stations and all gasoline and oil pumps maintained in
conjunction therewith but shall not be construed to include motor vehicle showrooms for
new and used motor vehicles.
GOLF COURSE – An area of 50 or more contiguous acres containing a full-size
professional golf course, at least nine holes in length, together with the necessary and
usual accessory uses and structures, such as but not limited to clubhouse facilities, dining
and refreshment facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts and the like, provided that the
operation of such facilities is incidental to the operation of the “golf course.”
GRADE – (1) The average elevation of the land around a building; (2) the percent of rise
or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED - The completed elevation of the ground level after development
including lawns, walks and roads as shown on municipally reviewed plans or designs
conforming to established municipal standards.
GREEN SPACE - The total portion of the lot or tract required to be covered by
vegetation.
Article II
11
GROUND COVER - Low-growing [under three (3) feet in height] woody or herbaceous
plants, grasses, or other landscaping that form a dense mat-like covering of the area in
which they are planted preventing soil from being blown or washed away and further
preventing the growth of undesirable (weed) plants.
HEDGE - Several plants, usually planted in a formal line or row, at a very tight spacing
in order to achieve a continuous line or mass of foliage to shield, screen, separate or
protect a lot(s) or a portion of a lot(s).
HEALTH CARE FACILITY - A facility or institution, whether public or private,
engaged principally in providing services for health maintenance and the diagnosis or
treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical or mental condition,
including but not limited to general hospital or special hospitals, psychiatric hospitals,
public health centers, diagnostic and treatment centers, rehabilitation centers, extended
care facilities, skilled nursing homes, nursing homes, intermediate care facilities,
outpatient clinics, bioanalytical laboratories (except as specifically excluded hereunder)
or central services facilities serving one (1) or more institutions, but, excluding
institutions that provide healing solely by prayer and excluding such bioanaltyical
laboratories that are independently owned and operated and are not owned, operated,
managed or controlled, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by any one (1) or more
health care facilities, and the predominant source of business of which is not by contract
with health care facilities within the State of New Jersey, and which solicit or accept
specimens and operate predominately in interstate commerce.
HOME OCCUPATION – Any gainful employment, or occupation, of one or more
members of the resident family, which shall constitute, either entirely or partly, the means
of livelihood of such member or members and which shall be conducted in clearly
secondary or accessory use to the primary residential use of the principal structure. Such
occupation may be pursued in the principal dwelling structure or in a secondary building
which is accessory to such principal structure. The retail sale of goods or services in
structures designed or altered to make such activities the primary use of the site shall not
be construed hereunder to be a home occupation.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION - An incorporated, nonprofit community association
operating under a recorded land agreement through which:
(1) Each lot owner, condominium owner, stockholder under a cooperative
development or other owner of property or interests in the project shall be a
member.
(2) Each occupied dwelling unit is subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the
expenses for the organization’s activities and maintenance, including any
maintenance costs levied against the unit by the association or by the
municipality.
(3) Each owner and tenant has a right to use the common property.
Article II
12
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - A home occupation consisting of the office of a
practitioner of a recognized profession carried out in accordance with the provisions of
Section 15-5.13.
HOTEL - A series of attached or detached dwelling units operated as a single business,
containing individual sleeping or living units with bathrooms and closet space, with or
without kitchens, designed for or used to provide housing accommodations, for
consideration, to tourists, transients and travelers and held out to the public as
accommodations by the day, week or month. Wherever in this chapter the word "hotel"
appears and restrictions are set forth to apply to the use of land for the operation of a
"hotel," it shall be considered synonymous with the word "motel," and the same
restrictions and requirements shall apply to the construction and operation of a “motel.”
HOUSEHOLD – A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access
to and common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the
preparation of serving of food within the dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE – The percentage of the total area of a lot or
tract, after deduction for natural tidal, non-tidal bodies of water, wetlands or other Stateor
federally-regulated non-buildable lands, covered by buildings, structures, parking
areas, drives, curbs, sidewalks, and other impervious surface coverage, shall include a
surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is made
resistant to infiltration by water. Examples of such materials shall include: dry laid brick
or concrete pavers on compacted sand beds, dry laid cut stone or tile on compacted sand
beds, wood decks and concrete patios (including stamped concrete). Detention and
retention basins and dry wells shall not be considered impervious surfaces; however,
graveled areas underlain by impermeable materials, such as non-porous plastic, shall be
considered impervious surfaces. Where porous filter fabric is used under non-compacted
gravel to allow water infiltration and prevent vegetative growth, such a surface shall not
be considered impervious. [Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
INDUSTRIAL OR OFFICE PARK - A total tract comprehensively planned, designed
and approved for industrial or office uses, whether or not the buildings are erected in one
(1) development stage or over a period of time, but where the streets, utilities and lots
and/or tenant's parcels are set forth on a plan for the entire tract prior to construction of
any portion of the tract. As development takes place in accordance with the approved
plans, changes may be made in the plans for the undeveloped section to accommodate
subsequent land needs, provided that the modifications conform to logical extensions of
installed segments of streets, drainage, utilities and other facilities.
INFILTRATION FACILITY - A stormwater system, which temporarily impounds runoff
and discharges it via infiltration through the surrounding soil. While an "infiltration
facility" may also be equipped with an outlet structure to discharge impounded runoff,
such discharge is normally reserved for overflow and other emergency conditions. Since
an "infiltration facility" impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during
nonrainfall periods.
Article II
13
ISLAND - In road and parking area design, a raised planting area, usually curbed, placed
to guide traffic, separate lanes, limit paving (impervious surface), preserve existing
vegetation and increase aesthetic quality.
JUNKYARD - An area or structure used for the collecting, storage, buying, trading or
abandonment of any refuse and/or discarded material or the dismantling, demolition,
salvaging or abandonment of processing structures, automobiles, boats, outboard motor
engines, or other vehicle equipment and machinery or parts thereof, with the deposit of
domestic, commercial, industrial or sanitary waste or garbage excluded.
LOADING SPACE - An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading material.
LOT – A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon.
LOT AREA – The acreage and/or square footage contained within the lot lines of the
property. Any portion of the lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in
calculating lot area. Portions of lots encumbered by easements shall be included in
calculating lot area. Portions of lots below the mean high-water line shall not be
considered in any lot area, depth, rear yard setback or building coverage
calculation/determination. [Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-043]
LOT, CORNER - Any lot which occupies the interior angle of the intersection of two (2)
street lines. On all "corner lots," the required building setback line paralleling both street
frontages shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback requirements of an
adjoining interior lot fronting on said street. On all "corner lots," the lot width shall be
equal to or greater than the minimum depth of lot requirements of the zoning district.
The required lot width and lot depth shall be measured along the required front yard
building setback line. All "corner lots" shall have two (2) front yards, one (1) side yard
and one (1) rear yard.
LOT COVERAGE – The area of a lot covered by buildings and structures expressed as a
percentage of the total lot area.
LOT DEPTH - The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
drawn parallel to the front line through the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE - The "lot frontage" shall be measured along the street line between
the property side lines and in no case shall be less than two-thirds (2/3) of the required
width of the lot.
Article II
14
LOT LINE - A line of record forming all or a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot.
The "lot line" is the same as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting a street. "Lot
lines" extend vertically in both directions from ground level.
LOT, THROUGH - A lot which fronts upon two (2) parallel streets or that fronts upon
two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH - The distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum
required front building setback line.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION - Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
MARINA - Any waterfront facility wherein berthing spaces for any watercraft or boats
are offered for rental by the operator. A "marina" shall be deemed to include, in addition,
automobile parking facilities, sanitary facilities, motor fuel sales, boat sales, repairs,
maintenance and service; excluding, however, facilities for the construction of new boats.
For the purpose of this chapter, the rental of one (1) or more berthing spaces to other than
the residents of the property contiguous to the same shall be deemed to constitute a
"marina," and the same shall conform to all provisions of this chapter pertaining to
"marinas."
MEAN HIGH WATERLINE – The line formed by the intersection of the tidal plane of
mean high tide with the shore.
MINING - An extractive process involving the removal of soil, earth, sand, clay, ground,
humus peat or ilmenite.
MINOR SITE PLAN – A development plan which:
(1) Proposes building alterations, additions or expansion of an existing use or another
permitted use in the same zoning district and/or six (6) or fewer additional
parking spaces.
(2) Exterior façade – alterations are proposed and/or new building construction or
additions do not exceed 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Does not involve any proposed planned development, cluster development or
mixed-use residential development.
(4) Does not involve any new street or extension of any off-site or off-tract potable
sewer improvement that would service more than one (1) lot.
(5) Does not require soil disturbance of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more.
(6) Contains that information reasonably required so that the Board and its
professionals may make an informed, intelligent determination as to whether the
requirements established for approval of a "minor site plan" can be met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION - Any subdivision resulting in not more than three (3) lots
including the remainder of the original lot, all lots fronting on an existing improved street
and not involving any new street or road, provided that the following conditions have
Article II
15
been met: [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]; [Amended 12/12/2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-040]
(1) That curbs and sidewalks have been installed or that the developer agrees to
install and post performance guarantees for curbs and sidewalks, or that curbs and
sidewalks are not required due to specific conditions in the area.
(2) That the subdivision does not require the extension of municipal facilities at the
expense of the municipality.
(3) That the subdivision and construction resulting therefrom will not adversely affect
drainage patterns of the basin in which the lots are situated.
(4) That the subdivision will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of
the parcel or the adjoining property.
(5) That the subdivision is not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master
Plan, Official Map or this chapter.
(6) That no portion of the lands involved have constituted a part of a minor
subdivision within two (2) years preceding the application.
MOBILE HOME - A dwelling unit, manufactured in one (1) or more sections, designed
for long-term occupancy, containing living and sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a
tub or shower, bath and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections
provided for attachment to outside systems, and designed to be transported on its own
wheels after fabrication or on a flatbed or on other trailers, arriving at the site where it is
to be occupied as a complete dwelling, usually including major appliances and furniture
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations. For purposes of this chapter, travel trailers and campers are not considered
"mobile homes." A "mobile home" may be placed on a permanent or nonpermanent
foundation; provided, however, that in the event that a nonpermanent foundation is used,
the "mobile home" shall be installed and anchored in accordance with the requirements
set forth in 24 CFR 3280.305 and 3280.306 and the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
MOBILE HOME PARK - Any site, lot or tract of land upon which two (2) or more
authorized mobile homes are parked, permanently or temporarily, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and includes any appurtenant facilities used or designed as part of
the equipment of such mobile home court or park.
MODEL HOME - Any house or residential structure constructed as a sales exhibit for a
builder, housing development or subdivision.
MOTEL - The same as “hotel,” as defined herein.
MULCH - A layer of organic material such as shredded wood or leaf litter, placed on the
surface of the soil around plantings to aid plant growth by retaining moisture, preventing
weed growth, holding soil in place, protecting root systems and providing a neat, easily
maintained surface immediately around the base of the plant.
Article II
16
OFFICE - A place for the transaction of business where reports are prepared, records kept
or services rendered, but where no retail sales are offered and where no manufacturing,
assembling or fabrication takes place.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE - An off-street parking area for passenger vehicles,
including the storage area of each vehicle and necessary maneuvering area of each
vehicle. Space for maneuvering incidental to parking or unloading shall not encroach
upon any public way. Every off-street parking facility shall be accessible from a public
street. Accessory garage space(s) for the storage of one (1) or two (2) automobiles shall
be considered "off-street parking space(s)."
ORNAMENTAL TREE - A woody plant which will exhibit a mature height of at least
twelve (12) to fifteen (15) feet, but not usually greater than twenty (20) to twenty-five
(25) feet, which provides distinct flowers, bark or leaf coloration, fruit or form of visual
variety and interest.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, GROSS - The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
land area, including streets, easements and open space portions of a development.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET – The number of dwelling units which may be or are
developed per acre of land, exclusive of areas used for public access and/or open space
and natural or nontidal bodies of water, tidal wetlands regulated under the NJ Wetlands
Act of 1970 and freshwater wetlands regulated under the NJ Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act of 1987 or flood hazard areas established by NJDEP or FEMA.
RESTAURANT - Any establishment, however designated, regularly and principally used
for the purpose of providing meals to the public, having an adequate kitchen and dining
room, equipped for the preparing, cooking and serving of foods for its customers and in
which no other business, except such as is incidental to such establishment, is conducted.
However, a snack bar at a public or community recreation facility, operated solely by the
public agency controlling the recreation facility for the convenience of the patrons of the
facility, shall not be deemed a "restaurant" for purposes of this chapter.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD - An establishment where patrons are served prepared
foods, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections for principal consumption outside
the confines of the principal building or in automobiles parked upon the premises,
regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other accommodations are
provided for the patrons.
RETAIL STORE - An establishment with a primary purpose of the sale of goods or
articles, individually or in small quantities, directly to the consumer.
RETENTION FACILITY - A stormwater system which, similar to a detention facility,
temporarily impounds runoff and discharges its outflow through a hydraulic structure to a
downstream conveyance system. Unlike a detention facility, however, a "retention
facility" also includes a permanent impoundment and, therefore, is normally wet, even
Article II
17
during nonrainfall periods. Storm runoff inflows are temporarily stored above this
permanent impoundment.
SCREEN - A structure, berm or planting which will provide a continuous visual
obstruction of a site(s) or portion of a site(s).
SETBACK - The horizontal distance between the nearest part of the building or structure
and any front, side or rear lot line measured perpendicular to such lot lines. Overhanging
eaves of not more than two (2) feet shall be excluded from the measurement of the
required setback.
SETBACK LINE (BUILDING LINE) - A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line
and drawn to the point of the building nearest to the street line or lot line, beyond which a
building shall not project. The minimum yard requirements shall be the minimum
required setbacks. All setbacks from public streets shall be measured from the required
right-of-way width.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS - [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(1) A commercial establishment, which, as one of its principal business purposes,
offers for sale, rental, or display any of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes or other visual representations which depict or describe a “specified
sexual activity” or “specified anatomical areas”; or still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices which show images t one
person per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
characterized by the depiction of a “specified sexual activity” or “specified
anatomical area”, or instruments, deices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with a “specified sexual activity”; or
(2) A commercial establishment, which regularly features live performances
characterized by the exposure of a “specified anatomical area” or by a “specified
sexual activity,” or which regularly shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic representations which depict or describe a “specified
sexual activity” or “specified anatomical area”;
(3) “Person” means: an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
(4) “Specified anatomical area” means: (1) less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or (b) human genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if covered.
(5) “Specified sexual activity” means: (a) the fondling or other erotic touching of
covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, or female breasts; or (b) any
actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate
sexual intercourse.”
SHADE TREE - A woody plant, with one (1) main stem, which will exhibit a mature
height of at least twenty (20) to twenty-five (25) feet and have a distinct head of foliage.
Article II
18
SHRUB(S) - A woody plant (evergreen or deciduous), which will exhibit a mature height
of at least two (2) feet and usually not greater than twelve (12) feet.
SIGHT TRIANGLE - A triangle area abutting two (2) intersecting streets, where vision is
unobstructed to motorists entering the intersection. The "sight triangle" is formed by the
intersecting street side lines and a line connecting a point on each side line a set distance
from the intersection.
SIGN - Any structure, either on its own supports or attached to another structure, which
shall display or include any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or
advertisement. The word "sign" includes the word "billboard" but does not include the
flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit or of any political,
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, religious or like campaign, drive, movement
or event.
SIGN AREA - The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign. Where there is no frame
or edge to the sign, the area shall be defined by a projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight
sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines the sign.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL - Any sign which is owned or operated by any person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of outdoor advertising for direct profit gained from
the rental of such signs or any sign advertising a commodity not sold or produced on the
premises. This shall include billboards and off-premises signs indicating the direction to
a particular place.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR - All site plans for new development not defined or classified as
minor site plans or exempt development.
SPECIMEN TREES – The largest known individual trees of each species in the state of
New Jersey. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Forestry, maintains a list of such trees, which is incorporated herein by reference. Any
trees which are equal to or larger than said trees; also any trees so designated by the Little
Egg Harbor Environmental Commission.
STORY - That part of a building between the surface of any floor and the next floor
above it or, in its absence, the finished ceiling or roof above it. A split-level story shall
be considered a second story if its floor level is six (6) feet or more above the level of the
line of the finished floor next below it. Any floor under a sloping roof at the top of a
building which is more than two (2) feet below the top plate shall be counted as a "story,"
and if less than two (2) feet below the top plate, it shall be counted as a half-story. A
basement shall be counted as a "story" if it averages more than five (5) feet above ground.
Article II
19
STREET LINE - The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way, whichever would
result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map or
as required by this chapter, forming the dividing line between the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE – Anything constructed, assembled or erected, the use of which required
the location on the ground or attachment to something having location on or in the
ground, and shall include tanks, towers, advertising signs or devices, bins, tents, lunch
wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars or similar structures on wheels, or other supports,
used for business or living purposes. The word “structure” shall not apply to service
utilities entirely below ground or pavements, curbs, sidewalks, patios or gasoline fuel
pumps.
SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall not
be considered “subdivisions” within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are
created: divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof
appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are
five (5) acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments
of foreclosure; conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument;
the conveyance of one (1) or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the
same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the Administrative
Officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and
area shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the
municipality. The term “subdivision” shall also include the term “resubdivision.”
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE - A subcommittee of not more than three (3) Planning
Board members, appointed by the Chairman of the Board, for the purpose of classifying
subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and having such further
duties related to land subdivision as may be conferred on this community by the Board.
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED - Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the actual cash value
of the structure either before the improvement is started or, if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, to the condition existing before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement is started when the first alteration of any structural part of the
building commences.
SWIMMING POOL - Facilities constructed above or below grade, having a depth of
more than two (2) feet and/or water surface of one hundred (100) square feet or more,
and designed and maintained for swimming purposes. The term shall also include all
appurtenant buildings, structures or equipment accessory thereto.
TRACT - An area of land comprised of one (1) or more lots, having sufficient
dimensions and area to meet the requirements of this chapter for the use(s) intended.
Article II
20
TREE – Any living deciduous tree having a trunk of a diameter greater than three (3)
inches [diameter measured at four (4) feet from ground level], any living coniferous tree
having a trunk of a diameter greater than four (4) inches or any living dogwood (cornus
florida) or American holly (ilex opaca) having a diameter of one (1) inch or greater.
TREE CLUSTER – Three or more deciduous trees with a caliper of 3.5 inches measured
at breast height located not more than 10 feet apart.
USE - The purpose for which a lot, structure or building is designed, arranged or intended
or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE - A departure from any provision of a zoning ordinance pursuant to Section
47 and Sections 29.26. 57c and 57d of P.L. 1975, c. 291.
VEHICLE CAMPER - A motorized or portable vehicle designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not
exceeding eight (8) feet and including motorized coaches, pickup campers, tent trailers
and similar equipment and having a length not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL – A place where animals are given medical care and the
boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
VIDEO ARCADE - A commercial business established primarily to offer a place where a
person or player may play any one (1) of a number of video games, pinball tables or other
amusement machines or devices, upon payment of a fee, to attempt to obtain a prize or
tickets or tokens redeemable for a prize or to attempt to attain a score or result.
YARD – An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and unobstructed
from the ground to the sky.
YARD, FRONT – A yard extending the full width of the lot and not less in depth from
the minimum distance required between the street line and the front yard building setback
in each district.
YARD, REAR – A yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear line of the
principal building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE – A yard between the exterior of the side wall of the principal building and
the side lot line which extends through from the front yard to the rear yard.
C. Words and phrases. Unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise, all
words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural; and the plural, the singular. The word "building" includes the word "structure" or
any part thereof; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed or intended to be
occupied"; the word "used" includes "arranged, designed or intended to be used"; the
word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships and corporations. The word
Article II
21
"shall" is always mandatory and not directory. The word "may" is permissive. The
phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained
for" and "occupied for."
D. Additional definitions can be found in §15-12.11.E, §15-13.5.K and §15-13.5.O.3.b.
[Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
§ 15-2.2. Pinelands Area definitions. . [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
The following definitions shall apply to those portions of the Township of Little Egg Harbor that
are located within the Pinelands Area: agricultural employee housing, agricultural or
horticultural purpose or use; development; forestry; habitat; historic resource; hydrophytes;
immediate family; impermeable surface; navigable waters; off-site commercial advertising sign;
person; Pinelands; Pinelands resource related use; recommended management practice;
recreation facility, intensive; recreational facility, low intensive; seasonal high water table; sign;
specimen tree; submerged land; structural alteration; vegetation; and wetland soils, the meanings
ascribed to them in N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11.
AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT – A retail sales establishment
primarily intended to sell agricultural products produced in the Pinelands. An
agricultural commercial establishment may be seasonal or year round and may or may
not be associated directly with a farm; however, it does not include supermarkets,
convenience stores, restaurants and other establishments which coincidentally sell
agricultural products, nor does it include agricultural processing facilities.
ANIMALS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED – Those animals specified in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.32.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT – Any application filed with any permitting
agency for any approval, authorization or permit which is a prerequisite to initiating
development in the Pinelands Area, except as provided in Subsection 15-13.1.A.(4) of
this chapter.
APPROVAL AGENCY – Any board, body or other authority within the Township of
Little Egg Harbor with authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans,
construction permits or other applications for development approval.
CAMPER – A portable structure, which is self-propelled or mounted on or towed by
another vehicle, designed and used for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation, or
other short-term uses. Camper does not include mobile homes or trailers.
CAMPSITE – A place used or suitable for camping on which temporary shelter such as a
tent or camper may be placed and occupied on a temporary and seasonal basis.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS – A certificate issued by the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subsection 15-13.4.A.(15) for the construction,
Article II
22
alteration, remodeling, removal or demolition of any structure, area or site designated in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156 or as may be designated by the Board in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
CERTIFICATE OF FILING – A certificate issued by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 that a complete application for development has been
filed.
COMMISSION – The Pinelands Commission created pursuant to Section 5 of the
Pinelands Protection Act.
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN – The plan adopted by the Commission
pursuant to Section 7 of the Pinelands Protection Act, as amended.
CONTIGUOUS LANDS – Land which is connected or adjacent to other land so as to
permit the land to be used as a functional unit; provided that separation by lot line,
streams, dedicated public roads which are not paved, right-of-ways, and easements shall
not affect the contiguity of land unless a substantial physical barrier is created which
prevents the land from being used as a functional unit.
DENSITY – The average number of housing units per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT – The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any land,
the performance of any building or mining operation, the division of land into two (2) or
more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian rights
including, but not limited to:
(1) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
(2) A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external
appearance of a structure or land;
(3) A material increase in the intensity use of land, such as an increase in the number
of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or dwelling units in a
structure or on land;
(4) Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or excavation on a parcel of
land;
(5) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(6) Commencement of forestry activities;
(7) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, fill or a parcel of land;
(8) In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change in noise
levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste material; and
(9) Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank or floodplain,
seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial body of water.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL – Any approval granted by an approval agency,
including appeals to the governing body, except Certificates of Occupancy and variances,
Article II
23
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 which do not otherwise include issuance of a
construction permit, subdivision or site plan approval.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR – Any division or subdivision of land into 5 or more parcels;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five (5) or more units; any
construction or expansion of any commercial or industrial use or structure on a site of
more than 3 acres; or any grading, clearing or disturbance of any area in excess of 5,000
square feet for other than agricultural or horticultural purposes.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR – Any development other than major development excepting
those items listed in Subsection 15-13.1.A.(4) of this chapter.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINES – All electric lines other than electric transmission
lines.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINES – Electric lines which are part of an electric
company’s transmission and subtransmission system, which provide a direct connection
between a generating station or substation of the utility company and (1) another
substation of the utility company; or (2) a substation of or interconnection point with
another interconnecting utility company; or (3) a substation of a high-load customer of
the utility.
FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT – The changing of the characteristics and
interactions of fish and wildlife population and their habitats in order to promote, protect
and enhance the ecological integrity of those populations.
FORESTRY – The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees for the production of
wood products, including firewood. It includes such practices as reforestation, site
preparation and other silvicultural practices. For purposes of this chapter, the following
activities shall not be defined as forestry and, although they may otherwise require an
application for development, they shall not require the issuance of a forestry permit:
(1) Removal of trees located on a parcel of land one (1) acre or less on which a
dwelling has been constructed;
(2) Horticultural activities involving the planting, cultivating or harvesting of nursery
stock or Christmas trees;
(3) Removal of trees necessitated by the development of the parcel as otherwise
authorized by this chapter;
(4) Removal of trees necessary for the maintenance of utility or public right-of-ways;
(5) Removal or planting of trees for the personal use of the parcel owner; and,
(6) Removal of trees for public safety.
HEIGHT – The vertical distance of a building measured from grade to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs and to the mean height
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. For structures, the vertical
distance measures from grade to the highest point; provided, however, that no height
Article II
24
limitation in this chapter shall apply to any of the following structures, provided that such
structures are compatible with uses in the immediate vicinity: antennas which do not
exceed a height of 200 feet and which are necessary to an otherwise permitted use, silos,
barns and other agricultural structures, church spires, cupolas, domes, monuments, water
towers, fire observation towers, electric transmission lines and supporting structures,
windmills, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles and masts, aerials, solar energy
facilities, chimneys and similar structures to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy. The height limitations in this chapter shall also not apply
to the antenna and any supporting structure of a local communication facility of greater
than 35 feet, provided that the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) are met.
INSTITUTIONAL USE – Any land used for the following public or private purposes:
churches; cemeteries; public office buildings; educational facilities, including
universities, colleges, elementary and secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens
and nurseries; cultural facilities such as libraries, galleries, museums, concert halls,
theaters and the like; hospitals, including such educational, clinical, research and
convalescent facilities as are integral to the operation of the hospital; medical and health
service facilities, including nursing homes, rehabilitation therapy centers and public
health facilities; law enforcement facilities; military facilities; and other similar facilities.
For purposes of this ordinance, institutional use shall not include medical offices which
are not associated with hospitals or other medical health service facilities, nor shall it
include assisted living facilities.
INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS – The regulations adopted by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act to govern the review of
applications from the adoption of the regulations until the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan took effect on January 14, 1981. These regulations were formerly
codified as N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq.
LAND – The surface and subsurface of the earth as well as improvements and fixtures
on, above or below the surface and any water found thereon.
LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY – An antenna and any support structure,
together with any accessory facilities, which complies with the standards in N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.4 and which is intended to serve a limited, localized audience through point to
point communication, including cellular telephone calls, paging systems and dispatch
communications. It does not include radio or television broadcasting facilities or
microwave transmitters.
PARCEL – Any quantity of land, consisting of one (1) or more lots that are capable of
being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be
established.
PINELANDS AREA – The area designated in Subsection A of Section 10 of the
Pinelands Protection Act.
Article II
25
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT CREDIT – A use right allocated to certain lands within
the Township pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43 that can be used to secure a residential
density bonus in other municipalities which have adopted appropriate ordinances
permitting their use.
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD – The agency responsible from
February 8, 1979 until June 28, 1979 for the review of and action on applications for
development in the Pinelands Area which required approvals of other state agencies,
except where the Pinelands Commission acted on applications during that time period.
PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT – N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 29.
PLANTS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED – A Pinelands plant species whose
survival worldwide, nationwide, or in the state is in jeopardy.
PRESERVATION AREA (PINELANDS PRESERVATION AREA) – The area
designated in Subsection B of Section 10 of the Pinelands Protection Act, and shown on
the Pinelands Area Master Plan Map of Little Egg Harbor Township.
PROTECTION AREA (PINELANDS PROTECTION AREA) – All lands located in the
Pinelands Area which are not within the Preservation Area.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE – Sewer service, gas, electricity, water,
telephone, cable television, and other public utilities developed linearly, roads and streets
and other similar services provided or maintained by any public or private entity.
RECORD TREE – The largest tree of a particular species in New Jersey based on its
circumference at 4.5 feet above ground level. A listing of the largest known tree of each
species and its location is maintained at the principal offices of the Commission.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION – The dredging, digging, extraction, mining and quarrying
of sand, gravel, clay or ilmenite for commercial purposes, not including, however, the
private or agricultural extraction and use of extracted material by a landowner.
UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINES – Lines, conduits or pipes located in a street, road,
alley or easement through which natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable television,
water, sewage, or stormwater discharge is distributed to or from service lines extending
from the main line to the distribution system of the building or premises served. Utility
distribution lines do not include electric transmission lines.
WETLANDS – The meaning ascribed to the word in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.3.
WETLANDS, COASTAL – The meaning ascribed to the word in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.4.
WETLANDS, INLAND – The meaning ascribed to the word in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.5.
Article III
1
ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedure
§ 15-3.1. Planning Board: establishment; membership; terms; vacancies; officers.
A. There is hereby established, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., in the Township of Little Egg Harbor, a Planning Board of nine (9) members,
consisting of Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV members.
B. Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV members shall be appointed in accordance with
the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, as amended.
C. Terms of office. The terms of office of the members of the Planning Board shall be as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, as amended.
D. Alternate members. The Mayor may appoint two (2) alternates to the Planning Board.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of alternate members shall be as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1, as amended.
E. All appointments of Class IV members and alternates to the Planning Board shall
commence as of January 1 of the year of appointment and shall terminate on December
31 of the last year of the term of the appointment.
§ 15-3.2. Planning Board Attorney; experts and other staff; authorization of
expenditures.
A. The Attorney to the Planning Board shall be an Attorney other than the Municipal
Attorney and shall be appointed by the Planning Board for a term of one (1) year
commencing January 1. Appointment to such office made after January 1 of any year
shall be limited to the calendar year, and such term shall terminate on December 31 of the
year of appointment. The Attorney to the Board shall receive such compensation as shall
be fixed by contract between the Attorney and the Board.
B. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
C. The Board shall not authorize expenditures, which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants,
the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 15-3.3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation. It shall
also have the following powers and duties:
Article III
2
A. To make and adopt and from time to time reexamine and/or amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28 and 40:55D-89.
B. To exercise subdivision control and site plan review in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and to
grant deminimis exceptions to the adopted Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS).
C. To consider and make a report to the Township Committee within thirty-five (35) days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also to pass upon other matters specifically
referred to the Planning Board by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
D. Variances and issuance of permits.
(1) Powers.
(a) Whenever the proposed development requires the approval, pursuant to
this chapter, of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, to grant, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment, variances
pursuant to Subsection 57c of the Municipal Land Use Law, provided that
for applications in the Pinelands Area, variances granted which constitute
waivers from the Comprehensive Management Plan shall be submitted to
the Pinelands Commission for review and action only after consideration
and approval by the Planning Board.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, to direct the
issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(c) In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, to direct the
issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a hearing on
the application for development shall include reference to the request for a
variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be. The developer
may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of the variance or
direction of the issuance of a permit and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of
the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon the
grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Planning Board. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can be granted without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinances.
Article III
3
§ 15-3.4. Adoption of rules and regulations; transcripts.
A. The Board shall adopt rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of
oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
B. When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two (2) or more meetings, a
member of the Board who was absent for one (1) or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his
absence from one (1) or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him a transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was
absent and certifies, in writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened to
such recording.
§ 15-3.5. Zoning Board of Adjustment: establishment; membership; terms; vacancies;
officers.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Little Egg Harbor, pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law, a Board of Adjustment consisting of seven (7) members
appointed by the Township Committee.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not have more than four alternate members, whom
shall be appointed by the Township Committee. Alternate members shall be designated
at the time of appointment by the Township Committee as “Alternate No. 1,” “Alternate
No. 2,” “Alternate No. 3,” and “Alternate No. 4.” [Amended 5/10/2007 by Ord. No.
2007-009]
C. The terms of the members first appointed under this chapter shall be so determined that to
the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed in the case
of regular members, evenly over the first four years after their appointment and, in the
case of alternate members, evenly over the first two years after their appointment,
provided that the initial term or a regular member shall not exceed four years and that the
initial term of an alternate member shall not exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of
each regular member shall be four years and the term of each alternate member shall be
two years. The terms of not more than two alternate members shall expire in any one
year. All regular members and any alternate members shall be residents of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor. [Amended 5/10/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-009]
D. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired
term only.
E. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its members
and shall select a Secretary, who may or may not be either a Board member or a
municipal employee.
Article III
4
§ 15-3.6 Board of Adjustment Attorney; experts and other staff; authorization of
expenditures.
A. There may be an Office of Attorney to the Board of Adjustment. The Attorney to the
Board of Adjustment shall be an Attorney other than the Municipal Attorney and whose
term of office shall be one (1) year, commencing January 1. Appointments to this office
made after January 1 shall be limited and shall terminate on the following December 31.
The Board may employ the services of an Attorney and pay such compensation as shall
be fixed by contract between the Attorney and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. The Board shall not authorize expenditures, which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants,
the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use. The Township Committee
shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Board.
§ 15-3.7. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths
and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 15-3.8. Powers and duties.
A. The powers of the Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69
et seq., and amendments and supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this article.
B. It is further the intent of this article to confer upon the Board of Adjustment as full and
complete powers as may lawfully be conferred upon such Board, including, but not by
way of limitation, the authority, in connection with any case, action or proceeding before
the Board, to interpret and construe the provisions of the Zoning Regulations or any term,
clause, sentence or word thereof and the Zoning Map in accordance with the general rules
of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, grant variances in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be done in cases
where the strict construction of the provisions of this chapter would work undue hardship.
The powers and duties of the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by
statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in the Municipal
Land Use Law or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided, and it shall from
time to time furnish to any person requesting the same a copy of its rules and information
as to how appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its decision
thereon.
D. In the case of variance applications, other than a "d" variance application under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70, variances granted which constitute a waiver of requirements, standards or
Article III
5
criteria contained in the Comprehensive Management Plan shall be submitted to the
Pinelands Commission for review and action only after consideration and approval by the
Board of Adjustment. In regard to a "d" variance application before the Board of
Adjustment under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, the application shall not be deemed complete for
hearing by the Board of Adjustment until such time as the applicant has produced a
certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission concerning the "d" variance
application.
E. Any municipal variance approval which grants relief from the density or lot area
requirements set forth in Article IV for a residential or principal nonresidential use in the
Pinelands Village Zone shall require that Pinelands Development Credits be used for all
dwelling units or lots in excess of the permitted without the variance. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
F. To exercise the powers and duties set forth in Subsection 15-13.4.(15) with regard to
historic resources in the Pinelands Area.
§ 15-3.9. Appeals and applications.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any
decision of the Zoning Officer or Building Official in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
72. The appellant shall file three (3) copies of the notice of appeal with the Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for such appeal.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of Adjustment for
action under any of its powers without prior application to an administrative officer.
C. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings arising from the
appealed action. See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-75 for full text and exceptions.
§ 15-3.10. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may reverse, affirm or
modify the action appealed from in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-74.
§ 15-3.11. Expiration of variances.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use of
any premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been
actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by the variance or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced within one (1) year from the date of entry of the
judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the
period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the
decision of the Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to a court of competent
jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding; except, further,
Article III
6
that in the case of a variance which also involved a subdivision or site plan approval, the
variance shall extend for the full period of preliminary or final approval or any extension thereof
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 15-3.12. Powers granted by law.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an administrative officer
based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or Ordinance or
decisions upon other special questions upon which such Board is authorized to
pass by any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance in accordance with the Act.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific
piece of property or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation pursuant to Article 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law would result in
peculiar and exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property,
to grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance
from such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship.
(4) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property, the
purposes of the Act would be advanced by a deviation from the Zoning Ordinance
requirement, and the benefit of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, to grant a variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to
Article 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law; provided, however, that no variance
from those departures enumerated in Subsection A(5) of this section shall be
granted under this subsection; and provided, further, that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision,
site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has
power to review a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
(5) In particular cases and for special reasons, to grant a variance to allow departure
from regulations pursuant to Article 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law to permit:
(a) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure.
(b) An expansion of a nonconforming use.
(c) Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
pertaining solely to a conditional use.
(d) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio, as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:44D-4.
(e) An increase in the permitted density, as defined herein, except as applied
to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two-dwelling
unit buildings, which lot or lots are either isolated, undersized lots or lots
Article III
7
resulting from a minor subdivision. A variance under this subsection shall
be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five (5) members.
(f) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by ten (10) feet or ten
percent (10%) the maximum height permitted for a principal structure.
B. If an application for development requests one (1) or more variances but not a variance
for a purpose enumerated in § 15-3.12.A(5), the decision on the requested variance or
variances shall be rendered under § 15-3.12.A(3) and (4).
C. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section unless such
variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinances. In respect of any airport hazard areas delineated under the Air Safety and
Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1988, c. 260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or
other relief may be granted under the terms of this chapter permitting in the creation or
establishment of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under the standards
promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner
of Transportation. An application under this chapter may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of
time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map, but only by
an affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the Board. The
Board of Adjustment shall not exercise this power if the proposed development requires
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60(b).
E. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for a building or structure not related to a street. The Board of
Adjustment shall not exercise this power if the proposed development requires approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
which the Planning Board has power to direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60(c).
F. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
Article 6 of the Municipal Land Use Law or conditional use approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to this chapter.
G. Any municipal variance approval which grants relief from the density or lot area
requirements set forth in Article IV for a residential or principal nonresidential use in the
Pinelands Village Zone shall require that Pinelands Development Credits be used for all
Article III
8
dwelling units or lots in excess of that permitted without the variance. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
§ 15-3.13. Applicability.
Except as otherwise provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31, the provisions of Chapter 15 shall not
be applicable to the Township of Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities Authority. All
other public agencies shall be bound by the provisions of Chapter 15 except when specifically
exempted by applicable state law which supercedes this Ordinance. In such cases, the subject
public agency shall comply with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31 and shall submit an application for courtesy
review by the appropriate Board.
Article IV
1
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Districts
§15-4.1. Designation of zoning districts.
R-5A Residential Zone
R-3A Residential Zone
R-1A Residential Zone
R-400 Residential Zone
R-200 Residential Zone
R-150 Residential Zone
R-100 Residential Zone
R-75
R-75A
Residential Zone
Residential Zone
R-70 Residential Zone
R-50 Residential Zone
PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone
PRD Planned Residential Development Zone
MF Multi-Family Residential Zone
NB Neighborhood Business Zone
GB General Business Zone
HB Highway Business Zone
MC Marine Commercial Zone
LI Light Industry Zone
SC/GB Senior Citizen/General Business Zone
SB Special Business Zone
WFD Waterfront Development Zone
Pinelands Area Zones
PA
FA
Preservation Area Zone
Forest Area Zone
FAC Forest Area Cluster Zone
PV Pinelands Village Zone
§15-4.2. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of all zoning districts set forth in this chapter are shown on a map entitled
“Zoning Map, Township of Little Egg Harbor, Ocean County, New Jersey, dated November
2007,” and said map is hereby made a part of this section and is on file in the Township Clerk’s
office. [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-031]; [Amended 4/25/2002 by Ord. No.
2002-09]; [Amended 12/30/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-046]; [Amended 6/26/2003 by Ord. No.
2003-10]; [Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
§15-4.3. Zone boundaries.
A. Zone boundaries are intended to follow street, lot lines, hypothetical extensions of lot
lines, property lines, or other natural lines such as centerlines of watercourses, ditches or
Article IV
2
lagoons, unless such district or zone boundary is fixed by dimension on the Zoning Map
or by description and shall include contiguous riparian lands subsequently acquired
and/or filled and lands acquired by accretion or stream diversion by natural causes.
B. Where a zone boundary fixed by dimension on the Zoning Map approximately follows
and is not more than 20 feet from a lot line, such lot line shall be constructed to be the
zone boundary.
C. In un-subdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such
boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the map, shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing thereon.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits shall be construed
as following municipal limits.
E. Where a zoning lot is located in part in one zoning district and in part in another zoning
district, the entire lot may be used for permitted uses in the zone containing the majority
(greater than 50%) of the land area of the split zoned lot and all zoning requirements for
that zone shall apply to the entire lot. [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017];
[Amended 12/12/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-040][ [amended 2/8/2005] by Ord. No. 2005-
02]
§15-4.4. R-5A Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings units.
(2) Golf courses.
(3) Stables housing horses for private use.
(4) Federal, State, County, and municipal buildings and grounds, including fire and
first aid buildings, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other recreational uses.
(5) Private or parochial schools not operated for profit; except, however that public
and private colleges or universities shall not be permitted.
(6) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, housing no more than
six (6) persons (excluding resident staff).
(7) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence housing no more than six
(6) persons (excluding resident staff).
(8) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided they are located behind the rear building line and not in the
required side or rear yard setback for the respective zone.
(2) Farm buildings for the storage of farm animals, farm products or equipment or for
the processing of farm products, and which are located on the same premises as
the principal use or building.
Article IV
3
(3) Farm markets for the sale of produce and farm products grown or raised on the
premises.
(4) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-12.17.
(5) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(6) Off-street parking.
(7) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-
7.9.
(8) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-5.2.
(9) Sheds (garden, storage, or tool).
(10) Signs, subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-7.6.
(11) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(12) Family day care home.
(13) Home occupations subject to the provisions of 15-5.13 [Amended 12/27/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-035]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Cemeteries and mausoleums.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, housing between seven
and fifteen persons, excluding resident staff.
(4) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence housing between seven and
fifteen persons, excluding resident staff.
(5) Public utilities.
D. Signs:
(1) One lighted office announcement sign not more than 2 square feet in area.
(2) One lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed 4 square feet in
area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to off-street
parking areas.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(9) Maximum building height is 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-
019]
Article IV
4
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 3 percent.
§15-4.5. R-3A Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-5A Zone District with the exception of farm and
agricultural activities, and private and parochial schools.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-5A Zone District with the exception of farm buildings
for the storage of farm animals, farm products or equipment or for the processing
of farm products, and which are located on the same premises as the principal use
or building, as well as farm markets for the sale of produce and farm products
grown or raised on the premises. Nurseries and greenhouses are non-permitted
accessory uses within the R-3A Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Cemeteries and mausoleums.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, housing between seven
and fifteen persons, excluding resident staff.
(4) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence housing between seven and
fifteen persons, excluding resident staff.
(5) Public utilities.
(6) Communication antennas and towers.
D. Signs:
(1) One lighted office announcement sign not more than 2 square feet in area.
(2) One lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed 4 square feet in
area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to off-street
parking areas.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
Article IV
5
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 5 percent.
F. Cluster development option. An owner, developer or subdivider may elect to develop
lots for detached single-family lots which will preserve desirable open spaces,
conservation areas, floodplains and wetlands and/or provide areas and land for other
public or quasi-public active recreational or open space purposes compatible with
residential uses by permitting a reduction of lot sizes subject to the following
requirements.
(1) Required findings by the Planning Board:
(a) The proposed layout will produce economy in layout and design.
(b) The open space to be created must be suitable for public or quasi-public
passive or active recreational uses and/or valuable for the protection of the
natural environment and/or necessary for a public or quasi-public purpose.
(c) There are reasonable assurances that the improvement and maintenance of
the open space or active or passive recreational facilities can be secured by
the methods and arrangements proposed by the methods and arrangements
proposed by the developer.
(d) The proposal is consistent with the intent and purposes of the Master Plan.
(2) Minimum tract size. The minimum size of a tract or parcel of land proposed for
development under the cluster development provisions of this section shall be one
hundred (100) contiguous acres.
(3) Maximum density (gross residential density). The maximum number of
residential building lots for each cluster development shall be computed on the
basis of one (1) residential building lot per three (3) acres of gross tract areas.
Calculations resulting in a fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(4) Area, yard and setback requirements. The minimum building lot requirements for
cluster development shall be as follows:
(a) Same as permitted in the R-1A Zone.
§ 15-4.6. R-1A Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family residential dwelling units.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Federal, State, county and municipal buildings and grounds, including fire and
first aid buildings, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other recreational uses.
[Amended 6/9/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided they are located behind the rear building line and not in the
required side or rear yard setback for the respective zone.
Article IV
6
(2) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-12.17.
(3) Private residential swimming pools.
(4) Satellite dish antennas subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-5.2.
(5) Sheds, garden or tool storage units.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(7) Home occupations subject to the provisions of 15-5.13 [Amended 12/27/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-035]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(1) Same as permitted in the R-3A Zone District with the exception of cemeteries,
mausoleums, churches, and places of worship.
(2) Home professional office.
(3) [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(4) Planned retirement community in accordance with the provisions of 15-4.15,
except as provided below, provided the tract is located north of Frog Pond Road
and east of North Green Street (also known as Ocean County Route 539), and is
in compliance with the following standards:
(a) The minimum lot area for single-family detached dwellings shall e 6,500
square feet with a minimum lot width of not less than 65 feet. [Amended
6/26/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
D. Signs:
(1) One lighted office announcement sign not more than 2 square feet in area.
(2) One lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed 4 square feet in
area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to off-street
parking areas.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 20 percent.
Article IV
7
§ 15-4.7. R-400 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family residential dwelling units.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-1A Zone.
C. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Home professional office.
D. Signs:
(1) One lighted office announcement sign not more than 2 square feet in area.
(2) One lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed 4 square feet in
area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to off-street
parking areas.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 35,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 175 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 20 percent.
§ 15-4.8. R-200 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings units.
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
Article IV
8
(1) Dog pens, provided they are located behind the rear building line and not in the
required side or rear yard setback for the respective zone.
(2) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-12.17.
(3) Off-street parking.
(4) Private residential swimming pools
(5) Satellite dish antennas subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-5.2.
(6) Sheds, garden or tool storage units.
(7) Home occupations subject to the provisions of 15-5.13 [Amended 12/27/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-035]
(8) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Cluster Development in accordance with Subsection 15-4.8.F.
(3) Planned retirement community in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
15-4.15.
(4) Home professional office.
D. Signs:
(1) One (1) lighted office announcement sign not more than two square feet in area.
(2) Reserved.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 35 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 20 percent.
F. Cluster development. In accordance with the regulations of this section, an owner,
developer or subdivider may elect to develop lots for single-family detached dwellings in
a manner which will preserve desirable open spaces, conservation areas, floodplains and
wetlands and/or to provide areas and lands for other public or quasi-public purposes
compatible with residential uses by permitting a reduction of lot sizes and the application
Article IV
9
of certain other regulations hereinafter stated without increasing the number of lots in the
total areas to be developed.
(1) Required findings by Planning Board. Prior to granting approval of any cluster
(reduced-lot-size) development election, the Planning Board must find that:
(a) The proposal will produce economy in layout and design.
(b) The proposal is not inconsistent with and will not create hazards relating
to traffic patterns already established by surrounding development.
(c) Open space to be created by the proposal must be suitable for passive or
active recreation uses and/or valuable for protection of the natural
environment and/or necessary for a public or quasi-public purpose.
(d) There is reasonable assurance that the improvement and maintenance of
the open space can be secured by the methods and arrangements proposed
by the developer.
(e) The proposal is consistent with the intent and purposes of the Master Plan.
(2) General standards.
(a) All dwelling units shall be connected to public water and sewer systems.
(b) The maximum number of residential building lots shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) A cluster development shall consist of at least one or more contiguous
tracts of land containing not less than 50 acres in the R-200 Zone and 40
acres in the R-150 Zone.
(3) All open space lands shall meet the following requirements:
(a) A minimum of 30 percent of the gross area of the tract shall be restricted
to open space purposes.
(b) The minimum size of any open space parcel shall be two acres.
(c) It shall be an integral part of the development and shall be located to best
suit the purpose(s) for which it is intended.
(d) Nothing herein shall obligate the Township to accept land offered by the
developer. Every parcel offered to and accepted by the Township shall be
conveyed by deed at the time final plat approval is granted and such
acceptance is subject to any conditions the Township may impose. The
deed shall contain restrictions stating to what use(s) such land(s) shall be
restricted.
(e) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to the approval by the
governing body after review and recommendation by the approving
authority. The approving authority shall be guided by the Master Plan, the
ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan, the
accessibility and potential utility of such lands, and such existing features
may enhance or detract from the intended use of the lands. The approving
authority may request an opinion from other agencies or individuals as to
the advisability of accepting any lands to be offered.
(f) Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate
covenants and deed restrictions approved by the Planning Board which
ensures that:
[1] The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future.
Article IV
10
[2] The use of the open space areas will continue in perpetuity for the
purpose specified.
[3] Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the open
space area.
[4] All open space shall be clearly indicated on the final plat by metes
and bounds.
(g) All lands set aside for open space shall be developed with active and
passive recreational facilities to service the needs of the future resident
population. The Planning Board shall have complete and final
determination as to the adequacy, usefulness and functionalism of the
lands set aside for open spaces. Active and passive recreational facilities
shall include but not be limited to the following: ball fields, multi-purpose
fields, tennis courts, multi-purpose court areas, children’s playground
equipment, passive picnic or sitting areas, swimming pools, bicycle paths,
and jogging trails.
(h) There should be a close visual and physical relationship between open
space and as many dwelling units as is reasonably possible. Open space
areas should weave between dwelling units generally respecting a
minimum width of 50 feet and periodically widening out into significant
and usable reasonable areas.
(i) The configuration of the open space area should be so arranged that
connections can be made to existing or future adjacent open spaces.
(j) Land so dedicated for open spaces shall include, wherever feasible, nature
features such as streams, brooks, wooded areas, steep slopes and other
natural features of scenic and conservation value. The developer may be
required to plant trees or make similar landscaping improvements.
(k) Development of open space and recreational facilities shall proceed at the
same rate as development of the dwelling units. To assure compliance
with this subsection, the building inspector shall, from time to time,
following the approval of the cluster development, review building
permits and shall make an inspection of the open space and recreational
facilities to examine the work taking place on the site. If he shall
determine that open space and recreational facilities are not being
developed at the same rate as dwelling units, he shall report back to the
Township Committee, which may take such action as it may deem
appropriate, including the issuance of stop-work notices or revocation of
building permits until such time as parity in development has been
reached.
(l) The Board may require a developer to make certain site preparation
improvements to the open spaces. The Board may provide that the site
preparation improvements are made a part of the plan and are noted
therein. Same may include the following:
[1] Removal of dead trees or diseased trees.
[2] Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
Article IV
11
[3] Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes or active
recreational facilities. The Board may require the assistance of
experts to determine the foregoing.
[4] Grading and seeding.
[5] Improvement or protection of the natural drainage system by the
use of protective facilities. The Board may require the assistance
of experts to determine the foregoing.
(m) Wherever possible, all the following land areas and features shall be
preserved as open space:
[1] Wetlands and flood plain areas as defined by Little Egg Harbor
Township ordinance, State statute, regulation or Master Plan.
[2] Areas containing significant numbers of trees.
[3] Lands with sloped of more than ten percent.
[4] Lands with seasonal high water tables of less than 18 inches.
(4) Calculation of permitted number of residential building lots for cluster
developments. When selecting the cluster option in the R-200 Zone or R-150
Zone, the maximum number of residential building lots that can be developed
shall be based on the following definitions and calculations:
(a) “Net Buildable Area” shall be determined by the following calculation:
Net Buildable Area (E) = A – B – C – D, where;
A = Gross tract area in square feet.
B = Area of tract mapped as wetlands and/or wetlands transition
areas pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act.
C = Open space requirement calculated by multiplying .30 times
the result of A minus B. Note: The open space requirement
of net land area herein, 30 percent, is for the sole purpose of a
density calculation. The density formula shall not modify in
any way the 30 percent open space requirement of gross area
of a tract provided in Section 15-4.8.F.(3)(a). [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
D = Infrastructure requirements (streets, drainage improvements,
other utilities) calculated by multiplying .20 times the result
of A minus B minus C. [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-035]
E = Net Buildable Area in square feet.
(b) The maximum number of building lots to be permitted under the cluster
option shall be determined based upon the following formula (calculation
to be rounded to the closest whole number):
[1] R-150 Zone
Maximum Number = Net Buildable Area (E)
of Building Lots 8,000 square feet
[2] R-200 Zone
Maximum Number = Net Buildable Area (E)
of Building Lots 12,500 square feet
Article IV
12
(5) Area, yard and building requirements for building lots under cluster option:
(a) R-150 Zone
[1] Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
[6] Minimum combined side setback: 20 feet.
[7] Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
[8] Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 10 feet.
[9] Maximum height: 35 feet.
[10] Maximum building lot coverage: 30 percent.
(b) R-200 Zone
[1] Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
[6] Minimum combined side setback: 20 feet.
[7] Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
[8] Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 10 feet.
[9] Maximum height: 35 feet.
[10] Maximum building lot coverage: 30 percent.
§ 15-4.9. R-150 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-200 Residential Zone District.
C. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-200 Residential Zone District.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article V of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-200 Residential Zone District.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-200 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
Article IV
13
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
F. Cluster development:
(1) Permitted in accordance with requirements of Subsection 15-4.8.F.
§ 15-4.10. R-100 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-150 Residential Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-150 Residential Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Reserved.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-150 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
(11) Maximum building height for lots located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard as set
forth in §185-7: 40 feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
Article IV
14
F. Area yard and building requirements of lots which adjoin the Ocean County Atlantis Golf
Course. The golf course tract consists of the following lots: Block 285, Lot 11.01; Block
326.35, Lots 1 and 27.01; and Block 326.100, Lots 12.03, 12.05 and 64.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building* side and rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
* Private residential swimming pools, all types, shall comply with the rear yard
setback requirements.
§ 15-4.11. R-75 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-100 Residential Zone District, with the exception of
dog pens.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-100 Residential Zone District.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Reserved.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-200 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 5 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
Article IV
15
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
F. Area yard and building requirements of lots which adjoin the Ocean County Atlantis Golf
Course. The golf course tract consists of the following lots: Block 285, Lot 11.01; Block
326.35, Lots 1 and 27.01; and Block 326.100, Lots 12.03, 12.05 and 64.
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 5 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building* side and rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
* Private residential swimming pools, all types, shall comply with the rear yard
setback requirements.
§ 15-4.12. R-75A Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Reserved.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 8 feet.
Article IV
16
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 20 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
(11) Maximum building height for lots located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard as set
forth in §185-7: 40 feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
§ 15-4.13. R-70 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 70 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 5 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
(11) Maximum building height for lots located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard as set
forth in §185-7: 40 feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
§ 15-4.14. R-50 Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings units.
Article IV
17
(2) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-12.17.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Private residential swimming pools.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Subsection 15-5.2.
(5) Sheds (garden, storage, or tool).
(6) Home occupations subject to the provisions of 15-5.13. [Amended 12/27/2001
by Ord. No. 2001-035]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the R-75 Residential Zone District.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 5 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet. [Amended 8/23/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-019]
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 30 percent.
(11) Maximum building height for lots located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard as set
forth in §185-7: 40 feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
F. Exemption to the minimum lot area, lot depth and rear yard setback requirements:
[Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-043]
(1) Notwithstanding the minimum lot area, lot depth and rear yard setback
requirements set forth in Subsection E. above, the following lot area, lot depth and
rear yard setback requirements shall apply only to lagoon, or other waterfront,
detached single-family building lots shown on a final major subdivision plat
and/or minor subdivision plat filed on or before November 1, 1987:
(a) Minimum lot area: 4,350 square feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No.
2013-01]
(b) Lot depth: 87 feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
Article IV
18
(c) Rear yard setback: 20 feet; 15 feet if a bulkheaded lot.
(d) No accessory structure shall be constructed closer than 15 feet to the
bulkhead.
§ 15-4.15. PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone.
A. The Planned Retirement Community Zone hereinafter referred to as “PRC” is defined as
a community or district having one or more parcels of land with a contiguous total
acreage of at least 100 acres forming a land block to be dedicated to the use of a planned
retirement community; through its corporation, association or owners, the land shall be
restricted, by bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions of record, to use by permanent
residents in their late adult years. Ownership of the residential units and the area
comprising a PRC may be in accordance with the provisions on N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.,
or the ownership may be as is commonly refereed to as “fee simple” with open space to
be maintained through assessment against property owners within the confines of the
community.
(1) Permitted Uses:
(a) Detached single-family dwelling not part of a planned retirement
community, subject to the requirements for detached single-family
dwellings in the R-75 Zone.
(b) Detached single-family, two-family and multi-family dwelling units
(townhouses) to be part of a planned retirement community subject to the
conditions of this subsection.
(c) Attached single-family dwelling with no side yard between adjacent
dwellings, but no more than four (4) such units so attached (townhouses).
(d) Essential services.
(2) Required accessory uses:
(a) Off-street parking.
(3) Permitted accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted for the
sole use or service of the planned retirement community residents and their
guests:
(a) Recreational and cultural facilities for the sole use of the residents of the
community and their guests, including the following: clubhouse,
swimming pool, shuffleboard courts and picnic grounds. Recreational and
cultural facilities shall not be limited to the foregoing, so that the applicant
may propose additional facilities with its submission. All such facilities
shall be subordinated to the residential character of the community and no
advertising shall be permitted.
(b) Buildings and structures for the maintenance or administration of the
planned retirement community.
(4) Permitted signs:
(a) One free standing sign not to exceed 40 square feet in area for the purpose
of identifying the name of the planned retirement community. Such
identification sign shall be located near the primary access road into the
planned retirement community and may utilize flood light illumination,
Article IV
19
provided that the light is not directed onto adjoining property or into the
eyes of passing motorists.
(b) Additional non-illuminated signs not to exceed four (4) square feet in area
necessary to provide directions to specific buildings, parking areas, etc.
(5) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted for the sole
service of the PRC residents subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this
chapter:
(a) Neighborhood shopping facilities.
(b) Medical facilities.
(c) On-site public utilities excluding substations switching stations or storage
facilities of any nature.
(6) Minimum requirements:
(a) Planned retirement communities shall be limited to occupancy by persons
55 years of age or older, with the following exceptions:
[1] The husband or wife under the age of 55 whom is residing with his
or her spouse who is of the age of 55 or older.
[2] Children residing with their parent or parents, if such child (or
children), is over the age of 18 and if one of the parents with whom
the child or children is residing is 55 years of age or older.
[3] Full time occupancy shall be limited to three (3) individuals.
(b) No building, structure or land shall be used or erected, altered, enlarged, or
maintained as a planned retirement community within the Planned
Retirement Community Zone unless it is in accordance with a site
development plan reviewed and approved pursuant to the site plan review
and/or subdivision approval provisions of the ordinance.
(c) The minimum area for a planned retirement community shall be 100 acres,
provided that an area of less than 100 acres may be added to an existing
planned retirement community if contiguous thereto and in compliance
with the ordinance.
(d) The maximum residential density of a planned retirement community shall
be four (4) dwelling units per acre of residential land planned and
approved pursuant to this chapter. Same shall be calculated by dividing
the proposed number of dwelling units by the number of acres in the
development, excluding land under permanent bodies of flowing streams
of water, preexisting development of the tract and one-half of all land
within a floodplain area as defined either in this chapter or any other
ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(e) Not more than 25 percent of the gross project area shall be covered by
building or structures including accessory uses and conditional uses.
(f) The height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet and shall be limited to
two and one-half stories; provided, however, that water towers and
attendant facilities and similar structures shall have no height limit but
shall be reviewed on an individual basis.
(g) Not less than 25 percent of the entire acreage of the PRC tract shall be
used for a green area or open space. “Green area” or “open space,” for the
purpose of this subsection, is defined as those areas of the PRC tract not
Article IV
20
committed to use for residential buildings and public or private right-ofways.
There may be included in the green area those areas used for
recreational purposes.
(h) No structure or building shall contain more that four (4) dwelling units.
(i) No building or structure other than an entrance gatehouse, wall or fence,
shall be located within 50 feet of any exterior boundary.
(j) Minimum lot size.
[1] Minimum lot size for single-family detached dwellings in the PRC
shall be 6,000 square feet with a minimum width of not less than
60 feet.
[2] Attached dwellings or townhouses shall have a minimum lot size
of 1,500 square feet for each unit. The minimum width of such
townhouse units shall be 20 feet at the building setback line.
(k) Single-family dwelling setbacks. Front yards, side yards, and rear yards of
single-family dwelling buildings shall comply with the following
minimum dimensions:
[1] Front yard setbacks shall be at least 25 feet. On a corner lot all
residential buildings shall be at least 20 feet from any street upon
which the lot does not front.
[2] A side yard shall be a minimum of six (6) feet with a total of both
side yards being 16 feet on each lot. In no event, however, shall
buildings be less than 14 feet apart.
[3] Rear yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet (except the rear yard
setback of lots which have rear property lines abutting common
open space shall have a minimum of ten (10) feet).
(l) Attached dwelling setbacks. Attached dwelling units or townhouse
structures shall have the following front yard, side yard and rear yard
setbacks:
[1] Front yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
[2] Side yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
(m) Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: Efficiency unit, 800 square feet;
one-bedroom unit, 800 square feet; two-bedroom unit, 975 square feet;
three-bedroom units, 1,000 square feet.
(n) Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(o) Front, side and rear yard setbacks for non-residential accessory and
conditional use buildings and structures within the Planned Retirement
Community Zone: Minimum front yard setback, 50 feet; minimum side
yard setback, 35 feet; and minimum rear yard setback, 50 feet.
(7) Plan review shall be required by the appropriate municipal agency for all
proposed PRC development. All submissions, review procedures, development
review fees, site plan regulations, permits and approvals, design and performance
standards, zoning district regulations, and compliance shall conform to the
provisions as set forth in this chapter.
(8) Streets:
Article IV
21
(a) Streets may be either dedicated to the public use or private in nature, at the
option of the Township Committee. In any event, same shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of NJAC 5:21 (Residential
Site Improvement Standards).
(b) With the exceptions of those roads which are required to be dedicated for
public use by either the Board, the Township Committee or the County of
Ocean, or unless a previously approved Master Development Plan or final
plat dictate differently, all roads are to remain private roadways and are to
be the property and responsibility of a homeowners’ association or
analogous body for the care and maintenance of the roadways, green areas
and recreational facilities. Provisions shall be made for the permanent
maintenance of private roadways. Private roadways shall not become the
obligation of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(9) Screening strips. There shall be provided an adequate screening strip along the
exterior boundary lines of a PRC, which screening strip shall consist of fencing or
plantings or a combination of both, the adequacy of which shall be determined by
the Board.
(10) Water and sewer facilities. No individual wells or individual sewage disposal
systems shall be permitted. Each dwelling unit shall be serviced by a central
water system and waste disposal system approved by the jurisdictional utility and
all applicable bodies. The implementation and placement of these facilities shall
be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(12) Maintenance of association-owned properties. The maintenance of the green
areas, private roadways, driveways, common courtyards, recreational areas, lakes
and other improvements not intended to be individually owned shall be provided
by an association organized under the Nonprofit Corporation Statute of the State
of New Jersey (Title 15) and formed for that purpose. The applicant shall, in the
form of restrictions and covenants to be recorded, provide the title to the aforesaid
enumerated areas shall be conveyed to the association, whose members shall be
owners of lots or other interests, or to such other persons as a majority of the
members shall designate from time to time duly adopted bylaws. Said restriction
and covenants shall also provide that in the event the nonprofit association shall
cease to function through lack of participation of its members or be dissolved, the
Township of Little Egg Harbor shall have the right by special assessment to
assess the lot owners in the development or tract, annually, a sum of money which
would be sufficient to pay the taxes on the park, recreational and other areas and
for the proper upkeep, maintenance and preservation of same. Such restrictions
and covenants shall further provide that the same shall not be altered, amended,
voided or released, in whole or in part, without the written consent of the
Township Committee and except upon proper notice being given by the applicant
or any other party in interest to all owners of lots in the PRC.
(13) Recreational areas:
(a) There shall be in each PRC at least one clubhouse or community building.
There shall be at least six (6) square feet of clubhouse building space
provided for each proposed dwelling unit. The clubhouse shall be
completed and in operation before the one hundredth dwelling unit, or
Article IV
22
prior to twenty-five percent (25%), of the proposed has been completed
and a certificate of occupancy issued therefore.
(b) Each PRC shall provide a site or sites for recreational facilities for the use
of its residents. Recreational facilities shall include, but shall not be
limited to, such facilities as shuffleboard lanes, barbecue grills, picnic
benches and indoor recreation facilities. Swimming pools, not less than
2,500 square feet in size shall be required. Such additional recreational
facilities may be required by the Board, in its discretion, as will be
beneficial to the residents of the community. All grounds surrounding
recreational and administrative facilities shall be appropriately landscaped
and shall be provided with adequate walkways. Underground irrigation
shall be installed for such areas.
(c) Where a PRC is a conventional fee simple development, covenants and
restrictions and plat plans shall indicate that recreational areas and green
areas shall be dedicated to a homeowner’s association or analogous body.
(14) Procedural requirements:
(a) All subdivision plans and site plans shall be submitted to the Board in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) At such time as the applicant or developer shall submit a subdivision plan
or site plan for approval, the following shall also be submitted:
[1] Covenants and restrictions for the community or any other plan for
restriction upon the community property.
[2] Proposed master deed or deeds.
[3] By-laws of the proposed homeowners’ association.
[4] Proposed agreement of sale.
[5] Proposed form of deed.
(c) The documents shall be forwarded to the Board and shall be subject to the
review of the Planning Board and of the Township Committee as to their
adequacy in ensuring that the community shall be constituted so as to be
consistent with the purposes and requirements of this subsection. The
proposed documents and restrictions shall indicate a comprehensive and
equitable program for the orderly transition of control over the
homeowners’ association from the applicant or the developer to the actual
homeowners in the community.
(d) In addition to the foregoing, it shall be mandatory for any applicant to
provide the Board and the Township Committee with copies of all
submissions to be made to any state agency, pursuant to the Retirement
Community Full Disclosure Act, at all stages of development.
§ 15-4.16. PRD Planned Residential Development Zone.
A. The Planned Residential Development Zone, hereinafter referred to as “PRD,” is defined
as a community or district having one or more parcels of land with a contiguous total
acreage of one hundred (100) acres forming a land block to be dedicated to the use of a
multi-family and planned adult community with a minimum of ten (10%) percent of the
total units developed as adult housing. The purpose of the zone is to encourage adult
Article IV
23
housing and provide a means for the preservation of land areas in the Township.
Particularly, in those sections of the municipality zoned for conventional small lot
development. The zone offers development incentives in an effort to maximize the use of
land by permitting greater densities on developed portions of the tract and requiring the
dedication of areas of public/private open spaces, active recreation and adult housing
units. It is the intent of this provision to encourage the preservation of land areas in their
natural state, provide for active and passive open space areas in conjunction with the new
residential growth and encourage innovative design techniques in the layout and
development of new residential construction. Development shall be permitted on a fee
simple or condominium ownership basis. [Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-
26]
(1) No golf course or designated open space that provides all or any portion of the
developed or undeveloped open space or area requirement of an approved PRD
shall be subdivided or otherwise modified as to use, size or extent for additional
residential units or new commercial uses within the Planned Residential
Development. [Amended on 6/28/2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
B. Submission procedures and requirements. An applicant who elects to apply for the
development of a parcel of land under the provision of the zone shall commence the
processing of such an application by initiating the following steps:
(1) The applicant shall schedule and attend a Pre-Application Conference with the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal
Resources in accordance with the Coastal Resource and Development Policies
(CAFRA) to ascertain and delineate the buildable area of the tract. Those
portions of the tract determined by CAFRA to be not suitable for development
and which are outside any regulated wetlands may be counted towards the
required minimum contiguous acreage but shall not comprise any of the required
minimum buildable acreage.
(2) After an applicant has concluded the CAFRA Pre-Application Conference and
provided the parcel of land can meet all of the minimum standards specified in
paragraphs A. (1), (2) and (3) above, a “concept plan” shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for consideration and review.
C. Permitted uses: [Amended on 6/28/2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
(2) Detached single-family, two-family and multi-family dwelling units (townhouses)
to be part of a planned adult community subject to the conditions of this
subsection.
(3) Federal, State, County, and municipal buildings and grounds, including schools,
parks and playgrounds, but not garages, warehouses and storage and maintenance
yards.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Golf courses.
Article IV
24
D. Required accessory uses:
(1) Private swimming pools.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to the
principal use and building.
E. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private swimming pools.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to the
principal use and building.
F. Other permitted accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted for the
sole use or service of the planned adult community residents and their guests:
(1) Recreational and cultural facilities for the sole use of the residents of the
community and their guests including the following: clubhouse, swimming pool,
shuffleboard courts and picnic grounds. Recreational and cultural facilities shall
not be limited to the foregoing, so that the applicant may propose additional
facilities with its submission. All such facilities shall be subordinated to the
residential character of the community and no advertising shall be permitted.
Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the applicant from dedicating land and
facility to Township ownership for use and enjoyment of all Township residents.
(2) Non-commercial amusement facilities.
(3) Buildings and structures for the maintenance or administration of the planned
retirement community.
G. Permitted signs:
(1) Two (2) free-standing signs located at the primary entrance to a development not
to exceed 32 square feet in area for the purpose of advertising the name of the
development. Flood lighting may illuminate such sign provided that the light is
not directed onto adjoining property or into the eyes of passing motorists.
(2) One (1) lighted professional office announcement sign not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area.
(3) One (1) lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or approved conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed four (4)
square feet in area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to
off-street parking areas.
H. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Churches and places of worship.
(2) Quasi-public utilities excluding substations, switching stations or storage facilities
of any nature.
Article IV
25
I. Other conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted for the service
of the PRD residents:
(1) Neighborhood shopping facilities.
(2) Medical facilities.
(3) On-site public utilities excluding substations, switching stations or storage
facilities of any nature.
J. Common open space. Every tract of land developed under the Planned Residential
Development Zone shall include common open space land in accordance with the
following:
(1) Land used or deeded to public agencies for roads, streets, or utilities, including
utility easements, shall not be defined as common open space. However, bodies
of water located within the tract may be counted as common open space.
(2) All lands set aside for open space shall be developed with active and passive
recreational facilities to service the needs of the future resident population.
(3) There should be a close visual and physical relationship between open space and
as many dwelling units as is reasonably possible. Open space areas should weave
between dwelling units generally respecting a minimum width of ten feet and
periodically widening out into significant and usable recreation areas.
(4) It shall be an integral part of the development and shall be located to best suit the
purpose(s) for which it is intended.
(5) Every parcel offered to and accepted by the Township shall be clearly indicated
on the final plat by metes and bounds and conveyed by deed at the time final plat
approval is granted and such acceptance is subject to any conditions the Township
may impose. Said deeds shall contain restrictions stating what use(s) such land(s)
shall be restricted.
(6) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to approval by the governing
body after review and recommendation by the approving Land Use Board. The
approving authority shall be guided by the Master Plan, the ability to assemble
and relate such lands to an overall plan, the accessibility and potential utility of
such lands, and such existing features that may enhance or detract from the
intended use of the lands. The approving authority may request an opinion from
other agencies or individuals as to the advisability of accepting any lands to be
offered.
(7) No land designated for open space or part of a golf course approved as part of a
Planned Residential Development shall be further subdivided or otherwise
modified as to use, size or extent for additional residential units or new
commercial uses within the PRD or a new PRD. [Amended on 6/28/2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08]
K. Common open space: standards for determination. All common open space shall be
either Undeveloped Open Space (UOS) or Developed Open Space (DOS).
Article IV
26
(1) UOS shall generally be left in its natural state. To qualify as UOS, the land shall
include, wherever feasible, natural features such as streams, brooks, wooded
areas, steep slopes and other natural features of scenic and conservation value.
The developer may be required to plant trees or make other similar landscaping
improvements when the natural cover is inadequate.
(2) There shall be no development of any kind of UOS land, except the following:
footpath, jogging trail, bicycle path, nature walk, nature preserve, ecological
areas, buffer, body of water, trees, shrubs and other plants, lighting, and retaining
walls and other features necessary to protect the land or people who will use the
land.
(a) Minimum percentage required. At least 12.0 percent of the gross project
area shall consist of undeveloped open space.
(b) Developed open space; standards for determination. DOS is intended to
serve the active and passive recreation needs of the residents of the
community. DOS differs from UOS in that the former requires regular
maintenance for the upkeep of equipment and/or vegetation. In no case
shall any part of the DOS be of such size and shape as to be unsuited for
the intended use. DOS shall be included in the buildable project area.
(3) All lands set aside for DOS shall be developed with active and passive
recreational facilities to service the needs of the future resident population. The
following are permitted use(s) of DOS land:
(a) Sitting areas, footpaths, jogging trails, nature walks, playfields, game
courts, playgrounds, tot lots, swimming pools, bath houses, beach areas,
community centers, garden plots for use of residents.
(b) To encourage the retention or creation of ponds and lakes for aesthetic
and/or recreational purposes, 20 percent of the area of any ponds or lakes
included in the buildable project area may be counted upon request of the
applicant, as DOS.
(4) Minimum percentage required. At least 3.0 percent of the buildable project area
shall consist of developed open space consistent with the following:
(a) Required playground space: Children’s playground with a total area of at
least 100 square feet times the number of dwelling units in the project
shall be constructed and considered as part of DOS. Outdoor play
equipment such as swings, slides, jungle gyms, etc., shall be installed in
these playgrounds in sufficient amount and variety to service the resident
children. Baseball, football and soccer fields shall not be considered as
playground space for the purpose of this paragraph.
(b) Recreation for the elderly: Where dwelling units are designed for and are
to be occupied exclusively by elderly persons, a proportion of the
playground space required herein may be equipped with outdoor
recreation equipment suitable for elderly persons.
(c) Location of recreation space: All recreation space to be provided in
accordance with the above shall be located within convenient walking
distance of the residence it is intended to serve.
(d) Installation, timing and development of recreation space: No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling until 100 square feet of
Article IV
27
recreation space attributable to that dwelling unit has been completed and
restricted be deed. Additionally, DOS and recreational facilities shall
proceed at the same rate as development of the dwelling units. To assure
compliance with this section, the Construction Official shall, from time to
time, following the approval of the development, review building permits
and shall make an inspection of open space and recreational facilities to
examine the work taking place on the site. If the Construction Official
shall determine that open space and recreational facilities are not being
developed at the same rate as dwelling units, they shall report back to the
Township Committee, which may take such action as it may deem
appropriate, including the issuance of stop-work notices or revocation of
building permits until such time as parity in development has been
reached.
L. General UOS and DOS development standards and criteria:
(1) The Board may require a developer to make certain site preparation
improvements part of the plan and are noted therein. Same may include the
following:
(a) Removal of dead trees or diseased trees.
(b) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable growth.
(c) Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes or active recreational
facilities. The Board may require the assistance of experts to determine
the foregoing.
(d) Grading and seeding.
(e) Improvements or protection of the natural drainage system by the use of
protective structures, stabilization measures and similar improvements.
(2) Wherever possible, all of the following land areas and features shall be preserved
as open space:
(a) Wetlands and floodplain areas as defined by Little Egg Harbor Township
Ordinance, State statute, regulation or Master Plan.
(b) Areas containing significant number of trees.
(c) Lands with slopes of more than ten percent.
(d) Lands with seasonal high water tables of less that 18 inches.
(3) The configuration of the open space areas shall be so arranged that connections
can be made to existing or future adjacent open spaces.
M. Density calculations:
(1) The maximum permitted gross residential density of a PRD shall be four (4)
dwelling units per acre.
(2) The maximum permitted net residential density of a PRD shall be six (6) dwelling
units per acre.
N. Townhouse general standards:
(1) Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5
stories.
(2) Area and yard requirements:
Article IV
28
(a) The minimum townhouse area to be dedicated for use shall be ten acres
including the areas of existing streets and water areas within the tract
boundary lines. All plans shall delineate the boundaries of the portion(s)
of the tract devoted to each use.
The minimum tract building setbacks for townhouses shall be as follows:
Front 75 feet
Side 30 feet
Rear 30 feet
(b) Minimum building yard areas for townhouses shall be measured
horizontally in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side and
rear of each building. The total minimum distance between buildings shall
be the sum of the two (2) abutting yard areas. The minimum yards shall
be 40 feet for front yards, 25 feet for side yards and 50 feet for rear yards.
No building as measured radially from any corners shall be closer to any
other building corner than the combined distances of the side yard
requirements for each building. The combined distance of two (2) side
yards shall exclude any driveway or vehicular access, such driveways or
vehicular access width being in addition to the combined side yard width.
No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the future right-of-way
line of any existing public street.
(3) No townhouse structure shall be more than four (4) dwelling units in any
unbroken building line. A setback of not less than four (4) feet shall be deemed a
satisfactory break in the building line.
(4) All residential buildings shall be designed and constructed with a soundproofing
barrier between adjoining units with a sound transmission class 50 as tested by the
American Society for Testing and Materials, E-90. Floor plans of a typical unit
shall be required. Any room other than kitchen, bathroom, closet, or combined
living/dining room shall be counted as a bedroom for purposes hereof.
(5) Land area equal to at least 150 square feet for each dwelling unit shall be
specified on the site plan and improved by the developer as active recreation areas
for use by the residents of the development, such areas shall be an integral part of
the development, and each shall be at least 10,000 square feet in size, at least 75
feet wide, and have a grade less than five percent.
(6) All portions of the tract not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be
landscaped utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn
area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing foliage, and the planting of
conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either maintain or
reestablish the tone of the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact of
the structures and paved areas. The established grades on any site shall be
planned for both aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage
facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting, as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage system is
deficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from the site and
contributing upstream areas.
Article IV
29
(7) Gross floor area minimums:
(a) Townhouses.
(b) One-bedroom unit, 800 square feet.
(c) Two-bedroom unit, 900 square feet.
(d) Three- bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet.
(8) Plan review shall be required by the appropriate municipal agency on townhouses.
All submissions, review procedures, development review fee, site plan
regulations, permits and approvals, design and performance standards, zoning
district regulations, and compliance shall conform to the provisions as set forth in
this chapter.
(9) A homeowners’ association may be permitted in townhouse developments in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection 15-11.15. of this chapter.
O. Townhouses.
(1) Within the PRD district allowing townhouses, no townhouse development shall
take place unless the following minimum standards are met, in addition to the
other requirements of this chapter:
(a) Each dwelling unit and combined complex of dwelling units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development, which shall include consideration of
landscaping techniques, building orientation to the site and to other
structures, topography, natural features and individual dwelling unit
design such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches,
colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in
combination for each dwelling unit.
(b) All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning public
water and sanitary systems prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(c) All parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located
within 150 feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to
serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed specifically for
parking, and there shall be no parking along interior streets. The total area
devoted to parking shall not exceed 20 percent of the tract, and the total
aggregate area devoted to both parking and interior streets shall not exceed
35 percent of the tract.
(d) No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than 20 feet wide. Building
coverage shall not exceed 20 percent of the tract area. Number of
dwelling units in one (1) building shall not exceed eight (8).
(e) No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of laundry
or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Sufficient area and
equipment shall be made available within each dwelling unit for the
laundering and artificial drying of laundry of occupants of each dwelling
unit.
Article IV
30
(f) All streets, both internal and external, (including grading and paving),
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street lighting, shade
trees, water mains, water systems, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
pumping stations, drainage structures and such other improvements as
may be found to be necessary in the public interest (including recreational
facilities) shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer before a certificate
of occupancy may be issues. In lieu of total completion of landscaping
improvements only, and adequate performance bond properly
guaranteeing the completion may be accepted. Such bond value will be
set at the time of posting and will be held by the Clerk of Little Egg
Harbor after approval by the Township Attorney as to form and surety, for
a period of no more than one (1) year, during which time the landscaping
improvements shall be completed, or the bond will be forfeited. This
section shall not be construed as relieving the developer of the
performance bond requirements in accordance with this chapter.
P. Attached single-family general standards (within Planned Residential Development
District).
(1) Attached patio homes or twin units built on a zero lot line concept shall be
permitted provided there are no more than two (2) dwelling units per structure and
the following minimum requirements are met:
(a) Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 65 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 0 feet.
(f) Minimum combined side yards: 15 feet.
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(h) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(i) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(j) Maximum percent building lot coverage: 30 percent.
Q. Detached single-family general standards.
(1) Within the planned residential development. Single-family detached units shall
be built in accordance with and in compliance with the area, yard, and bulk
requirements of R-50 Residential Zone as specified in Subsection 15-4.14, except
that the minimum lot area shall be 6,500 square feet, the minimum lot width shall
be 65 feet and the minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet.
R. Minimum requirements of planned adult community within the PRD:
(1) Planned retirement communities shall be limited to occupancy by persons 55
years of age or older, with the following exceptions:
Article IV
31
(a) The husband or wife under the age of 55 who is residing with his or her
spouse who is of the age of 55 years or older.
(b) Children residing with their parent or parents, if such a child (or children)
is over the age of 18 and if one of the parents with whom the child or
children is residing is 55 years of age or older.
(c) Full time occupancy shall be limited to three (3) individuals.
(2) No building, structure or land shall be used or erected, altered, enlarged, or
maintained as a planned retirement community within the Planned Retirement
Community Zone unless it is in accordance with a site development plan reviewed
and approved pursuant to the site plan review and/or subdivision approval
provisions of the section.
(3) The minimum area of land within the development to be dedicated to the planned
residential development shall be 30 acres.
(4) The maximum permitted net residential density of a planned retirement
community shall be six (6) dwelling units per acre of residential land planned and
approved pursuant to this chapter. Same shall be calculated by dividing the
proposed number of dwelling units by the number of acres in the development,
excluding land under permanent bodies of flowing streams of water, pre-existing
development of tract and one-half of all land within a floodplain area as defined
either in this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(5) Not more than 25 percent of the gross project area shall be covered by buildings
or structures, including accessory uses and conditional uses.
(6) The height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet and shall be limited to two and
one-half stories; provided, however, that water towers and attendant facilities and
similar structures shall have no height limit but shall be reviewed on an individual
basis.
(7) Not less than 15 percent of the entire acreage of the PRD tract shall be used for a
green area or open space. “Green area” or “open space,” for the purpose of this
subsection, is defined as those areas of the PRD tract not committed to use for
residential buildings and public or private rights-of-way. There may be included
in the green area those areas used for recreational purposes.
(8) No structure or building shall contain more than four (4) dwelling units.
(9) No building or structure other than an entrance gatehouse, wall or fence, shall be
located within 50 feet of any exterior boundary.
(10) Minimum lot size:
(a) Minimum lot size for single-family detached dwellings in the PRD shall
be 6,500 square feet with a minimum width of not less than 65 feet.
(b) Attached dwellings or townhouses shall have a minimum lot size of 1,500
square feet for each unit. The minimum width of such townhouse units
shall be 20 feet at the building setback line.
(11) Single-family dwelling setbacks. Front yards, side yards, and rear yards of singlefamily
dwelling buildings shall comply with the following minimum dimensions:
(a) Front yard setbacks shall be at least 25 feet. On a corner lot, all residential
buildings shall be at least 20 feet from any street upon which the lot does
not front.
Article IV
32
(b) A side yard shall be a minimum of six (6) feet with a total of both side
yards being 16 feet on each lot. In no event, however, shall buildings be
less than 14 feet apart.
(c) Rear yard setbacks shall be at least 25 feet.
(12) Attached dwelling setbacks. Attached dwelling units or townhouse structures
shall have the following front yard, side yard, and rear yard setbacks:
(a) Front yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
(b) Side yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
(c) Rear yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.
(13) Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: Efficiency unit, 675 square feet; onebedroom
unit, 800 square feet; two-bedroom unit, 975 square feet; three-bedroom
unit, 1,000 square feet.
(15) Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(16) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks for nonresidential accessory and conditional
use buildings and structures within the Planned Retirement Community Zone:
minimum front yard setback, 50 feet; minimum side yard setback, 35 feet; and
minimum rear yard setback, 50 feet.
(16) All planned adult communities shall provide recreational facilities and/or
community amenities for the exclusive use of its residents and their guests.
Such recreational facilities and/or community amenities shall include as a
minimum the following:
(a) A clubhouse or indoor recreation/multi-purpose facility with a minimum
floor area of five (5) square feet per dwelling unit within the planned adult
community, with a minimum size of fifteen hundred (1500) square feet.
(b) Outdoor active recreational facilities that may include, but shall not be
limited to, tennis courts, swimming pools, bocce courts and walking trails. Such
active recreation shall be provided at a minimum of ten (10) square feet per
dwelling unit in the planned adult community. [Amended on 6/28/2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08]
S. Streets.
(1) Streets may be either dedicated to the public use or private in nature, at the option
of the Township Committee or Planning Board. In any event, same shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
T. Screening strips. There shall be provided an adequate screening strip along the exterior
boundary lines of a PRD. This screening strip shall consist of fencing or plantings or a
combination of both, the adequacy of which shall be determined by the Board.
U. Water and sewer facilities. No individual wells or individual sewerage disposal systems
shall be permitted. Each dwelling unit shall be serviced by a central water system and
waste disposal system approved by the jurisdictional utility and all applicable bodies.
Article IV
33
The implementation and placement of these facilities shall be subject to the requirements
of this chapter.
V. Maintenance of association owned properties. The maintenance of the green areas,
private roads, driveways, common courtyards, recreational areas, lakes and other
improvements not intended to be individually owned shall be provided by an association
organized under the Nonprofit Corporation Statute of the State of New Jersey (Title 15)
and formed for that purpose. The applicant shall, in the form of restrictions and
covenants to be recorded, provide that title to the aforesaid enumerated areas shall be
conveyed to the association, whose members shall be owners of lots or other interests, or
to such other persons as a majority of the members shall designate from time to time duly
adopted by-laws. Said restrictions and covenants shall also provide that in the event the
nonprofit association shall cease to function through lack of participation of its members
or be dissolved, the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall have the right by special
assessment to assess the lot owners in the development or tract, annually, a sum of money
which would be sufficient to pay the taxes on the park, recreational and other areas and
for the proper upkeep, maintenance and preservation of same. Such restrictions and
covenants shall further provide that the same shall not be altered, amended, voided or
released, in whole or in part, without the written consent of the Township Committee and
except upon proper notice being given by the applicant or any other party in interest to all
owners of lots in the PRD.
W. Procedural requirements.
(1) All subdivision plans and site plans shall be submitted to the Board in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) At such time as the applicant or developer shall submit a subdivision plan or site
plan for approval, the following shall also be submitted:
(a) Covenants and restrictions for the community or any other plan for
restriction upon the community property.
(b) Proposed master deed or deeds.
(c) By-laws of the proposed homeowners’ association.
(d) Proposed agreement of sale.
(e) Proposed form of deed.
(3) The documents shall be forwarded to the Board and shall be subject to the review
of the Planning Board and of the Township Committee as to their adequacy in
ensuring that the community shall be constituted so as to be consistent with the
purposes and requirements of this subsection. The proposed documents and
restrictions shall indicate a comprehensive and equitable program for the orderly
transition of control over the homeowners’ association from the applicant or the
developer to the actual homeowners in the community.
(4) In addition to the foregoing, it shall be mandatory for any applicant to provide the
Board and the Township Committee with copies of all submissions to be made to
any state agency, pursuant to the Retirement Community Full Disclosure Act, at
all stages of development.
Article IV
34
X. General standards and supplementary requirements:
(1) Building lot standards. Whenever possible, buildings shall front on cul-de-sacs,
loop street or P-loops. Only rear lot lines of proposed building lots shall abut rear
or side lot lines of the tract of land proposed for development.
(2) Utilities. All utilities shall be underground, and water and sewerage facilities
shall be centralized, with no individual wells, septic tanks or cesspools permitted.
(3) All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning public water
and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Streets shall be public or private at the desecration of the Township Committee
and Planning Board. All streets shall comply with the minimum design and
construction standards specified in NJAC 5:21 (Residential Site Improvement
Standards).
(5) There shall be no parking along any private streets in the development and “NO
PARKING” signs shall be posted at the applicant’s expense.
(6) All streets, both internal and external (including grading and paving), driveways,
parking areas, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street lighting, shade trees, water mains,
water systems, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, pumping stations, drainage
structures and such other improvements as may be found to be necessary in the
public interest (including recreational facilities), shall be installed at the expense
of the developer and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. In lieu of total
completion of improvements, an adequate performance bond properly
guaranteeing the completion may be accepted. Such bond value will be set at the
time of posting and will be held by the Clerk of Little Egg Harbor for a period of
no more than one (1) year, during which time said improvements shall be
completed, or the bond will be forfeited. This section shall not be construed as
relieving the developer of the performance bond requirements in accordance with
this section.
(7) Buffers. Along all boundary lines of the PRD a 50 foot buffer shall be required.
Where said buffer in wooded, it shall be left in its natural state, but if and where
there is insufficient vegetative growth to provide an adequate screening said
buffer shall be planted in accordance with Subsection 15-11.7. of this chapter.
Between any differing uses or activities within a project the requirements for
screening, planting, buffering or any other protective or transitional features shall
be no less that required under normal zoning provisions for any similar use or
adjoining use.
Where attached single-family residential development in a project adjoins
detached single-family residential homes without an intervening major street or
permanent open space at least 50 feet in width, the portion of the perimeter of the
development so adjoining shall provide for a 50 foot planted buffer. If said buffer
is presently wooded, it shall remain in its natural state.
Article IV
35
(8) Unless specified differently herein, all development under the Planned Residential
Development Zone shall comply with the minimum standards of Subsection 15-
4.16. of this chapter.
(9) Parking. Parking to be provided in accordance with NJAC 5:21 (Residential Site
Improvement Standards) and this chapter.
(10) Sidewalks. Sidewalks to be provided in accordance with NJAC 5:21 (Residential
Site Improvement Standards) and this chapter.
(11) Improvements. Improvements shall comply with the requirements of Subsections
15-12., 15-14. and 15-17. of this chapter.
(12) Inspection requirements shall be specified in Subsection 15-17.4. of this chapter.
(13) Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees, releases, inspection fees, and
maintenance guarantees shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 15-17.
of this chapter.
(14) Homeowners’ association. A homeowners’ association shall be established in
accordance and compliance with Subsection 15-11.15. of this chapter. The
maintenance of association owned property shall comply with Subsection 15-
11.15. of this chapter.
(15) Submission procedures and application fees. All subdivision or site plan
applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted
under the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted in accordance with the
rules, regulations, standards and plat details requirements for tentative
(preliminary) and final major subdivision approval as set forth in Article XV of
this chapter. The application fees for final approval shall be in conformance with
the present fee schedule.
(16) Final Approval. In the case of a condominium development where lots are not
sold on a fee simple basis, the developer shall file a final plat in accordance with
the Map Filing Law showing a metes and bounds description of the perimeter of
the tract and any and all lands, roads, easements, etc., dedication to the Township
of Little Egg Harbor or the homeowners’ association established under the
provisions of this chapter.
Y. Abandonment. In the event that a plan or a section thereof is given final approval and
thereafter the applicant shall abandon that plan or the section thereof that has been fully
approved, the applicant shall so notify the Planning Board in writing. In the event the
applicant shall fail to commence the development within 18 months, the time period is
extended by the Planning Board upon written application of the applicant.
If, at any time following the commencement of a development, the applicant has done no
work, or filed no application for the next scheduled stage, for a period exceeding 18
months, the Planning Board may schedule a meeting with the applicant, and at any time
after the date of that meeting, may terminate the final approval.
Z. Required findings by the Planning Board. Prior to the granting of tentative approval
under the provisions of the Planned Residential Development Zone, the Planning Board
must find that:
Article IV
36
(1) Sanitary sewer collection and treatment facilities are available to and are to be
provided to the proposed development.
(2) The proposal will produce economy in layout and design.
(3) The proposal is not inconsistent with and will not create hazards relating to traffic
patterns already established by surrounding development.
(4) Open space to be created by the proposal must be suitable for passive and active
recreation uses and/or valuable for the protection of the natural environmental and
necessary for a public or quasi-public purpose.
(5) There is reasonable assurance that the improvements and maintenance of the open
space can be secured by the methods and arrangements proposed by the
developer.
(6) The proposal is consistent with the intent and purposes of the Master Plan.
(7) The densities will not exceed the provisions of this chapter.
(8) There is an equal relationship between the development of dwelling units and
UOS and DOS such that should one or more sections of the project not be built,
each section will independently meet the open space and density requirements of
this chapter.
AA. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
“BUILDABLE AREA” shall mean the portion or portions of the gross site area,
exclusive of any and all wetlands and other regulated non-developable lands, upon which
all building will take place and upon which the developed density shall be calculated.
The buildable area shall be expressed in acres and fractions thereof.
“DEVELOPED DENSITY” shall mean the total number of dwelling units that can be
constructed or will be constructed on the buildable area and expressed in terms of
dwelling units per buildable area for the Planned Residential Development Zone.
“GROSS SITE AREA” shall mean the total area of a lot(s), parcel(s) or tract of land,
expressed in acres and fractions thereof, exclusive of any and all wetlands which are a
part of the property in question.
“MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PERMITTED” shall mean the total
number of dwelling units that can be constructed on the buildable area which is obtained
by multiplying the gross site area by the specified number of dwelling units per acre for
the Planned Residential Development Zone.
“TOTAL TRACT ACRES” shall mean the total area, expressed in acres and fractions
thereof, of a parcel or parcels of land which is the subject of an application submitted
under the provisions of the land preservation development options wetlands shall be
expressed in acres and fractions thereof.
Article IV
37
§ 15-4.17. MF Multi-Family Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Townhouses.
(2) Detached single-family dwellings.
(3) Federal, State, County and municipal buildings and grounds including schools,
parks and playgrounds, but not garages, warehouses and storage and maintenance
yards.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Senior citizen housing.
B. Required accessory uses:
(1) Off-street parking.
C. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private swimming pools.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to the
principal use and building.
D. Permitted signs:
(1) One (1) free standing sign located at the primary entrance to a development not to
exceed 32 square feet in area for the purpose of advertising the name of the
development. Such sign may be illuminated by flood lighting provided that the
light is not directed onto adjacent property or into the eyes of passing motorists.
(2) One (1) lighted professional office announcement sign not more than two (2)
square feet in area.
(3) One (1) lighted home occupation announcement sign not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area.
(4) One (1) lighted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area for each access drive to a
permitted or approved conditional use, plus additional signs not to exceed four (4)
square feet in area to provide direction to a specific building or buildings and to
off-street parking areas.
E. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Section 15-5.of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Churches and places of worship.
(2) Quasi-public and private club recreational areas.
(3) On-site public utilities, excluding substations, switching stations, or storage
facilities of any nature.
F. Townhouse general standards:
Article IV
38
(1) Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5
stories.
(2) Area and yard requirements:
(a) Detached single-family dwellings shall be constructed in accordance with
the bulk, area, and yard requirements of the R-75 District and all other
applicable rules, regulations and standards of the zone.
(b) The minimum tract size shall be 5 acres including the areas of existing
streets and water areas within the tract boundary lines provided they total
no more than two (2) percent of the tract area. All plans shall delineate the
boundaries of the portion(s) of the tract devoted to each use.
(c) Minimum building yard areas for townhouses shall be measured
horizontally in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side and
rear of each building. The total minimum distance between buildings shall
be the sum of the two (2) abutting yard areas. The minimum yards shall
be 40 feet for front yards, 25 feet for side yards and 50 feet for rear yards.
No building as measured radially from any corners shall be closer to any
other building corner than the combined distances of the side yard
requirements for each building. The combined distance of two (2) side
yards shall exclude any driveway or vehicular access, such driveway or
vehicular access width being in addition to the combined side yard width.
No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the future right-of-way
line of any existing public street.
(d) No townhouse structure shall be more than four (4) dwelling units in any
unbroken building line. A setback of not less than four (4) feet shall be
deemed a satisfactory break in the building line.
(e) All residential buildings shall be designed and constructed with a
soundproofing barrier between adjoining units with a sound transmission
class 50 as tested by the American Society for Testing and Materials, E-
90. Floor plans of typical unit shall be required. Any room other than
kitchen, bathroom, closet or combined living-dining room shall be counted
as a bedroom for purposes hereof.
(f) Land area equal to at least 250 square feet for each dwelling unit shall be
specified on the site plan and improved by the developer as active
recreation areas for use by the residents of the development. Such areas
shall be an integral part of the development, and each shall be at least
10,000 square feet in size, at least 75 feet wide and have a grade less than
five (5) percent.
(g) All portions of the tract not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be
landscaped utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing, shrubbery,
lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing foliage, and
the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order
to either maintain or re-establish the tone of the vegetation in the areas and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The established
grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic and drainage
purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping shall be
coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as well as assuring that the
Article IV
39
capacity of any natural or manmade drainage system is sufficient to handle
the water generated and anticipated both from the site and contributing
upstream areas.
(3) Gross floor area minimums:
(a) Townhouses.
[1] One-bedroom unit, 800 square feet required.
[2] Two-bedroom unit, 900 square feet required.
[3] Three-bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet required.
(4) Density:
(a) Townhouses shall not exceed a density of eight (8) units per acre.
(5) Plan review shall be required by the appropriate municipal agency. All
submissions, review procedures, development review fees, site plan regulations,
permits and approvals, design and performance standards, zoning district
regulations, and compliance shall conform to the provisions as set forth in this
chapter.
(6) A homeowners’ association may be permitted in accordance with the provisions
of Section 15-11.15. of this chapter.
G. Townhouses:
(1) Within the MF District allowing townhouses, no townhouse development shall
take place unless the following minimum standards are met in addition to the
other requirements of this chapter:
(a) Each dwelling unit and combined complex of dwelling units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development which shall include consideration of
landscaping techniques, building orientation to the site and to other
structures, topography, natural features and individual dwelling unit
design such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches,
colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in
combination for each dwelling unit.
(b) All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning public
water and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(c) All parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located
within 150 feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to
serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed specifically for
parking, and there shall be no parking along interior streets. The total area
devoted to parking shall not exceed 20 percent of the tract, and the total
aggregate area devoted to both parking and interior streets shall not exceed
35 percent of the tract.
(d) No townhouse dwelling shall be less than 20 feet wide. Building coverage
shall not exceed 20 percent of the tract area. Number of dwelling units in
one (1) building shall not exceed eight (8).
Article IV
40
(e) No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of laundry
or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Sufficient area and
equipment shall be made available within each dwelling unit of the
laundering and artificial drying of laundry of occupants of each dwelling
unit.
(f) All streets, both internal and external (including grading and paving),
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street lighting, shade
trees, water mains, water systems, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
pumping stations, drainage structures and such other improvements as
may be found to be necessary in the public interest (including recreational
facilities) shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer before a certificate
of occupancy may be issued. In lieu of total completion of landscaping
improvements, only an adequate performance bond properly guaranteeing
the completion may be accepted. Such bond value will be set at the time
of posting and will be held by the Clerk of Little Egg Harbor Township
after approval by the Township Attorney as to the form and surety, for a
period of no more than one (1) year, during which time the landscaping
improvements shall be completed, or the bond will be forfeited. This
subsection shall not be construed as relieving the developer of the
performance bond requirements in accordance with this chapter.
H. Senior citizen housing:
(1) Within the MF District, as a planned unit development on parcels containing a
minimum of 50 acres, senior citizen residences in the form of single-family
detached dwelling are permitted. Such housing shall be restricted to principal
occupants of age 55 years or older, with the following exceptions: the husband or
wife under the age of 55 who is residing with his or her spouse who is the ago of
55 years or older; children residing with their parent or parents, if such child (or
children) is over the age of 18 and if one of the parents with whom the child or
children is residing is 55 years of age or older; and, full-time occupancy shall be
limited to three (3) individuals. In addition, senior citizen assisted-living facilities
shall be permitted to a maximum number of 100 beds per facility. Assisted-living
facilities shall also be restricted to principal occupants aged 55 years or older.
(2) Single-family detached housing shall comply with the following bulk area and
yard requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet required.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet required.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet required.
(d) Minimum front yard: 20 feet required.
(e) Minimum side yard: 5 feet required.
(f) Minimum combined side yards: 15 feet required.
(g) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet required.
(3) Assisted-living housing shall be designed in accordance with the following
standards:
Article IV
41
(a) Structures for assisted-living units shall be located a minimum of 25 feet
from tract boundaries, including existing and proposed public right-of
ways.
(b) All parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located
within 150 feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to
service.
(c) Parking shall be provided at a minimum rate of 0.5 space per unit.
(d) A landscaped buffer of at least 25 feet shall be provided between assistedliving
buildings and adjoining single-family residential limits.
§ 15-4.18. NB Neighborhood Business Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Antique shop.
(2) Appliance store.
(3) Art/Graphic/Photo supply store.
(4) Artist/Photo store.
(5) Bakery.
(6) Bank and financial institution.
(7) Barbershop or beauty/hair salon.
(8) Bookstore.
(9) Business office.
(10) Candy store.
(11) Clothing/Dry goods store.
(12) Convenience store.
(13) Gift store.
(14) News/Magazine store.
(15) Produce market.
(16) Ice cream parlor.
(17) Delicatessen.
(18) Dry cleaners.
(19) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and uses as are
deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Committee.
(20) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5.2.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of Section 15-7.6.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
Article IV
42
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Childcare centers, nursery schools and day care centers.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Public utilities.
D. Signs:
(1) One (1) free standing sign located at the primary entrance to a development not to
exceed 32 square feet in area for the purpose of advertising the name of the
development. Such sign may be illuminated by flood lighting, provided that the
light is not directed onto adjoining properties or into the eyes of passing motorists.
(2) One (1) sign shall be permitted for each permitted use and may be an illuminated,
business sign, providing that the total area of any sign should not exceed 150
square feet. Such signs shall be displayed so as not to project more than 12 inches
from the surface of the building or beyond the ends of the building.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
[1] The front yard setback may be decreased to the existing prevailing setback
of adjoining buildings on the same street and within the same block, but in
any event shall not be less than 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 40 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
§ 15-4.19. GB General Business Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows: [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]; [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017];
[Amended 8/8/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]; [Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-
043]; [Amended 6/9/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
(1) All principal uses permitted in the NB Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Art, dance, gymnastics, music, or other similar instructional school.
(3) Auto parts store, excluding, however, auto repair shops and installation services.
(4) Bar/Cocktail lounge/nightclub.
(5) Bicycle sale, repair or rental establishment.
(6) Bowling alley.
Article IV
43
(7) Commercial office.
(8) Building materials retail sales establishment.
(9) Commercial retail use.
(10) Contractor’s office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop; provided, however,
that all materials and equipment are stored within a completely enclosed building.
(11) Department store.
(12) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal buildings and uses as are
deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Committee.
(13) Federal, State, County, and other public buildings and grounds; including, public
schools, parks, playgrounds or other recreational uses and areas. [Amended
6/9/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
(14) Funeral home.
(15) Furniture store.
(16) Garden center.
(17) Indoor commercial health/recreational facility.
(18) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(19) Personal and professional service establishments.
(20) Pet shop; excluding, however, the boarding or treatment of animals.
(21) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(22) Restaurant with or without a liquor license.
(23) Shopping centers.
(24) Shops of artisans, carpenters, craftsmen, electricians, painters, plumbers, printers
or other similar trade.
(25) Sign shop.
(26) Nursing home.
(27) Supermarket.
(28) Theater (indoor only).
(29) Vocation/Trade school. [Amended 6/9/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
(30) Outside boat storage provided, however, that there shall be no boats placed or
stored within ten (10) feet of any property line and the boat storage is not within
any required parking area. Such screening may consist of fence, walls, natural
vegetation and landscaping, or combination thereof, and shall be specifically
approved by the Planning Board. Open rack storage is prohibited. [Amended
6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]
(31) Combinations of two (2) or more of the above permitted uses. [Amended
6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]
(32) Other uses similar to those above. [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bulk storage subject to the provisions of Section 15-11.9.
(2) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5.2.
Article IV
44
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
C. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair shop).
(2) Automobile sales establishment for new or used cars.
(3) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service station).
(4) Car wash.
(5) Churches and places of worship.
(6) Commercial recreation activities.
(7) Health care facility.
(8) Hotel or motel.
(9) Mini-storage facility.
(10) Public utilities.
(11) Veterinary clinic hospital or animal care facility.
(12) Sexually-oriented businesses subject to the provisions of 15-23. [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
(13) Boat repair shop and boat storage. [Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-
043]
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in NB Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Only wall mounted signs shall be permitted for each permitted use, and may be an
illuminated, business sign, provided that the total area of any sign shall not exceed
150 square feet. Such signs shall be displayed so as not to project more than 12
inches from the surface of the building or beyond the ends of the building.
(3) Identification signs. Free-standing signs may be erected to identify a shopping
center and to list individual occupants, provided that not more than one (1) such
sign shall be erected for each 300 feet of frontage on a public street and, further
provided, that the aggregate area of all sides of any such signs shall not exceed
200 square feet. Such signs may be illuminated, but shall not be of the flashing
type, shall not exceed one and one-half times the height of the principal building,
not to exceed 35 feet, shall not be located within 50 feet of a public street or
parking area exits or entrances or within 200 feet of the boundary of a residence
zone, and shall in no way interfere with the safe functioning of any traffic control
signal or directional device.
(4) Directional signs (ingress). One (1) free-standing sign may be erected at each
driveway which provides a means of ingress for off-street parking facilities on the
premises, shall relate only the name of the use of the facility and appropriate
traffic instructions, shall not exceed 10 square feet in area for each of two (2)
faces, shall be mounted so as not to obstruct vision for a height of 7 feet above
ground lever, and shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(5) Direction signs (egress). Free-standing signs may be erected on the premises for
the purpose of providing directions to traffic leaving the premises, shall not
Article IV
45
exceed 10 square feet in area on each of two (2) sides, shall be mounted so as not
to obstruct vision for a height of 7 feet above ground level, and shall not exceed
10 feet in height.
(6) Traffic control signs. Free-standing signs may be erected which are necessary to
control and regulate the movement of traffic on the interior roadways on the
premises, provided the number and location of such signs are approved by the
Planning Board. Such signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in area, and shall not
exceed a height of 6 feet.
(7) Parking lot signs. Free-standing signs may be erected within the parking areas to
identify particular areas or sections of the parking lot, provided that not more than
one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each 40,000 square feet of parking area,
and further provided that such signs shall not exceed an area of 3 square feet on
each of four (4) faces, nor exceed a height of 25 feet. In addition, free-standing
signs may be erected at each of a parking aisle for identification purposes,
provided that such signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area, nor exceed a
height of 11 feet. All of the above described signs must be mounted not less than
7 feet above the ground.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 22,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 70 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 40 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 40 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
§ 15-4.20. HB Highway Business Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All principal uses permitted in the NB Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Art, dance, gymnastics, music, or other similar instructional school.
(3) Auto parts store, excluding, however, auto repair shops and installation services.
(4) Bar/Cocktail lounge/nightclub.
(5) Bicycle rental, repair or sales establishment.
(6) Bowling alley.
(7) Building materials retails sales establishment; excluding, however, lumberyards,
or similar uses requiring outdoor storage.
(8) Commercial office.
(9) Commercial retail use.
Article IV
46
(10) Contractor’s office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop; provided, however,
that all materials and equipment are stored within a completely enclosed building.
(11) Department store.
(12) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal buildings and uses as are
deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Committee.
(13) Federal, State, County, and other public buildings and grounds; excluding
however, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other recreational uses and areas.
(14) Funeral home.
(15) Furniture store.
(16) Garden center.
(17) Indoor commercial health/recreational facility.
(18) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(19) Personal and professional service establishments.
(20) Pet shop; excluding, however, the boarding or treatment of animals.
(21) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(22) Restaurant with or without a liquor license.
(23) Shopping centers.
(24) Shops of artisans, carpenters, craftsmen, electricians, painters, plumbers, printers
or other similar trades.
(25) Sign shop.
(26) Supermarket.
(27) Theater (indoor only).
(28) Vocation/Trade school, operated for profit.
(29) Combinations of two (2) or more of the above permitted uses in one (1) principal
building.
(30) Other uses similar to those above.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bulk storage subject to the provisions of Section 15-11.9.
(2) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5.2.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
C. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair shop).
(2) Automobile sales establishment for new or used cars.
(3) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service station).
(4) Car wash.
(5) Churches and places of worship.
(6) Commercial recreation activities.
(7) Drive-in restaurant.
Article IV
47
(8) Health care facility.
(9) Hotel or motel.
(10) Mini-storage facility.
(11) Public utilities.
(12) Veterinary clinic hospital or animal care facility.
(13) Sexually-oriented businesses subject to the provisions of 15-23. [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
D. Signs:
(1) Same requirements as the (GB) General Business Zone.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre or 43,560 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 70 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 40 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
§ 15-4.21. MC Marine Commercial Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Boat yard for the repair and service of boats, excluding new boat construction.
(2) Marinas.
(3) Boat sales and showrooms.
(4) Retail and wholesale sale of boating supplies.
(5) Restaurants, and other eating establishments, excluding drive-in and fast food
restaurants.
(6) Waste pump-out facilities.
(7) Essential services.
B. Accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
Article IV
48
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter:
(1) Public utilities.
D. Signs:
(1) One (1) sign shall be permitted for each permitted use, and may be an illuminated,
business sign, provided that the total area of any sign should not exceed 150
square feet. Such signs shall be displayed so as not to project more than 12 inches
from the surface of the building or beyond the ends of the building.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
§ 15-4.22. LI Light Industry Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) The fabrication, assembly, or processing of goods and materials or the storage of
bulk goods and materials, where such activities and materials create no significant
hazard from fire or explosion or produce no toxic or corrosive fumes, gas smoke,
obnoxious dust, or vapor, offensive noise or vibration, glare, flashes, or
objectionable effluent.
(2) Business, professional and governmental offices.
(3) Warehouse and storage of goods.
(4) Contractor’s office, showroom, garage, warehouse, and shop; provided, however,
that all materials are stored within a completely enclosed building.
(5) Contractors or craftsmen shop or equipment storage area, including general repair
shop, except automobile dismantling or cannibalizing.
(6) Wholesale trade and distribution, excluding used automobiles.
(7) Wholesale building supply yards, lumber yards, yards of contractors in the
construction and building trades and similar operation requiring bulk storage of
materials and equipment, such as building construction supplies and the
equipment.
(8) Medical and dental laboratories.
(9) Research and testing laboratories.
Article IV
49
(10) Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and stenographic
services.
(11) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(12) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bulk storage subject to the provisions of Section 15-11.9.
(2) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5.2.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter:
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Truck terminals.
(3) Communications antennas and towers, limited to the northerly zone district
adjacent to Route 539 and the Garden State Parkway.
(4) Sexually-oriented businesses subject to the provisions of 15-23. [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
D. Signs:
(1) Same as permitted in the (GB) General Business Zone.
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre or 43,560 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 100 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 40 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
§ 15-4.23. SC/GB Senior Citizen/ General Business Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
Article IV
50
(1) All permitted uses in the GB, General Business, Zone as specified in Subsection
15-4.19.
(2) Public and non-profit or limited dividend housing for elderly persons. Such
housing shall be referred to as senior citizen housing and shall be located and
designed to serve the special needs and habits of such persons and shall contribute
to their dignity and independence.
(3) For the purposes of this section, “Public and Non-Profit Limited Dividend
Housing for the Elderly” shall be deemed to mean dwelling units intended and
specifically designed to provide well constructed and adequate housing for elderly
persons having low or moderate income, which housing shall conform to all the
requirements and guidelines established by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development of the New Jersey Housing and Finance Agency, whichever
are more stringent, with respect to cost limitation, construction, rental costs,
selling prices, and other standards for low and moderate income senior citizen
housing; and, further provided that the applicant for construction of such housing
in order that shelter costs shall be initiated and maintained at the lowest feasible
costs. Such housing shall be occupied by individuals, 55 years of age or older,
one person under age 55 may reside in a dwelling unit with an elderly person or
persons as permitted above if the presence of such person is essential to the
physical care or economic support of the elderly person or persons. Such
dwelling units shall be attached dwelling grouped together in one or more multiunit
buildings. Each dwelling unit shall consist of complete living
accommodations, including cooking, sleeping, bathroom and storage facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) For general business uses, same as specified in Subsection 15-4.19., exclusive of
swimming pools and home occupations.
(2) For senior citizen housing, one (1) or more of the following:
(a) One (1) dwelling unit for a resident manager and his or her family who
may or may not be 55 years of age or older;
(b) Health facilities;
(c) Dispensary;
(d) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities;
(e) Worship facilities;
(f) Living and dining area for the common use of project residents;
(g) Central kitchen facilities where food may be prepared for service either in
a common dining area or for distribution to individual dwelling units,
however, such central kitchen facilities shall not be used by the residents
for the preparation of their own individual needs;
(h) An assembly or meeting room;
(i) An outdoor storage shed for the storage of seasonal maintenance
equipment;
(j) Garden plots for the use of individual tenants.
Article IV
51
C. Permitted uses:
(1) For general business uses, same as specified in Subsection 15-4.19.
(2) For senior citizens housing, one (1) free standing sign located at the primary
entrance to the project and within the required front yard and outside of any sight
triangle easements. Said sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area for the
purpose of advertising the name of the project. Such sign may be illuminated by
flood lighting, provided that the light is not directed onto adjoining property or
into the eyes of passing motorists.
(3) Customary traffic control, circulation and directional signs.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) For general business uses, same as specified in Subsection 15-4.19.
(2) For senior citizen housing, a pharmacy or doctor’s office, provided the applicant
can demonstrate both the need and demand for such a use and provided same is
designed as an integral part of the multi-unit structure(s).
E. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) For general business uses, same as specified in Subsection 15-4.19.
(2) For senior citizen housing, the area, yard and building requirements shall be as
specified below:
(a) Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(g) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(h) Maximum number of dwelling units: 24 per acre.
(i) Maximum percent coverage of all buildings: 20 percent.
F. Other requirements:
(1) There shall be provided off-street parking of at least one-half space for each one
(1) dwelling unit.
(2) At least 50 percent of the selling units shall have one (1) bedroom per unit, the
remainder shall be efficiency or two (2) bedroom units.
(3) Said project shall be served by complete water, sewer, telephone and gas and/or
electrical facilities. All these services shall be placed underground.
(4) No dwelling shall be constructed below grade.
(5) There shall be access, at least emergency access, to all sides of the building for
emergency and fire equipment.
Article IV
52
(6) Wherever practical and feasible, sites shall be located within 0.25 miles of arterial
roadways and such community facilities as public transportation, hospital or
medical facilities, shopping, religious, cultural and recreational facilities.
(7) Due consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps and driveways to
prevent slipping or stumbling. Handrails and ample places for rest shall be
provided. Gradients of walks shall not exceed 5 percent. Single riser grade
changes in walk shall not be permitted. Outdoor area available to the residents
shall permit older persons to move about without danger and with minimum
effort. A barrier free design shall be provided.
(8) The project design shall be functional and provide for the safety, health and
general welfare of occupants of this age group.
(9) Individually secured storage space for the occupants’ use and storage space for
equipment and supplies for the operation and maintenance shall be provided in
suitable locations within the project.
(10) Adequate facilities shall be provided for the removal of snow, trash, garbage, and
for general maintenance of the project.
(11) Portions of all front, rear and side yards which are not being used for driveways,
sidewalks, parking or loading, accessory buildings or recreation areas shall be
planted with trees, shrubs, plants, and lawns or ground cover in order to insure the
screening, buffering, and attractiveness of the project. Where possible, the first
six (6) or ten (10) feet of the required rear and side yards shall contain a heavy
planting of trees, shrubs and plants.
(12) Unless specified otherwise herein, the project shall comply with all other
provisions of the chapter with respect to improvements, performance and
maintenance guarantees, design standards, permits and approvals, fees, approval
procedures, supplementary design and performance standards, etc.
§ 15-4.24. WFD Waterfront Development Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Marinas.
(2) Boat sales and showrooms.
(3) Retail and wholesale sale of boating supplies.
(4) Restaurants, and other eating establishments, excluding drive-in and fast food
restaurants.
(5) Attached single-family townhouse dwelling units offered on a condominium or
fee simple basis.
(6) Public or private docks and boat slips with appurtenant marine and water
orientated accessory facilities.
(7) Business office.
(8) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.17.
Article IV
53
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Section 15-12.16.
(4) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Section 15-5. of this chapter, are as follows:
(1) Offices.
D. Area, yard and building requirements of nonresidential uses:
(1) Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum combined side yard setback: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(8) Minimum accessory building side and rear yard setback: 5 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 40 feet and 2 ½ stories.
(10) Maximum percent building coverage: 50 percent.
(11) Buildings for boat repair and maintenance shall not be closer than 50 feet from
any property line.
(12) Boats shall not be stored or displayed closer than 20 feet to any property line and
shall be adequately screened and fenced.
E. Other requirements:
(1) Utilities shall be supplied to each boat slip including electricity, lighting, water
supply and sewage disposal.
F. Area, yard and building requirements for attached single-family townhouse dwellings:
(1) The minimum tract size shall be five (5) acres, including the areas of existing
streets and water areas within the tract boundary lines provided they total no more
than two (2) percent of the tract area.
(2) The gross residential density shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
Gross residential density shall be computed by dividing the total numbers of units
by the total tract size.
(3) The net or developed residential density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units
per acre. Net or developed residential density shall be computed on the buildable
project area by the total buildable project area.
(4) A minimum of 20 percent of the total tract area shall be devoted to active or
passive open space, except where a proposed project has frontage along or access
to existing waterways or the water edge, a minimum of 15 percent of the total
tract area shall be devoted to active or passive open space provided the waterfront
Article IV
54
area is developed with boat slips, docks, bulkheads, fishing piers or other marine
and water oriented facilities.
(5) Improvements shall comply with the requirements of Subsections 15-17.1. and
15-17.3. of this chapter.
(6) Inspection requirements shall be as specified in Subsection 15-17.4. of this
chapter.
(7) Performance guarantees, releases, inspection fees and maintenance guarantees
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections 15-16.4., 15-17.5. and 15-17.6.
of this chapter.
(8) A homeowners’ association, if required by the Board or proposed by the
applicant, shall be established in accordance and compliance with Subsection 15-
11.15. of this chapter. The maintenance of association owned property shall
comply with Subsection 15-11.15.F. of the chapter.
(9) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
§ 15-4.24.1. Cemetery Zone [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-031]
A. Permitted principal use of the buildings and structures is as follows:
(1) Erection of memorial monuments, less than six (6) feet in height.
B. Signs.
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, provided the total area of the
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and not exceed a height of four (4) feet.
C. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 21,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 175 feet
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet
(6) Minimum combined sideyard setback: 20 feet
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
§ 15-4.24.2. Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone. [Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-
26]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone is to recognize and serve the
needs of the traveling public within the Township and Region, and to preserve the
wooded rural character, and promote design compatibility for the development,
redevelopment, and changes in land use along the Route 539 corridor.
B. The Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone is intended for properties that front the Route 539
corridor between the Garden State Parkway and the Township border shown on the
Article IV
55
Township’s zoning map. Any lot or parcel of land located at least partially within the
overlay zone shall follow the requirements of this section for that portion of the lot or
parcel.
C. Applicability.
(1) These standards and guidelines shall be applicable to any project within the
Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone. The standards shall be applied concomitantly
with the relevant use and bulk regulations defined in the underlying zoning
districts. Unless otherwise noted, these standards shall apply uniformly to the
underlying zoning districts; in those cases where the standard varies with the
district, these provisions supersede.
(2) The scope of the standards covers all exterior aspects of the rehabilitation of
existing structures, additions to existing structures, and construction of new
buildings, as well as all site improvements, streetscape, signage, lighting and
landscaping.
(3) In the exercise of its powers of review, the reviewing board may recommend
approval, conditional approval, request modifications, or recommend denial to an
application based upon its review of the materials submitted by the applicant and
any additional information which it may deem appropriate.
(4) These standards shall be interpreted with flexibility. The reviewing board shall
view them as a tool, since exceptional situations, requiring unique interpretations,
can be expected. When applying them, the reviewing board shall carefully weigh
the specific circumstances surrounding each application, and strive for design
solutions that best promote the spirit and intent of the standards and guidelines
D. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Neighborhood Business uses pursuant to §15-4.18 shall be permitted.
(2) General Business uses pursuant to §15-4.19 shall be permitted with the exception
of the following:
(a) Auto parts store, auto repair shops and installation services.
(b) Contractor’s office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop.
(c) Funeral home.
(d) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(3) Hotels, motels, lodges or inns, including extended stay hotels and convention
centers.
(4) Spas or other related health resorts
(5) Health care facilities
(6) Medical office uses
(7) Long-term care facilities
(8) Assisted living facilities
E. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of §15-12.17.
Article IV
56
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of §15-7.6 and additional design standards for
standards set forth below.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of §15-12.16.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of §15-12.16.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of §15-5.2.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
F. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of §15-5, are as follows:
(1) Childcare centers, nursery schools and day care centers.
(2) Churches and places of worship.
(3) Commercial recreation activities.
(4) Veterinary clinic hospital or animal care facility.
G. Building design standards. Buildings located in the overlay zone shall mark the transition
into and out of the overlay zone in a distinct fashion, using massing, height extensions,
contrasting materials and/or architectural embellishments to obtain this effect.
(1) Buildings shall be oriented towards street frontage, both functionally and visually.
(2) Buildings on corner lots shall be considered more significant structures, since they
have at least two (2) front facades visibly exposed to the street. If deemed
appropriate by the Board, such buildings may be designed with additional height
and architectural embellishments relating to their location
(3) Focal point features incorporated into a structure’s design is encouraged through
the use of one or more of the following techniques:
(a) A distinctive design that does not represent standard franchise
architecture.
(b) A vertical architectural feature or appendage (e.g., a clock tower, spire, or
interesting roof form).
(c) Exceptional landscape feature or water feature.
(d) The creation of open spaces, passive park areas, plazas that are
aesthetically pleasing and designed for public gathering, local events,
community events, walking, sitting, picnicking, or bicycling,
(4) Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access.
(5) In a multiple building development, individual buildings shall be oriented to
compliment each other, and shall be organized around features such as courtyards,
quadrangles and alleys, which encourage pedestrian activity.
H. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with §15-12.16.
(2) Parking lots shall be prohibited in any front yard area.
(3) Surface parking lots shall be located to the rear of buildings and/or in the interior
of a site, where the visual impact to adjacent properties and to the public right-ofArticle
IV
57
way can be minimized. Access shall, to the extent possible, be obtained from side
streets, and curb cuts minimized.
(4) Parking areas for individual nonresidential uses shall be designed to be
interconnected with adjacent properties and shall utilize common entrance(s) and
exit(s), where feasible, to minimize access points to the street. Such
interconnection shall be established through an appropriate cross-access
easement, either unilaterally established by one party or by mutual agreement.
The cross-access easement shall be approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
I. Signage. In addition to the signage standards set forth in the underlying zoning districts,
the following shall apply:
(1) One (1) ground-mounted monumental sign not to exceed seventy-five (75) square
feet may be erected at each driveway which provides a means of ingress and
egress to the use.
(2) Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, as well as
with other signs used on the building or its vicinity.
(3) Signs shall fit within the existing facade features, shall be mounted so that the
method of installation is concealed, and shall not interfere with door and window
openings, conceal architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade
where they are located.
(4) Whenever possible, signs located on buildings within the same blockface shall be
placed at the same height, in order to create a unified sign band.
(5) Businesses located in corner buildings are permitted one (1) sign for each street
frontage.
(6) Signs on roofs, dormers and balconies are prohibited.
J. Awnings and Canopies.
(1) Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at ground floor level, and on upper
levels where appropriate, provided they complement a building's architectural
style, and are compatible with its materials, colors and details. Awning shapes
shall reflect the shape of the top of the opening to which they relate.
(2) Canvas is the preferred material, although other water-proofed fabrics may be
considered. Metal or aluminum awnings are prohibited. Only solid or striped
patterns are permitted.
(3) Awnings shall not extend more than four (4') feet from the building surface, or
less than eight (8') feet from the sidewalk.
(4) Canopies are permitted, and may extend over the sidewalk, but shall not restrict
pedestrian circulation, and shall follow the standards set forth for awnings
(5) Particular attention shall be taken with selection of the appropriate supporting
structure and hardware, as well as with the location and method by which it is
attached to the building facade
(6) In buildings with multiple storefronts, compatible awnings should be used as a
means of unifying the structure.
Article IV
58
K. Banners and Flags.
Banners and flags are encouraged, provided they are appropriately scaled to the building
and streetscape, and do not interfere with facade composition or obscure architectural
details. Banners and flags shall be of cotton or heavy dacron or nylon.
L. Circulation standards. In addition to the standards set forth in §15-11.8(I), “Pedestrian
Spaces,” the following shall apply:
(1) The circulation system shall allow for different modes of transportation. The
circulation system shall provide functional and visual links between the Scenic
Gateway Overlay Zone and adjacent neighborhoods, open space, and mixed use
areas outside the overlay zone in the Township and Tuckerton Borough. The
circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected
pedestrian and bicycle ways (especially off-street bicycle or multiuse paths or
bicycle lanes on the streets), control through traffic, limit lot access to streets of
lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility.
(2) Bicycle circulation. Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated on streets and/or
on dedicated bicycle paths. Where feasible, any existing bicycle routes through
the site shall be preserved and enhanced. Facilities for bicycle travel may include
bike racks, off-street bicycle paths (generally shared with pedestrians and other
non-motorized users) and separate, striped, four-foot bicycle lanes on streets. If a
bicycle lane is combined with a lane for parking, the combined width should be
fourteen (14’) feet.
(3) Public transit access. Where public transit service is available or planned,
convenient access to transit stops shall be provided. Where transit shelters are
provided, they shall be placed in highly visible locations that promote security
through surveillance, and shall be well-lighted and designed to relate to the
neighborhood architectural character.
(4) Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to
minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic-calming features such
as queuing streets, curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds.
(5) Pedestrian circulation. The street and pedestrian network must be well connected
for the health, safety, and welfare of residents. Therefore, safe and attractive midblock
linkages are encouraged, as are barrier-free connections.
§15-4.24.3. Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone. [Amended 3/14/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone is to recognize and serve
the needs of the traveling public within the Township and Region and enhance the design
of development in the HB and GB Districts along the Route 9 corridor to promote a
desirable and attractive visual environment in a corridor that serves as an important
gateway through the township.
Article IV
59
B. The Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone is intended for properties that front on the Route 9
corridor between the township boundaries with Bass River Township and Tuckerton
Borough as shown on the Township’s zoning map. Any lot or parcel of land located at
least partially within the overlay zone shall follow the requirements of this section for
that portion of the lot or parcel.
C. For the purpose of building and site design and regulation, the Route 9 Gateway Overlay
Zone shall be divided into the following two separate subsections:
(1) Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone South
(2) Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone North
These two sub-areas are depicted on the township’s zone map and Exhibit A herein.
D. Applicability.
(1) These standards and guidelines shall be applicable to any project within the Route 9
Gateway Overlay Zone, including both North and South subsections. The standards
shall be applied concomitantly with the relevant use and bulk regulations defined in
the underlying zoning districts. Unless otherwise noted, these standards shall apply
uniformly to the underlying zoning districts; in those cases where the standard
varies with the district, these provisions supersede.
(2) The scope of the standards covers all exterior aspects of the rehabilitation of
existing structures, additions to existing structures, and construction of new
buildings, as well as all site improvements, streetscape, signage, lighting and
landscaping.
(3) In the exercise of its powers of review, the reviewing board may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny an application based upon its review of the materials
submitted by the applicant and any additional information which it may deem
appropriate.
(4) These standards shall be interpreted with flexibility. The reviewing board shall
view them as a tool, since exceptional situations, requiring unique interpretations,
can be expected. When applying them, the reviewing board shall carefully weigh
the specific circumstances surrounding each application, and strive for design
solutions that best promote the spirit and intent of the standards and guidelines
E. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Highway Business uses pursuant to §15-4.20(A) shall be permitted in those areas
where the underlying zoning is HB.
(2) General Business uses pursuant to §15-4.19(A) shall be permitted in those areas
where the underlying zoning is GB.
Article IV
60
F. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the provisions of §15-12.17.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of §15-7.6 and additional design standards for
standards set forth below.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of §15-12.16.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of §15-12.16.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of §15-5.2.
(6) Wind and solar energy systems as may be permitted in accordance with the
applicable requirements of §15-24.
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use.
G. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of §15-5, are as follows:
(1) Permitted conditional uses in the Highway Business district pursuant to §15-
4.20(C) shall be permitted in those areas where the underlying zoning is HB.
(2) Permitted conditional uses in the General Business district pursuant to §15-
4.19(C) shall be permitted in those areas where the underlying zoning is GB.
H. Building design standards. Buildings located in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone shall
mark the transition into and out of the overlay zone in a distinct fashion, using massing,
height extensions, contrasting materials and/or architectural embellishments to obtain this
effect.
(1) Buildings shall be oriented towards street frontage, both functionally and visually.
(2) Buildings on corner lots shall be considered more significant structures, since they
have at least two (2) front facades visibly exposed to the street. If deemed
appropriate by the Board, such buildings may be designed with additional height
and architectural embellishments relating to their location
(3) Focal point features incorporated into a structure’s design is encouraged through
the use of one or more of the following techniques:
(a) A distinctive design that does not represent standard franchise
architecture.
Article IV
61
(b) A vertical architectural feature or appendage (e.g., a clock tower, spire, or
interesting roof form).
(c) Exceptional landscape feature or water feature.
(d) The creation of open spaces, passive park areas, plazas that are
aesthetically pleasing and designed for public gathering, local events,
community events, walking, sitting, picnicking, or bicycling,
(4) Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access.
(5) In a multiple building development, individual buildings shall be oriented to
complement each other, and shall be organized around features such as
courtyards, quadrangles and alleys, which encourage pedestrian activity.
I. Streetscape Design in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone North. The objective shall be
to provide street trees, paving, benches, lighting and other improvements to provide an
ample, well-defined, unified and distinct pedestrian corridor along the Route 9
streetscape. The following standards shall apply:
(1) Provide street trees within the right-of-way in planting areas of at least ninety (90)
square feet in surface area. An acceptable ground cover or mass shrub planting
shall be provided in all planting areas.
(2) The quantity of trees shall be equivalent to one (1) tree of three (3) inches to three
and five-tenths (3.5) inches caliper for every forty (40) feet of frontage.
(3) If existing trees are preserved within ten (10) feet of the curb, the requirements for
additional street tree plantings may be reduced.
(4) Trees within a sight triangle or distance area shall be of sufficient size to be
pruned to a seven-foot branching height with one (1) main stem upon planting.
Planting within a sight triangle or distance area must be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(5) A walkway within the right-of-way of a minimum clear width of five (5) feet shall
be provided. In areas where site furnishings are provided, the walk width shall be
widened to accommodate these amenities. The walkway shall be constructed of a
decorative pavement, i.e. brick pavers, as approved by the Board of jurisdiction.
All walks shall include ramps for handicap access at all street comers or road
crossings. The decorative paving shall be continued across all ingress and egress
drives as a crosswalk, providing a well-defined continuous pedestrian walkway.
(6) Site furnishings such as benches, period lighting, kiosks, bus shelters, trash
receptacles and flagpoles shall be provided as appropriate or required by the
Board of jurisdiction. All site furnishings within an individual village area shall
be of a consistent or compatible design style, color, material and location, subject
to the approval of the Board of jurisdiction.
Article IV
62
(7) Signage within the village streetscape area shall be of a consistent or compatible
design style, color, material and location, subject to the approval of the Board of
jurisdiction.
(8) All overhead utilities should be relocated underground whenever possible.
J. Streetscape Design in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone South. The streetscape design
in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone South shall be designed to create a pedestrian
friendly park-like open space amenity along the Route 9 frontage of properties in the
overlay district. The streetscape design shall incorporate a combination of buffering and
berms, landscaping, streetscape design amenities, and pedestrian walkway along the
entire Route 9 street frontage. The general design of the streetscape is illustrated in
Figure 1, Illustrative Plan View and shall include:
Figure 1: Illustrative streetscape plan view.
(1) A combination of nuisance and filtered buffers designed in accordance with the
standards and requirements set forth in §15-11.8. Illustrative cross sections of
buffers in relationship to the street are shown in Figures 2 through 4 as follows:
Figure 2
Article IV
63
Figure 3
Figure 4
(2) A pedestrian walkway designed in accordance with the standards set forth in §15-
11.8(I) and as illustrated in Figure 1.
(3) Associated pedestrian amenities and street furniture within the streetscape buffers
shall be designed in accordance with §15-11.8(I).
K. Streetscape Design Elements in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone. The streetscape
design elements in the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone shall include:
(1) Street lights: Pedestrian scale, thematic style light standards shall be used along
all street edges immediately adjacent to proposed developments. The horizontal
spacing of the fixtures shall be consistent with Township and State regulations as
required.
(a) Street lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14’) in height.
Article IV
64
(b) Street lights shall utilize decorative poles and pole base covers.
(c) Poles shall be cast iron, aluminum, or steel
and painted black.
(d) Luminaires shall incorporate night sky
friendly, energy efficient, full cut-off optics.
The use of LED technology is encouraged.
(e) Sample Fixture or approved equal:
Hadco CF15/17 Westbrooke
(2) Site Furnishings: Each project with street frontage
shall include the provision of site furnishings
consistent with the intent of this ordinance and the
creation of an inviting, safe and enjoyable pedestrian
experience. These furnishings shall include benches,
trash and recycling receptacles, bike racks, and
individual free standing planters as appropriate.
(a) Furnishings shall be constructed of non-biodegradable, vandal resistant
materials such as cast iron, steel, aluminum, or recycled plastic
components. All metal parts to be painted black.
(b) Furnishings shall be consistent with the intent of this ordinance and
coordinated with the overall character of the proposed project.
(c) Benches shall be a minimum of six feet (6’) in length and incorporate a
center armrest. Benches can be backed or backless as deemed appropriate
for the specific setting.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be a minimum of thirty two (32) gallon capacity
and utilize the smallest possible semi-covered top or side opening to
prevent the deposition of household debris and trash.
(e) Recycling receptacles shall be provided and incorporated as appropriate.
(f) Sample Selections or approved equals:
Bench: Victor Stanley, City Series, CBF-12
Trash: Victor Stanley, Economy Series, ES-335
(3) Street trees:
As per §15-
11.8(B).
(4) Sidewalk
design: The
paving patterns shown in the
accompanying figure shall be
applied to pedestrian walkways,
with final design and material
Article IV
65
selection subject to the approval of the Planning Board. In general, running bond
patterns should be used for pedestrian-only walkways, 90 degree herringbone
pattern for areas which require limited vehicular traffic and basket weave for
plazas and other larger spaces.
L. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with §15-12.16.
(2) Landscaping within parking lots shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of §15-11.8(G).
(3) In the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone North, surface parking lots shall be located
to the rear of buildings and/or in the interior of a site, where the visual impact to
adjacent properties and to the public right-of-way can be minimized. Access shall,
to the extent possible, be obtained from side streets, and curb cuts minimized.
(4) Parking areas for individual nonresidential uses shall be designed to be
interconnected with adjacent properties and shall utilize common entrance(s) and
exit(s), where feasible, to minimize access points to the street. Such
interconnection shall be established through an appropriate cross-access
easement, either unilaterally established by one party or by mutual agreement.
The cross-access easement shall be approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
M. Signage. In addition to the signage standards set forth in the underlying zoning districts,
the following shall apply:
(1) Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, as well as
with other signs used on the building or its vicinity.
(2) Signs shall fit within the existing facade features, shall be mounted so that the
method of installation is concealed, and shall not interfere with door and window
openings, conceal architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade
where they are located.
(3) Whenever possible, signs located on buildings within the same block face shall be
placed at the same height, in order to create a unified sign band.
(4) Businesses located in corner buildings are permitted one (1) sign for each street
frontage.
(5) Signs on roofs, dormers and balconies are prohibited.
Article IV
66
N. Awnings and Canopies—Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone North.
(1) Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at ground floor level, and on upper
levels where appropriate, provided they complement a building's architectural
style, and are compatible with its materials, colors and details. Awning shapes
shall reflect the shape of the top of the opening to which they relate.
(2) Canvas is the preferred material, although other water-proofed fabrics may be
considered. Metal or aluminum awnings are prohibited. Only solid or striped
patterns are permitted.
(3) Awnings shall not extend more than four (4') feet from the building surface, or
less than eight (8') feet from the sidewalk.
(4) Canopies are permitted, and may extend over the sidewalk, but shall not restrict
pedestrian circulation, and shall follow the standards set forth for awnings.
(5) Particular attention shall be taken with selection of the appropriate supporting
structure and hardware, as well as with the location and method by which it is
attached to the building façade.
(6) In buildings with multiple storefronts, compatible awnings should be used as a
means of unifying the structure.
O. Banners and Flags.
Banners and flags are encouraged, provided they are appropriately scaled to the building
and streetscape, and do not interfere with facade composition or obscure architectural
details. Banners and flags shall be of cotton or heavy Dacron or nylon.
P. Circulation standards. In addition to the standards set forth in §15-11.8(I), “Pedestrian
Spaces,” the following shall apply:
(1) The circulation system shall allow for different modes of transportation. The
circulation system shall provide functional and visual links between the Route 9
Gateway Overlay Zone and adjacent neighborhoods, open space, and mixed use
areas outside the overlay zone in the Township and Tuckerton Borough. The
circulation system shall provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected
pedestrian and bicycle ways (especially off-street bicycle or multiuse paths or
bicycle lanes on the streets), control through traffic, limit lot access to streets of
lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility.
(2) Bicycle circulation. Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated on streets and/or
on dedicated bicycle paths. Where feasible, any existing bicycle routes through
the site shall be preserved and enhanced. Facilities for bicycle travel may include
bike racks, off-street bicycle paths (generally shared with pedestrians and other
Article IV
67
non-motorized users) and separate, striped, four-foot bicycle lanes on streets. If a
bicycle lane is combined with a lane for parking, the combined width should be
fourteen (14’) feet.
(3) Public transit access. Where public transit service is available or planned,
convenient access to transit stops shall be provided. Where transit shelters are
provided, they shall be placed in highly visible locations that promote security
through surveillance, and shall be well-lighted and designed to relate to the
neighborhood architectural character.
(4) Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall be designed to
minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic-calming features such
as queuing streets, curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds.
(5) Pedestrian circulation. The street and pedestrian network must be well connected
for the health, safety, and welfare of residents. Therefore, safe and attractive midblock
linkages are encouraged, as are barrier-free connections.
§ 15-4.25. PA Preservation Area Zone.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance with Subsection 15-4.29.,
and on lots of 1.0 acres, in accordance with Subsection 15-4.30.
(2) Agricultural employee housing as an element of, and accessory to, an active
agricultural operation.
(3) Berry agriculture and horticulture of native plants and other agricultural activities
compatible with the existing soil and water conditions that support traditional
Pinelands berry agriculture.
Article IV
68
(4) Forestry.
(5) Beekeeping.
(6) Fish and wildlife management.
(7) Low intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for intensity recreational use has an area of at least 50
acres;
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized vehicles,
except for necessary transportation;
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear feet of
frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage;
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil disturbance, does
not exceed 5 percent of the parcel; and,
(e) No more than 1 percent of the parcel will be covered with impermeable
surfaces.
(8) Public service infrastructure which is necessary to serve only the needs of the
Preservation Area Zone uses. Centralized waste water treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the Preservation Area Zone only in
accordance with Subsection 15-13.4.A.(8)(a). [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-08]
(9) Signs.
(10) Accessory uses.
(11) Resource extraction operations, provided that:
(a) The operation was authorized by a valid registration certificate issued by
the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry under N.J.S.A. 34:6-
98r(h) prior to February 7, 1979, or the operation was exempt from
registration requirements of the New Jersey Department of Labor and
Industry and was authorized by the operating under a valid municipal
permit prior to February 8, 1979;
(b) The area of extraction is limited to the value given under the category
“acreage to be mined” on the mine registration application submitted to
the Department of Labor and Industry, or the municipal permit, whichever
is applicable; and,
(c) The operation has been registered with the Pinelands Commission in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI.
(12) Pinelands Development Credits.
(13) Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such minimum lot
area for nonresidential use in the PA Zone shall be less than that needed to meet
the water quality standards of Subsection 15-13.4.A.(8)(a)[4], whether or not the
lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
B. Pinelands Development Credits established.
(1) Except for land which was owned by a public agency on January 14, 1981, land
which is thereafter purchased by the State for conservation purposes, land which
Article IV
69
is subject to an easement limiting the use of land to nonresidential uses, or land
otherwise excluded from entitlement in the paragraphs below, every parcel of land
in the Preservation Area Zone shall have a use right known as “Pinelands
Development Credits” that can be used to secure a density bonus for lands located
in a Regional Growth Area. Pinelands Development Credits may also be
allocated to certain properties in the Township by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4:61 et seq.
(2) Pinelands Development Credits are hereby established in the Preservation Area
District, at the following ratios:
(a) Uplands which are undisturbed but currently or previously approved for
resource extraction pursuant to Chapter XVI: two (2) Pinelands
Development Credits per 39 acres;
(b) Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource extraction permit
approved pursuant to Chapter XVI: zero (0) Pinelands Development
Credits per 39 acres;
(c) Other uplands: one (1) Pinelands Development Credit per 39 acres; and
(d) Wetlands: two-tenths (2/10) Pinelands Development Credit per 39 acres.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(3) The allocations established in Subparagraph 2 above shall be reduced as follows:
(a) Any property of 10 acres or less which is developed for a commercial,
industrial, resource extraction, intensive recreation, institutional,
campground or landfill use shall not receive Pinelands Development
Credit entitlement. For such an improved property of more than 10 acres,
the area actively used for such use or 10 acres, whichever is greater, shall
not receive Pinelands Development Credit entitlement.
(b) The Pinelands Development Credit entitlement of a parcel of land shall be
reduced by one-quarter (1/4) Pinelands Development Credit for each
existing dwelling unit on the property.
(c) The Pinelands Development Credit entitlement for a parcel of land shall
be reduced by one-quarter Pinelands Development Credit for each
reserved right to build a dwelling unit on a parcel retained by the owner of
the property pursuant to Subsection 15-4.25.B.(7) below or when a
variance for cultural housing is approved by the Township pursuant to
Subsection 15-4.30. of this chapter. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-08]
(d) The Pinelands Development Credit entitlement for a parcel of land shall
also be reduced by one-quarter (1/4) Pinelands Development Credit for
each dwelling unit approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4:61 et seq. when a
waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Pinelands Commission.
(4) The owners of parcels of land which are smaller than 39 acres shall have a
fractional Pinelands Development Credit at the same ratio established in
Subparagraph 2 of this subsection for the area in which the parcel is located.
(5) Notwithstanding the above provisions, the owner of record of one-tenth (1/10) or
greater acres of land in the Preservation Area District as of February 7, 1979 shall
be entitled to one-quarter (1/4) Pinelands Development Credit, provided that the
parcel of land is vacant, was not in common ownership with any contiguous land
Article IV
70
on or after February 7, 1979 and has not been sold or transferred except to a
member of the owner’s immediate family. The provisions of this paragraph shall
also apply to owners of record of less than one-tenth (1/10) acres of land in the
Preservation Area District, as of February 7, 1979, provided that said owners
acquire vacant, contiguous lands to which Pinelands Development Credits are
allocated pursuant to Paragraph B.(2) above, which lands, when combined with
the acreage of the parcel owned prior to February 7, 1979, total at least one-tenth
(1/10) of an acre.
(6) No Pinelands Development Credit may be conveyed, sold, encumbered or
transferred unless the owner of the land from which the credit has been obtained
has received a Pinelands Development Credit Certificate from the Pinelands
Development Credit Bank, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 3:42-3, and has deed restricted
the use of the land in perpetuity to those uses set forth in Paragraph (9) below by a
recorded deed restriction which is in favor of a public agency or not-for-profit
incorporated organization and specifically and expressly enforceable by the
Pinelands Commission. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(7) Notwithstanding the provision of Subparagraph (6) above, an owner of property
from which Pinelands Development Credits are sold may retain a right for
residential development on that property provided that the recorded deed
restriction expressly provides for same and that the total allocation of Pinelands
Development Credits for that property is reduced by one-quarter (1/4) Pinelands
Development Credit for each reserved right to build a dwelling unit. Subdivision
of the property shall not be required until such time as the residential development
right is exercised.
(8) No conveyance, sale or transfer of Pinelands Development Credits shall occur
until the Township, the agency or organization to which the restriction is in favor,
and the Pinelands Commission have been provided with evidence of recordation
of a restriction on the deed to the land from which the development credits were
obtained.
(9) Such deed restriction shall specify the number of Pinelands Development Credits
sold and that the property may only be used in perpetuity for the following uses:
In the Preservation Zone: berry agriculture; horticulture of native Pinelands
plants; forestry; beekeeping; fish and wildlife management; agriculture employee
housing as an accessory use; and low intensity recreational uses in which the use
of motorized vehicles is not permitted except for necessary transportation access
to water bodies is limited to no more than 15 feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of
frontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation does not exceed five percent of
the parcel, and no more than one percent of the parcel will be covered with
impermeable surfaces. In all other Pinelands Zoning Districts: agriculture;
forestry and low intensity recreational uses.
(10) Pinelands Development Credits shall be used in the following manner:
(a) When a variance of density or lot area requirements for a residential or
principal nonresidential use in the PV Zone is granted by the Township,
Pinelands Development Credits shall be used for all dwelling units or lots
in excess of that otherwise permitted without the variance;
Article IV
71
(b) When a variance for cultural housing is granted by the Township in
accordance with Subsection 15-4.30. of this chapter; and,
(c) When a waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
(11) In no case shall a building or construction permit be issued for any development
involving the use of Pinelands Development Credits until the developer has
provided the Pinelands Commission and the Township with evidence of his
ownership of the requisite Pinelands Development Credits and those Pinelands
Development Credits have been redeemed with the Township
§ 15-4.26. FA Forest Area Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Residential dwelling units on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance with Subsection 15-
4.29.
(2) Single-family residential dwelling units:
(a) Minimum lot area: 35 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum accessory use setback: 25 feet.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Agricultural employee housing as an element of, and necessary to, an active
agricultural operation.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Low intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low intensity recreational use has an area of at
least 50 acres;
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized vehicles except
for necessary transportation;
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear feet of
frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage;
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil disturbance, does
not exceed five percent of the parcel; and,
(e) No more than one percent of the parcel will be covered with impermeable
surfaces.
(7) Institutional uses, including cemeteries, provided that:
(a) The use does not require or will not generate subsidiary or satellite
development in the Forest Area;
(b) The applicant has demonstrated that adequate public service infrastructure
will be available to serve the use; and,
(c) The use is primarily designed to serve the needs of the Forest Area in
which the use is to be located.
Article IV
72
(8) Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing uses, excluding resource
extraction and uses that rely on sand or gravel as raw products, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for development has an area of at least five acres;
(b) The principal raw material for the proposed use is found or produced in
the Pinelands; and,
(c) The use does not require or will not generate subsidiary or satellite
development in a Forest Area.
(9) Campgrounds, not to exceed one campsite per gross acre, provided that the
campsites may be clustered at a net density not to exceed ten (10) campsites per
acre.
(10) Agricultural commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets, restaurants and
convenience stores, provided that:
(a) The principal goods or products available for sale were produced in the
Pinelands;
(b) No portion of any structure proposed for development will be more than
300 feet, measured along a line parallel to the roadway, from the closest
part of a roadside retail sales and service establishment structure that was
in existence on February 7, 1979; and,
(c) The proposed use will not unduly burden pubic services, including, but not
limited to, water, sewer and roads.
(11) Continuation of existing resource extraction operations in accordance with the
standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI.
(12) Fish and wildlife management.
(13) Residential dwelling units on lots on 1.0 acres in accordance with Subsection 15-
4.30. or Subsection 15-4.31.
(14) Reserved.
(15) Signs.
(16) Accessory uses.
(17) Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such minimum lot
area for a nonresidential use in the FA Zone shall be less than that needed to meet
the water quality standards of Subsection 15-13.4.A.(8)(a)[4] whether or not the
lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
§ 15-4.27. FAC Forest Area Cluster Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Cluster (reduced lot size) development. In accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, an owner, applicant, developer or subdivider may elect to develop lots in
the Forest Area Cluster Zone for single-family detached dwellings subject to the
following minimum requirements:
(a) The minimum base lot size shall be 3.2 acre lots. However, an applicant
shall be permitted to cluster the number of dwelling units permitted under
the minimum base lot size provisions on 1.0 acre lots (43,560 square feet),
Article IV
73
provided that the balance of the minimum base lot size (3.2 acres) is
dedicated for public and/or private open space.
(b) The maximum gross density of residential building lots in the Forest Area
Cluster Zone at no time shall exceed one (1) dwelling unit per 3.2 acres.
(c) The maximum developed or net density of residential building lots in the
Forest Area Cluster Zone at no time shall exceed one (1) dwelling unit per
one (1) acre (43,560 square feet) and the total number of dwelling units in
said zone shall not exceed 40 units.
(2) Notwithstanding the density limitations or other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling may be developed on any parcel of land of 1.0 acre or
more in the Forest Area Cluster Zone, provided that:
(a) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner or
a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
(b) The parcel has been in the continuous ownership since February 7, 1979
of the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a
member of that person’s immediate family, or a partnership or corporation
in which members of that person’s immediate family collectively own
more than a majority interest in such partnership or corporation;
(c) The parcel was not in common ownership with any contiguous land on or
after February 8, 1979 that contains substantial improvements; and,
(d) The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in common ownership on
or after February 8, 1979.
(3) Signs.
(4) Accessory uses.
(5) Agriculture.
(6) Forestry.
(7) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an area of at
least 50 acres;
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized vehicles,
except for necessary transportation;
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear feet of
frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage;
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil disturbance, does
not exceed five percent of the parcel; and,
(e) No more than one percent of the parcel will be covered with impervious
surfaces.
B. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Conventional development – Base lot size:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
Article IV
74
(f) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory use setback: 25 feet.
(2) Cluster development – Reduced lot size:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1.0 acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(f) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory setback: 20 feet.
(3) Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such minimum lot
area for a nonresidential use in the FAC Zone shall be less than that needed to
meet the water quality standards of Subsection 15-13.4.A.(8)(a)[4], whether or not
the lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
C. A 100 foot wide buffer shall be provided within the Forest Area Cluster Zone adjoining
its southerly boundary with the Forest Area Zone. Within the 100 foot buffer, the
applicant, developer, or subdivider shall construct a 50 foot wide fire break from County
Route No. 539 to the Township’s boundary with Eagleswood Township.
D. All lands proposed to be dedicated to the Township of Little Egg Harbor for open space
purposes shall meet and comply with Subsection 15-11.17. of this section.
§ 15-4.28. PV Pinelands Village Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Residential dwelling units on 3.2 acre lots, if served by a conventional on-site
septic waste water system.
(2) Residential dwelling units on 1.0 acre (43,560 square feet) lots, if served by a
septic system in accordance with Subsection 15-4.30.
(3) All uses permitted in the Forest Area Zone subject to the standards and
requirements contained therein, provided that:
(a) A public service infrastructure necessary to support the use is available or
can be provided without any development in the Preservation Area Zone
and Forest Area Zone; and,
(b) The character and magnitude of the use is compatible with existing
structure and uses in the village.
B. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Development of residential dwellings.
(2) No residential dwelling unit or nonresidential use in the PV District shall be
located on a parcel of less than 1.0 acre unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant.
(3) When a variance of the density or lot area requirements set forth in Paragraphs A.
or B. above for a residential or principal nonresidential use in the PV Zone is
Article IV
75
granted by the Township, Pinelands Development Credits shall be used for all
dwelling units or lots in excess of that permitted without the variance.
§ 15-4.29. Dwellings on 3.2 acre lots in the Pinelands Area.
A. Residential dwelling units on 3.2 acre lots may be permitted in any Pinelands Area Zone,
provided that:
(1) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner or a
member of the immediate family of the property owner;
(2) The individual whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has not
developed a dwelling unit under this section within the previous five (5) years;
(3) The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be located has been in the
continuous ownership since February 7, 1979 of the person whose principal
residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of that person’s immediate family,
or a partnership or corporation in which members of that person’s immediate
family collectively own more than a majority interest in such partnership or
corporation; and,
(4) The person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has resided in the
Pinelands for at least five (5) years and that person, or one (1) or more members
of that person’s immediate family, has resided in the Pinelands for a total of at
least 20 different years.
§ 15-4.30. Additional Provisions for cultural housing.
A. Residential dwelling units on 1.0 acre lots may be permitted in any Pinelands Area Zone,
provided that:
(1) The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth in Subsection 15-4.29.
above;
(2) The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979 or was created as a result
of an approval granted by the Pinelands Development Review Board or by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations prior to
January 14, 1981;
(3) The applicant qualifies for and receives from the Township a variance from the
3.2 acre lot size requirement set forth in Subsection 15-4.29. above;
(4) The applicant purchases and redeems one-quarter (1/4) Pinelands Development
Credit; and,
(5) Any Pinelands Development Credits allocated to the lot to be developed are
reduced pursuant to Subsection 15-4.25. of this chapter.
§ 15-4.31. Density transfer program.
A. Residential dwelling units on 1.0 acre lots existing as of January 14, 1981 shall be
permitted in the FA Zone, provided that:
Article IV
76
(1) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires sufficient vacant
contiguous or noncontiguous land which, when combined with the acreage of the
lot proposed for development, equals at least 35 acres;
(2) All lands acquired pursuant to Paragraph A. above, which may or may not be
developable, are located within the FA Zone;
(3) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Paragraphs (1) and (2) above are
permanently dedicated as open space through recordation of a deed to the
property with no further development permitted except agriculture, forestry and
low intensity recreational uses. Any such deed restrictions shall be a form to be
approved by the Township Solicitor and the Pinelands Commission;
(4) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are combined and assigned
to the land to be developed; and,
(5) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the minimum standards of
Subsection 15-13.4. of this chapter.
§ 15-4.32. Compliance.
All zoning requirements shall be met at the time of any erection, enlargement, moving, or change
in use. If a new structure is added to an existing complex of structures or if an existing structure
has an addition, the site plan provisions of this chapter shall apply to the enlargement or new
structure.
All developments resulting from subdivision and site plan approvals shall comply with all the
design and performance standards, including conditions imposed by the approving authority as
shown on the approved plat and/or included in the resolution adopted by the approving authority.
§ 15-4.33. Violations and penalties.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter or of any other
ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local authorities
of the municipality or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to
prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land, to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers or sells or agrees to
transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal
approval is required.
Article V
1
ARTICLE V
Conditional Uses
§ 15-5.1. Guiding principles and general provisions.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to serve the needs and
provide for the convenience of the citizens of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and at the same
time, appreciating the fact that they or any one of them may be or may become inimical to the
public health, safety and general welfare of the community if located without due consideration
to the existing conditions and surroundings, such uses are designated as conditional uses subject
to the standards and regulations hereby established. These standards and regulations are
intended to provide the Planning Board with a guide for reviewing applications for conditional
uses as provided for by this chapter. As a result of the review procedure, the applicant may be
required to meet additional standards and regulations imposed by the Planning Board during site
plan review which are in keeping with and will further the intent of these standards and
regulations. Such standards and regulations shall be provided for and maintained as a condition
of the establishment and maintenance of any use to which they are a condition of approval. In
acting upon an application for conditional use approval, the Planning Board shall be guided by
the following standards and principles:
A. The use for which an application is being made is specifically listed as a conditional use
within the zone where the property is located.
B. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such that the public health,
safety and welfare will be protected and reasonable consideration is afforded to the
following:
(1) The compatibility of the proposed use(s) and/or structure(s) within the existing
neighborhood.
(2) The potential effect that the proposed use(s) and/or structure(s) will have upon
property values.
(3) The adequacy of the proposed parking and traffic circulation for the use(s) and/or
structure(s) and the potential for traffic congestion and/or the creation of undue
traffic hazards.
(4) The need for such facility or use(s) to serve the area in which it is located.
(5) The adequacy of proposed drainage facilities which will serve the use(s) and/or
structure(s).
(6) The adequacy of plans for screening any adverse aspects of the use(s) and/or
structure(s) from adjoining properties.
(7) The adequacy of proposed outdoor lighting.
(8) Compliance with the performance standards under Section 15-11.16. of this
chapter.
(9) Compliance with the standards, principles and objectives of the Master Plan.
C. All conditional uses shall also be required to obtain site plan approval, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
Article V
2
D. Conditional uses shall adhere to the additional standards specified for the particular use
under this article, except where no additional standards are specified herein.
E. No use specified within this article shall be considered a conditional use unless it is
specifically listed as a conditional use in the zone district regulation.
§ 15-5.2. Antennas and towers.
A. Antennas and towers shall be permitted as conditional uses in the zones or areas specified
and shall be required to comply with the conditions set forth below in order to be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any proposed antenna or tower to be located within the R-5A Zone as a
conditional use must be located within the area identified as “Fish Island” on the
Zoning Map, due west of Great Bay Boulevard. [Amended 4/21/2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-06]
(2) Any proposed antenna or tower to be located within the northerly LI Zone as a
conditional use must be located within the area which runs along the northbound
lanes of the Garden State Parkway and lies west of Route 539.
B. General Requirements:
(1) Lot Size: For the purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with development regulations, including but not limited to
setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may
be located on leased parcels within such lot.
(2) Inventory of Existing Site: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall
provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or
(3) Township of Little Egg Harbor or within three (3) miles of the border thereof,
including specific information about the location, height, and design of tower,
each such antenna or tower. The Zoning Officer may share such information with
other applicants applying for approvals under this ordinance or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor, provided, however, that the Zoning Officer is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
(4) Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Towers or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to
the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend towers and related structures into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color
that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
Article V
3
structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting: Towers or antennas shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding
views.
(6) State or Federal requirements: All towers or antennas must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the State
or Federal Government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If
such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulation within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.
(7) Building codes; safety standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers or
antennas, the owner of a tower or antenna shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable State or local building codes
and the applicable standards for towers and antennas that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon
inspection, the Township concludes that a tower or antenna fails to comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then
upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower or antenna, the owner shall
have 30 days to bring such tower or antenna into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower or antenna into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.
(8) Measurement: For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks, and separation
distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the Township
irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
(9) Non-Essential Services: Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted as
conditional uses pursuant to this Ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted
as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
(10) Franchises: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all
franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless
communication system in the Township have been obtained and shall file a copy
of all required franchises with the Zoning Officer and Business Administrator.
(11) Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(12) Multiple antenna/tower plan: The Township encourages the users of towers and
antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or
antenna sites.
C. Applicability:
Article V
4
(1) New towers and antennas: All new towers and antennas in the Township of Little
Egg Harbor shall be subject to these regulations, except as otherwise provided
herein.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas: This Ordinance shall not
govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is 40 feet or less in height
and is owned and operated by a Federally licensed amateur radio station operator
or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Antennas, towers or alternative tower structures located on property owned,
leased or otherwise controlled by the Township of Little Egg Harbor in any
designated land use zone shall be permitted and the terms of this Conditional Use
Ordinance shall not apply to same, provided a license or lease authorizing such
antenna or tower has been duly approved by the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in this subparagraph, antennas, towers
and alternative tower structures shall be permitted in the Pinelands Area only in
accordance with C.(4) below. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(4) Antennas, towers and alternative structures in the Pinelands Area must comply
with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) of the Comprehensive Management
Plan and any comprehensive plan for local communications facilities approved by
the Commission pursuant thereto. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
D. Area, bulk and yard requirements:
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be a distance at least the height of the
tower or greater.
(2) The minimum rear yard setback shall be a distance at least the height of the tower
or greater.
(3) The minimum side yard setback shall be a distance at least the height of the tower
or greater.
(4) The maximum height of the tower shall be 350 feet if in the R-1A Zone and 125
feet if in the LI Zone.
(5) The maximum height of associated structures shall be eight (8) feet.
(6) The maximum square footage of associated structures shall be 250 square feet.
(7) No tower shall be located within 2,500 feet of any existing residential home or
residential structure.
(8) In the designated LI Zone, no tower shall be located within 1,000 feet of Route
539.
E. Additional requirements:
(1) All facilities shall be suitably secured and enclosed in a fence not less than eight
(8) feet high.
(2) Except for towers and antennas to be located on Township owned or controlled
property, site plan approval by the Little Egg Harbor Township Planning Board
shall be required and the following information shall be provided:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
Article V
5
zoning with 200 feet (including when adjacent to other municipalities),
Master Plan classification for the site and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in Section D., adjacent roads,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking and other information deemed by the Zoning Office
to be necessary to assess compliance with this Ordinance.
(b) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit or residentially zoned properties, whether platted or
unplatted.
(d) The separation distance from other towers shall be shown on an updated
site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction
of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if
known.
(e) A Landscape Plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing, finished color, if applicable, and methods of
camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with this section and all applicable Federal,
State and local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the
tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future
users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other personal wireless facilities
owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas
within the Township based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower
is erected.
(l) A sight line representation shall be drawn for the closest façade of each
residential unit located on all properties adjacent to the subject property,
the highest point of the tower. The sight line shall depict all intervening
trees and buildings.
(m) In the event a communication tower is abandoned or not operated for a
period of one (1) year, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the operator.
(n) Noise levels generated by the operation of the antenna at any property line
shall be not more than 50 decibels.
(o) A report prepared by a Professional Ornithologist describing the risks
posed by the tower, antenna and/or structure to threatened and endangered
Article V
6
species of birds; local breeding birds; known migratory birds; and the
surrounding habitat.
(3) Site lighting used to illuminate a tower shall be oriented towards a tower to
minimize spillage and glare onto adjacent properties.
(4) The tower and antennas shall be designed in accordance with the current edition
of the Building Officials and Code Administrators National Building Code.
(5) Any generator located on the site shall be within an equipment structure. All fuel
shall be contained in accordance with NJDEP requirements.
(6) Site clearing shall be minimized to preclude the removal of vegetation beyond
that necessary to install and maintain the facility.
(7) Communication towers and antennas shall not cause a disruption to, or interfere
with, other radio, communications, or television transmissions or equipment. If
such disruption or interference is found to be caused by the operation of the
communication tower, the subscribers and/or lessees shall notify their equipment
operators to abate the deficiencies.
F. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology: No
new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Planning Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the
Planning Board related to the availability of suitable existing towers, structure or
alternative technology. The applicant’s proposed antenna may consist of any of the
following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which
meets applicant’s reasonable engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s
reasonable engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support
applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
(4) The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with
the antenna on the exiting towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing
towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed
antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share
an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing
are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render
existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require
the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple
low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable.
Cost of alternative technology that exceeds new tower or antenna development
shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
Article V
7
G. Definitions: As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
“ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE” means a structure that camouflages or
conceals the presence of antennas or towers.
“ANTENNA” means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communication that radiate or capture electromagnetic
waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals),
wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
“BACKHAUL NETWORK” means the lines that connect a provider’s tower/cell sites to
one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the
public switched telephone network.
“FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
“HEIGHT” means when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure,
including any antenna.
“PRE-EXISTING TOWER AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNA” means any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior
to the effective date of this Ordinance, including permitted towers or antennas that have
not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
“TOWER” means any structure that is designated and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for telephone, radio, personal wireless
services and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
“PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES” include commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services.
§ 15-5.3. Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair garage).
Automobile repair shops may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning districts specified,
provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the minimum area, yard and building
requirements of the particular district and to the following:
A. No outdoor oil drainage pits or hydraulic lifts shall be permitted.
Article V
8
B. All repairs shall be performed in a fully enclosed building.
C. All vehicles awaiting repair or under repair may be stored out-of-doors and shall be
screened from the public by a solid fence and/or evergreen plantings, as required by the
Planning Board.
D. No vehicle awaiting repair or under repair may be stored out-of-doors within the required
front yard area, within 20 feet of any side or rear lot line or within 50 feet of any
adjoining lot within a residential zone.
E. If gas pumps are proposed, Section 15-5.5., referring to automobile service stations, shall
also be applicable to automobile repair shops.
F. The storage of junk or dilapidated vehicles on the site shall not be permitted.
§ 15-5.4. Automobile sales establishment for new and/or used cars.
A. Automobile sales establishments for new and/or used cars may be permitted as a
conditional use in the zoning district specified, provided that the lot, use and structures
shall adhere to the following:
(1) The property on which an automobile sales establishment is located shall conform
to the lot requirements established in the zoning district in which the conditional
use is permitted.
(2) The leasing of automobiles is also permitted in conjunction with the selling of
autos.
(3) A buffer area, a minimum of 25 feet in width, measured from the street right-ofway,
shall be provided along all such rights-of-way upon which the site has
frontage. Said buffer area shall be planted with grass and low-growing shrubbery.
Buffer areas, each a minimum of 25 feet in width, shall be provided on all the side
and rear property lines of the site and shall be landscaped in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Section 15-11.7. Where the site of an auto sales
establishment abuts a residential zoning district, the minimum width of the buffer
area provided along the zone boundaries between the two (2) districts shall be
increased to 50 feet. This buffer area shall also be landscaped in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Section 15-11.8.
(4) No vehicles shall be displayed, stored or parked within any buffer area.
(5) All areas used for the display, storage or parking of vehicles shall be of a paved
surface, which drains into a facility provided with an oil trap or similar device
designed, intended and installed to prevent petroleum products from draining
directly into the ground and/or public drainage system.
(6) No vehicles shall be displayed, stored or parked on any public street or within any
public or private right-of-way or easement.
(7) No facilities for vehicle body work shall be permitted on the site, except those
facilities designed and intended for the preparation and maintenance of vehicles
sold on the same premises and where such facilities are clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use.
Article V
9
(8) The delivery of autos shall take place on the premises and not on a public street or
within a public right-of-way.
(9) Off-street customer parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
established as set forth in Section 15-12.16.
§ 15-5.5. Automotive service stations.
A. Automobile service stations may be permitted in those zones specified, subject to the
issuance of a conditional use permit and adherence to the minimum standards of the
particular zone and the following:
(1) The motor vehicle service station shall have minimum of 150 feet of frontage on
and direct access to a roadway classified as a minor rural arterial.
(2) Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre.
(3) No vehicle shall be permitted to be standing or parking on the premises of a motor
vehicle service station other than those used by the employees in the indirect or
direct operation of the establishment, except for the following: no more that five
(5) during working hours and no more than three (3) overnight. Overnight
outdoor storage of more than three (3) vehicles shall be prohibited.
(4) Convenience shops may be permitted, provided that:
(a) The maximum gross floor area of the convenience store shall not exceed
2,000 square feet; provided, however, that the maximum gross floor area
of a convenience store may be increased at rate of 1,000 square feet of
additional gross floor area per acre of additional lot area over the required
minimum lot area, up to a maximum of 6,000 square feet of gross floor
area; and,
(b) Additional on-site parking for the convenience shops is provided in
accordance with Section 15-12.16.
(5) All fuel pump islands shall be located at least 35 feet from all property lines.
(6) No outdoor oil drainage pits or hydraulic lifts shall be permitted.
(7) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed building. No
parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles may be stored out-of-doors.
(8) No body work shall be permitted.
(9) Illumination shall be such that no direct glare from the lights shall fall upon
adjoining streets or properties.
(10) Sales of new or used cars are prohibited.
(11) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump islands and the building
island only. The outside storage of oil cans and/or antifreeze and similar products
may be displayed on the respective islands, if provided for in a suitable metal
stand or rack.
(12) The maximum building coverage shall be 15% of the lot area and a maximum of
20% of the lot area with a canopy. The maximum percent of lot coverage for
buildings and all impervious surface areas shall be 65%.
(13) The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 30% of the lot area.
(14) A canopy, consisting of a roof-like cover that is supported by one or more
columns or stanchions, without side walls, used primarily to shield fuel pumps
from the elements, shall be permitted subject to the following:
Article V
10
(a) The minimum canopy setback shall be 25 feet.
(b) The thickness of said canopy or the dimension measured from the topside
to the underside of the canopy shall be greater than 30 inches.
(c) The height of said canopy shall not exceed 15 feet, as measured to the
bottom of the canopy.
§ 15-5.6. Car washes.
A. Car washes may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning districts specified,
provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the minimum area, yard and
building requirements of the particular district and the following:
(1) All mechanical activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
(2) Wastewater from the use shall be discharged into the public sanitary sewer
system. No on-site septic system or dry well shall be permitted.
§15-5.7. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
A. Cemeteries and mausoleums for human internment may be permitted as a conditional use
in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the minimum area, yard and building requirements of the particular district and the
following:
(1) Gravesites shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any public right-of-way
line and 50 feet from all other property lines.
(2) Principal and/or accessory structures, including mausoleums, shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from all property lines.
(3) Parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board and no parking
shall be located closer than 100 feet to any public right-of-way.
§ 15-5.8. Child care centers; nursery schools, day care centers.
A. Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers may be permitted as a
conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures
shall adhere to the following:
(1) A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and building.
(2) The minimum required lot area for the proposed use shall be one (1) acre. Other
lot and principal building bulk requirements for the respective zoning district of
the proposed use shall prevail.
(3) Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than 20 feet to the rear or side
property line. No accessory building shall be permitted within the required front
yard setback of the front building line of the principle building, whichever is
greater.
(4) All interior facilities and areas to be used by the children shall be located on the
principal entrance floor and any other level which is not more than ½ story above
Article V
11
or below the finished grade at the location from which pedestrian access is
provided to the building.
(5) A minimum of 100 square feet per rated building capacity of outdoor space
devoted to recreational use shall be provided and shall be entirely fenced or
otherwise protected from hazards, traffic and driveways.
(6) Basement areas shall not be utilized for child care, classrooms or recreational
purposes.
(7) All loading and unloading of children shall take place on site and not in the rightof-
way of a public street.
(8) No temporary or permanent residential dwelling facilities shall be provided in a
child-care center, nursery school or day-care center.
(9) The use shall be licensed by the Division of Youth and Family Services, New
Jersey Department of Human Services.
§ 15-5.9. Churches.
A. Churches may be permitted in those districts designated in this chapter upon application
for a permit and upon determination by the approving authority that the following
standards and conditions are met:
(1) A set of plans, specifications and plot plans shall be filed with the approving
authority, showing overall dimensions, topographic conditions, the location and
intended use of existing and proposed buildings, the relationship of the proposed
use to streets and adjacent properties and other physical features which might act
as a deterrent to the general welfare.
(2) Before issuing a permit, the approving authority shall determine that the following
standards are met:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet and the minimum
frontage shall be 200 feet.
(b) The approving authority shall determine that the site plan is appropriate to
the adjacent area. It may require buffers of foliage if necessary to protect
surrounding properties from the effect of light or noise generated in
connection with the use of the property. Such buffer area shall be
constructed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-5.10. Commercial recreation activities.
A. Commercial recreation uses, such as theatres, drive-in theatres, bowling alleys, skating
rinks, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, amusement parks, dance halls, commercial
swimming pools, arcades and amusement machines, coin operated or otherwise, such as
video and/or pinball machines, may be permitted as a conditional use in those areas
specified, provided that the use and/or structure shall adhere to the minimum standards of
the particular zone and the following:
(1) No building, structure, active recreation area or parking area shall be located
closer than 50 feet to any residential property line.
Article V
12
(2) Unless elsewhere specified in this chapter, off-street parking requirements shall
be determined by the Planning Board.
(3) Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures, including swimming pools:
20 percent.
(4) Minimum unoccupied open space: 20 percent.
(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no conditional use permit shall be required for the
accessory use of five (5) or less amusement machines, coin-operated or otherwise,
including but not limited to video and/or pinball machines in any establishment,
provided that the use of five (5) or less machines is clearly an accessory use in
such establishment.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no conditional use permit shall be required for the
placement of over five (5) amusement machines, coin-operated or otherwise,
including but not limited to video and/or pinball machines in any establishment
presently approved or used as a commercial recreation use, provided that such
placement of said amusement machines is a secondary use.
§ 15-5.11. Community residences for developmentally disabled and community shelters
for victims of domestic violence.
A. Community residences for developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims
of domestic violence, housing between 7 and 15 persons, excluding resident staff, may be
permitted in those zoning districts specified, subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, and shall adhere to the minimum requirements of the particular zone and the
following standards:
(1) A statement is submitted with the application setting forth the full particulars
regarding the use, activities and buildings.
(2) The required minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet for each
developmentally disabled person and employee housed at the residence, but not
less than the minimum lot area required for single-family homes in the zone.
(3) The required minimum gross habitable floor area shall be 240 square feet for each
developmentally disabled person and employee housed at the residence.
(4) No conditional use permit shall be granted if the number of developmentally
disabled and mentally ill persons residing at such community residences exceeds
0.5% of the population of the Township.
(5) No community residence for the developmentally disabled shall be located upon a
lot containing any other principal use, nor shall any structure or facility on the site
be utilized to provide services for any persons not residing on the site.
(6) No community residence for the developmentally disabled shall be in excess of
two (2) stories in height, exclusive of basement areas. Basement areas shall not
be utilized to house patients.
(7) Each community residence for the developmentally disabled shall submit proof of
licensing by the Department of Human Services of the State of New Jersey.
(8) No community residence for the developmentally disabled shall be located within
1,500 feet of any other community residence for the developmentally disabled.
(9) No community residence for the developmentally disabled shall be located on any
arterial roadway.
Article V
13
(10) No community residence for the developmentally disabled shall be located in
areas of heavy vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, or in any area where, by
reason of any condition existing in proximity to the proposed community
residence for the developmentally disabled, the occupants of said proposed
community residence for the developmentally disabled would be exposed to
undue hazard.
(11) Each community residence for the developmentally disabled shall provide one (1)
off-street parking space for each employee on the shift employing the largest
number of persons, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each three (3)
developmentally disabled persons, or fraction thereof, residing at the site. The
required off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and
shall be screened from adjacent residentially zoned properties.
(12) No building utilized as a community residence for the developmentally disabled
shall be constructed or altered so as to be inharmonious with the residential
character of adjacent structures or provide services for any person not residing on
the site.
§ 15-5.12. Health-care facilities.
A. Health-care facilities may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning districts
specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the following:
(1) A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and requirements;
(2) The lot upon which the use is proposed and the building shall conform to the
following minimum standards and requirements:
Minimum Area, Yard and Building Requirements
(a) Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 5.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 250
(b) Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 35
(c) Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted
Rear yard setback (feet) 30
Side yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage (combined 25
coverage of all principal and accessory
buildings) (percent)
(3) A minimum of 16 patient beds shall be provided;
Article V
14
(4) Basement areas in health-care facilities shall not be included in calculating
building height, nor shall these areas be utilized to house patients or for recreation
areas; and,
(5) All health-care facilities shall be licensed by and/or meet all applicable standards
of Federal, State and County regulatory agencies.
§ 15-5.13. Home occupation.
A. Home occupations: A home occupation may be permitted in those districts specified,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) In addition to meeting the definitional requirement of this chapter, a home
occupation shall further be defined as an accessory use that:
(a) Is clearly accessory and incidental to the detached single-family principal
use of the structure and property.
(b) Is conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building.
(c) Is conducted by and limited to a member or members of the immediate
family residing full-time in the single-family dwelling and no more than
one (1) employee or family member not residing in the principal dwelling.
(d) Occupies not more than 10% of the total floor area of the residential
structure provided that the gross floor area of the structure shall meet or
exceed the minimum habitable floor area requirement of the zone.
(e) Does not alter the residential appearance of a principal residential structure
or the residential appearance of the property upon which it is conducted.
(f) Does not involve outdoor storage of equipment or materials.
(g) Does not involve signage other than a single lighted or unlighted
identification sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
(h) Does not involve the retail sale of goods and/or services offered or
produced by the home occupation from the property.
(i) Does not involve truck deliveries (except parcel delivery services, e.g.
UPS) and no more than an average of ten (10) vehicle visits per week,
including parcel delivery services (residential family or permitted
employees shall not be included in this calculation).
(j) Does not constitute a nuisance to adjacent residential property for reasons
of noise, odor, congestion, traffic, vibration, electrical interference and
other causes.
(k) The total floor area utilized for home occupation within an accessory
building does not exceed more than 10% of the total floor area of the
principal dwelling.
(l) The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other
residential uses in the zone.
(m) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet or the minimum lot area required in
the zone, whichever is greater.
(2) The cumulative total floor area of all the home occupations conducted on any lot
does not exceed 10% of the floor area of the principal dwelling.
(3) Permit requirements for home occupation.
Article V
15
(a) Prior to commencement of any home occupation use, a zoning permit for
the home occupation use shall be issued by the Zoning Officer. The
zoning permit shall be valid for a term of one (1) year (twelve months).
(b) Zoning permits for the home occupation shall be renewed on an annual
basis upon satisfactory application to the Zoning Officer.
(c) The annual fee for a zoning permit for a home occupation shall be in
accordance with Article XVI.
(d) Where required, proof of necessary Federal, State and/or County
approvals must be submitted with an application for a home occupation.
§ 15-5.14. Home professional office.
A. “Home professional office” may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones
specified, provided that the use and/or structure shall adhere to the minimum standards of
the particular zone and the following:
(1) A professional office shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory
building to the dwelling, which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner.
(2) Not more than two (2) persons outside the family shall be employed on the
premises.
(3) Advertising shall be limited to the display of a professional nameplate not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
(4) Such use shall only be permitted as part of a detached single-family dwelling and
that when such use is part of a residence there remains in the living quarters the
minimum habitable floor area as required by this chapter.
(5) The lot fronts on and has access to a street other than the “local street” per the
Master Plan.
(6) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet or the minimum lot area required in the
zone, whichever is greater.
§ 15-5.15. Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. Hospitals and philanthropic or eleemosynary uses may be permitted as a conditional use
in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the following:
(1) Minimum area, yard and building requirements:
(a) Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 5.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 250
(b) Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 100
Maximum building height (feet) 100
(c) Accessory building requirements:
Article V
16
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage (combined 25
coverage of all principal and accessory
buildings) (percent)
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct access to a major arterial or minor
arterial;
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth
in Section 15-12.16.;
(4) The proposal use shall not be detrimental to the values of adjacent properties; and,
(5) A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and buildings.
§ 15-5.16. Hotels and motels.
A. Hotels and motels may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones specified,
provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of the
particular zone and the following:
(1) Minimum lot area: one (1) acre.
(2) Minimum lot area per unit: 1,500 square feet.
(3) Efficiency apartments may be permitted by the Planning Board, provided that the
applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that they will be utilized primarily for
transients.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 20 percent.
(5) Minimum unoccupied open space: 20 percent.
(6) No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line.
(7) Minimum number of units: 20.
(8) No accessory building or parking area shall be located closer than 20 feet to a
residential property line.
(9) No additional parking shall be required for swimming pools, provided that the
pools are not open for use by the general public but are primarily for use of the
guests at the hotel or motel. Swimming pools shall otherwise be subject to the
provisions of Section 15-7.9. of this chapter.
§ 15-5.17. Kennels.
A. Kennels may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones specified, provided that the
use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone and the
following:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
(2) No structures, enclosures, pens, or runs shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
lot line.
(3) Sufficient space shall be provided indoors for all animals kept at the facility and
no animals shall be kept out of doors between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Article V
17
(4) Not more than ten (10) dogs or cats or combination thereof for each acre of lot
area shall be kept at any time.
(5) Outdoor runs or pens shall be visually screened from adjoining properties.
(6) Any such kennel shall also be approved by the Board of Health to insure proper
sanitation and compliance with applicable State and local health codes.
§ 15-5.18. Long-term facilities, assisted living facilities, residential health care facilities;
and, continuing care retirement communities.
A. Long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, residential health care facilities; and,
continuing care retirement communities, may be permitted as a conditional use in the
zoning district specified provided that the lot, use and structure adhere to the minimum
standard of the particular zone and the following:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be three (3) acres.
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth shall be 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(7) Maximum percent of building and impervious coverage shall be 65 percent.
§ 15-5.19. Public utilities.
A. Public utility uses, such as water towers, pumping stations, electric substations, radio
towers, transmission lines and switching stations, which must be provided above ground,
may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that
the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the following:
(1) A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the reasons that
the proposed installation must be provided above ground in a specific location
why it is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the public utility system
or for the satisfactory and convenient provision of service by the utility to the
neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
(2) Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures, including swimming pools:
20 percent of the lot area.
(3) Minimum unoccupied open space: 20 percent.
(4) No building, structure, recreation area or parking area shall be located closer than
50 feet to a residential property line.
(5) The maximum membership limit of said organization shall be fixed at the time of
application and shall be commensurate with the amount of land to be used and the
exact nature of the use. No further expansion of said membership shall be made
unless additional land is acquired and supplemental application is made to the
Planning Board.
(6) Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board except
that where swimming pools are provided, the off-street parking requirements shall
be not less than the requirements under 101-8.8C, plus such additional parking as
may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
Article V
18
(7) The property must front on and have access to a principal arterial roadway.
§ 15-5.20. Mini-storage (self-storage facility/mini-warehouse).
A. Self-storage facilities may be permitted in those districts specified, subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit and adherence to the minimum requirements of the particular
zone and the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: three (3) acres.
(2) Minimum side and rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum width of landscape buffer between all residential uses and residential
zones along side and near property lines: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum width of landscape buffer along side and rear property lines, all other
uses: 20 feet.
(5) Screening shall be required in the front yard area to enhance the appearance or
screen the self-storage facility from roadways. Such screening may consist of
fences, walls, natural vegetation and landscaping, or some combination thereof,
and shall be specifically approved by the Planning Board.
(6) Maximum building height: 24 feet and two (2) stories.
(7) Lighting shall be in strict accordance with the requirements of Section 15-12.19.
(8) No flammable materials, hazardous chemicals or explosives shall be permitted to
be stored.
(9) The servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn
mowers, appliances or similar equipment shall be prohibited.
(10) Auctions, wholesale and retail sales, and garage and miscellaneous other sales
shall be prohibited.
(11) The operation of power tools, spray painting, compressors and other similar
equipment shall be prohibited.
(12) Outdoor storage shall be limited to the storage of boats, boat trailers and
recreation vehicles, and any such storage shall not be visible from any property
line.
(13) Maximum building coverage: 35 percent.
§ 15-5.21. Truck terminals.
A. Truck terminals may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning district specified,
provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the following:
(1) The required minimum lot area shall be three (3) acres.
(2) Principal buildings and accessory building requirements and other lot bulk
requirements for the particular zone within which the site is located shall apply.
(3) The required minimum unoccupied open space shall be 35 percent.
(4) No trucks shall be parked, stored or otherwise maneuvered within the front yard
setback area.
(5) A heavily landscaped buffer area, a minimum of 25 feet in width, shall be
provided along all rear and side property lines, where the parking, storing or
maneuvering of trucks shall be prohibited.
Article V
19
(6) Trucks, including tractor or trailer units, parked or stored on the lot shall be
arranged in an orderly manner in allocated spaces, as shown on an approved site
plan.
(7) Trailer units shall be parked or stored only on paved surfaces, and concrete
surfaces shall be required under trailer support devices (e.g. crank-down wheels
or pads).
(8) All repair and service operations shall take place within completely enclosed
buildings in compliance with setback requirements for the zone.
(9) At least ten (10) percent of the area devoted to truck parking and storage shall be
landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected areas along
walkways, center islands and at the ends of the bays.
§ 15-5.22. Veterinary clinics.
A. Veterinary clinics or hospitals or animal care facilities may be permitted as a conditional
use in those zones specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the
minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
(1) Minimum lot size: one (1) acre.
(2) Minimum front yard setback, principal or accessory structures, including kennels,
pens and runs: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks, principal or accessory structures, including
kennels, pens and runs: 50 feet.
(4) No building or area used for kennels, pens or runs shall be located closer than 150
feet to any dwelling.
(5) Sufficient space shall be provided indoors for all animals kept at the facility, and
no animals may be kept out-of-doors between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(6) Detailed plans and proposals for sanitary sewage and solid waste disposal shall be
submitted to the Planning Board.
(7) Provisions shall be made for noise control which as a minimum shall include:
(a) Soundproofing of all enclosed structures.
(b) Noise baffles or dense screening and landscaping of all outside pens,
kennels, cages and runs.
(c) Secondary buffer plantings between pens, kennels, cages and runs and any
exterior property line buffer strip when required by the Planning Board.
(8) All such facilities shall be licensed by and meet the requirements of any
appropriate County, State or Federal regulatory agencies.
(9) The property must front on a street classified as a major collector of minor or
principal arterial roadway.
§ 15-5.23. Sexually-oriented businesses. [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
Sexually-oriented businesses as defined herein may be permitted as a conditional use in the GB,
HB or LI zones provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of
the particular zone and shall meet the applicable criteria as required pursuant to this Chapter.
Sexually-oriented businesses shall meet all of the provisions of the New Jersey Code of Criminal
Justice as N.J.S. 2C:34-7, including the following locational and site requirements:
Article V
20
A. No person shall operate a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of any existing
sexually-oriented business, or any church, synagogue, temple or other place of public
worship, or any elementary or secondary school or any school bus stop, or any municipal
or county playground or place of public resort and recreation, or any hospital or any child
care center, or within 1,000 feet of any area zoned for residential use.
B. Every sexually-oriented business shall be surrounded by a perimeter buffer of at least 50
feet in width with plantings, fence or other physical divider along the outside of the
perimeter sufficient to impede the view of the interior of the premises in which the
business is located.
C. No sexually-oriented business shall display more than two exterior signs, consisting of
one identification sign and one sign giving that the premises are off limits to minors.
Both signs shall be building-mounted and shall not extend more than 12 inches from the
face of the building. The identification sign shall in no case be greater than 40 square
feet in size.
D. This subsection shall no apply to a sexually-oriented business already lawfully operating
on the effective date of this ordinance where another sexually-oriented business, an
elementary or secondary school or school bus stop, or any municipal or county
playground or place of public resort and recreation, or any hospital or any child care
center, is subsequently established within 1,000 feet.
§ 15-5.24. Boat repair shop and boat storage. [Amended 12/23/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-
043]
A. Boat repair shops may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning districts specified,
provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the minimum area, yard and
building requirements of the particular district and to the following:
(1) No outdoor oil drainage pits shall be permitted.
(2) All repairs shall be performed in a specifically designated and approved area.
Boat repair may include general boat maintenance activities, such as painting,
sanding and winterizing, provided that all maintenance is performed in the
designated area. Power washing shall be permitted provided the activity takes
place in an approved containment area. Fiberglass repairs of boat hulls shall be
permitted provided the repairs are performed within an approved and designated
containment area.
(3) Sales of boats shall be permitted, however, no more than five (5) boats may be
displayed on the premises at any one time. Boats for sale may not be displayed in
a location that is less than twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line.
(4) Year round boat storage shall be permitted as an accessory use and in conjunction
with the boat repair activity.
(5) Open or closed rack storage shall be prohibited.
(6) No boats shall be stored in the required front yard setback area.
Article V
21
(7) No boats shall be placed or stored within twenty (20) feet of the side and rear
yards property lines.
(8) All boats shall be screened from the public view by a solid fence and/or evergreen
plantings, as required by the Planning Board.
(9) A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape buffer, consisting of a fence and
vegetation, shall be provided along the side and rear yards property lines.
(10) In the event that the foregoing standards conflict with any other standards in the
chapter, these standards shall control.
(11) Boat repair shops and boat storage shall also comply with the following design
standards. Relief from these standards may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c.
(a) Repair and maintenance materials, including flammable liquids, shall be
stored in a fully enclosed building and in accordance with the standards set
forth in Ordinance Section 15-11.18E. and any other applicable local,
State and Federal standards.
(b) All repairs and maintenance activities on boats and facilities situated on
the premises shall be performed by personnel employed by the boat
repair/storage establishment, not individual boat owners.
(c) The hours of operation shall be limited to the time period between dawn to
dusk.
(d) The storage of junk or dilapidated boats on the site shall not be permitted.
All boats shall be, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, in good working
order, unless scheduled for repair. All boats shall have current
registrations. The Code Enforcement Officer, upon just cause, may grant
extensions to the registration requirement for up to forty-five (45) days.
(e) Boats shall be stored on trailers or blocks.
(f) Trailer storage shall be permitted.
Article VI
1
ARTICLE VI
Non-Conforming Uses, Lots and Buildings
§ 15-6.1. Continuance.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of the land or a building
existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be continued although such use or
building does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in
which such land or building is located; provided, however, that:
(1) No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
(2) No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased unless such
enlargement is conforming.
(3) No nonconforming use may be expanded.
§ 15-6.2. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be presumed to be abandoned when there occurs a cessation of such
use or activity by an apparent act or failure on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such
use within a period of one (1) year from the date of cessation or discontinuance. Such use shall
not thereafter be reinstated and the structure shall not be reoccupied, except in conformance with
this chapter.
§ 15-6.3. Restoration.
If any nonconforming building shall be destroyed by reasons of windstorm, fire, explosion, act of
God, or otherwise, to an extent of more than partial destruction as provided for in N.J.R.S.
40:55D-68, then such destruction shall be deemed complete destruction, and the structure may
not be rebuilt, restored or repaired, except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
§ 15-6.4. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be changed back again into
a nonconforming use.
§ 15-6.5. Alterations.
A nonconforming building may be altered, but not enlarged or extended, during its life to an
extent not exceeding the aggregate fifty (50) percent of the assessed value, as recorded in the
records of the Tax Assessor, unless said building is changed to a building conforming to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 15-6.6. Prior approved construction.
Article VI
2
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of
a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and substantial construction
has taken place prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 15-6.7. District boundary changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district
to another of a different classification, the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
§ 15-6.8. Pre-existing non-conforming single-family detached dwellings/lots.
[Amended 6/26/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
In the case of a detached single-family dwelling and a lot in the R-1A, R-3A and R-5A zones,
which were conforming on December 29, 2002, said detached single-family dwelling may be
enlarged or extended provided: 1) The proposed addition, enlargement, or extension complies
with all of the regulations of the zone district in which the structure was situated on December
29, 2002; or 2) At the time of and since the adoption of Ordinance No. 02-46 on December 30,
2002, which rendered the lot nonconforming, either the owner of the lot does not and did not
own adjoining property, which would otherwise render the property more conforming or
conforming, or the owner of such property has consolidated by deed, or does agree to consolidate
by deed, the adjoining land owned in common to render the property more conforming or
conforming to the current zoning requirements.
§ 15-6.9. Nonconforming lots
[Amended 6/26/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
A single construction permit permitting the construction of one (1) detached single-family
dwelling may be issued for any parcel of land in the R-1A, R-3A and R-5A Residential Zones
with an area less than required for a lot in the zone in which the lot is located provided: 1) The
proposed single-family detached dwelling and lot comply with all the zoning requirements of the
zone district in which the lot was located on December 29, 2002; or 2) At the time of and since
the adoption of Ordinance No. 02-46 on December 30, 2002, which rendered the lot
nonconforming, the owner of the lot does not and did not own a contiguous lot (or lots), not
qualifying under this section, in and of itself, which would otherwise render the property more
conforming or conforming. The owner of such non-qualifying property shall consolidate by
deed, or shall agree to consolidate by deed, the adjoining lot (or lots) to render the property more
conforming or conforming to the current zoning requirements.
Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of this section will expire on December 31, 2003.
This expiration provision shall not be construed to affect any parcel with rights conferred
pursuant to a valid building permit or approval granted by the Planning Board of Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
Article VI
3
§ 15-6.10. Exceptions to the front yard requirements of lots fronting on Route 9 in the
General Business (GB) Zone [Amended 9/11/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
Notwithstanding an existing nonconforming front yard setback of a non-residential structure
fronting on Route 9 in the General Business (GB) Zone, such structure may be enlarged or
extended within the required front yard setback area provided that: such enlargement does not
extend beyond the existing non-conforming front yard setback; does not enlarge or extend the
structure into any other required side or rear yard, which is now conforming; and the current or
proposed use of the structure is a permitted use within the GB Zone. The proposed enlargement
or extension, which would otherwise be non-conforming except as otherwise permitted pursuant
to this subsection, may not exceed 1,000 square feet in total floor area.
Article VII
1
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 15-7.1. Application of regulations.
Except as herein otherwise provided:
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or
enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used, or intended to be used, for any
purposes or in any manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as
permitted in the zone in which such building or land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor
shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location regulations
hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or open space is located.
C. No off-street parking area or loading or unloading area provided to meet the minimum offstreet
parking, loading or unloading requirements for one use or structure shall be
considered as providing off-street parking, loading or unloading area for a use or
structure on any other lot, unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
D. No subdivision may be approved unless each lot contained in said subdivision complies with
all the requirements of the zone in which said lot is located or unless a variance has been
granted therefrom.
E. No use shall be considered a permitted use or a conditional use in a zone district unless
included as such in the particular zone district.
§ 15-7.2. Height.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, non-commercial antennas,
belfries, cupolas, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, solar heating equipment, focal point features
such as clock tower or spire, and other mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the
normal roofline, provided that no fire hazard is created, and provided that such exception covers
not more than ten (10%) percent of the roof or ground area. Such features, however, shall be
erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose that they are to serve.
Provisions of this chapter shall permit the erection of parapet walls or cornices for ornament
without windows above the building height limit by not more than five (5’) feet. Quasi-public
buildings and public buildings, schools, churches and other similar permitted uses may exceed
the height limit herein established, provided that such uses shall increase the front, rear and side
yards one (1’) foot for each foot by which such building exceeds the height limit established for
the district within which the use is located, but in no case shall any building have a height greater
than fifty (50’) feet. [Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
Article VII
2
§ 15-7.3. Lighting.
All area lighting shall provide translucent fixtures with shields around the light source. The light
intensity provided at ground level shall average a maximum of one-foot candles over the entire
area. For each fixture and lighted sign, the total quantity of light radiated above a horizontal
plane passing through the light source shall not exceed seven and one-half percent of the total
quantity of light emitted from the light source. Any other outdoor lighting shall be shown on the
plan in sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects at the property line and on nearby
streets, driveways, residences, and overhead sky glow. No lighting shall shine directly or reflect
into windows, or onto streets and driveways in such a manner as to interfere with driver vision.
No lighting shall be of a yellow, red, green or blue beam nor be of a rotating, pulsating, beam, or
other intermittent frequency. The intensity of such light sources, light shielding, the direction
and reflection of the lighting, and similar characteristics shall be subject to the site plan approval
by the approving authority. The objective of these specification is to minimize undesirable
offsite effects.
§ 15-7.4. Natural features.
Natural features such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops, and views, shall be preserved whenever
possible. On individual lots, care shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil
stability and the landscape treatment of the area.
§ 15-7.5. Principal use.
No lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal permitted use. No more than one
principal building shall be permitted on one lot except that commercial uses, shipping centers,
apartments and condominium projects, and industrial complexes, all receiving site plan approval,
may be permitted to have more than one building on a lot in accordance with standards of the
zoning district in which it is located.
§ 15-7.6. Signs (general).
No billboards shall be erected. No sign of any type shall be permitted to obstruct driving vision,
traffic signals, sight triangles, and traffic direction and identification signs.
A. Animated, flashing, and illusionary signs. Signs using mechanical and/or electrical
devices to revolve, flash, or display movement or the illusion of movement are
prohibited.
B. Attached signs. Attached signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall to which they are
attached and the face of the sign shall project no more than 12 inches from the surface of
the wall.
C. Height. The uppermost part of an attached sign shall not exceed the base of the second
floor window sill in a two or more story structure, or the base of the roof or 25 feet,
whichever is lower, in either a one-story structure or a structure without windows. The
Article VII
3
uppermost part of a free standing sign shall not exceed 20 feet. The lowest portion of any
sign which projects above an area traversed either by motor vehicles or pedestrians shall
be at least 15 feet and ten 10 feet, respectively.
D. Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be arranged to reflect the light and glare away
from adjoining lots and streets. No sign shall be permitted that has a beam, beacon or
flashing illumination. All signs lighted exteriorly shall have the light source shielded
from adjoining lots, streets, and interior drives. All lights shall be either shielded or have
translucent fixtures to reduce offsite effects.
E. Location. Attached signs may be located anywhere that does not conflict with any
height, obstruction to vision, and similar regulation of this chapter. Free standing signs
shall be located only in the front yard and shall be no closer to a side lot line than the
minimum side yard for the principal building, but in any event no closer to a street rightof-
way than 20 feet and not located in any sight triangle.
F. Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed to durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
G. Real estate signs. Real estate signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises or portion thereof shall be, if not attached to the building, set back at least onehalf
the building setback, but need not exceed 15 feet from all street and property lines.
Signs shall not exceed eight square feet for residential advertising or 35 square feet for
commercial and industrial uses. Signs shall be removed at the expense of the advertiser
within 15 days after the termination or completion of the matter being advertised. Real
estate signs do not require a building permit. No more than one sign shall be permitted
along each street on which the building has frontage. Real estate signs shall be permitted
only on the lot which the sign is advertising.
H. Sign areas and dimension. Sign area shall include all lettering, wording, coloring and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or
enclosed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing incidental to the
display itself. A freestanding sign with two exposures shall have a total sign area
consisting of the area of one side of the sign, but both sides may be used. Street number
designations, postal boxes, family names or residences, onsite traffic directional and
parking signs, signs posting property as “private property,” “no hunting,” or similar
purposes, and “danger” signs around utility and other danger areas are permitted, but are
not to be considered in calculating the sign area. The maximum dimension in any
direction along the surface of a sign shall be ten (10) feet.
I. Temporary signs. No more than one sign advertising the name of the building under
construction, general contractor, sub-contractor, financing institution, any public agencies
or officials, and the professional personnel who worked on the project are permitted on a
construction site beginning with the issuance of a building permit and terminating with
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure or the expiration of the
Article VII
4
building permit, whichever comes first. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 32 square
feet.
§ 15-7.7. Storage of boats, travel trailers and commercial vehicles.
Storage of mobile homes or manufactured homes is specifically prohibited. The outdoor storage
of an unoccupied recreational vehicle, motor homes, travel trailer, camper or boat shall be
permitted on single-family properties, provided that:
A. Such storage shall not be located closer than three feet from any side or rear lot line or ten
feet from any street line.
B. Travel trailer, camper or boat shall not exceed 35 feet in length and eight (8) feet in
width.
C. Only one such trailer, camper, boat shall be permitted to be stored outdoors in any
required yard area on any single-family residential lot.
D. No travel trailer, camper or boat stored in conformance with this subsection shall remain
in such storage for longer than 12 consecutive months.
E. Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this subsection shall not be occupied and
shall not be provided with utility connections other than required for vehicle maintenance
and shall not be used for the storage of any non-recreational material.
F. Automobiles, station wagons, small pickups or panel trucks with less than one ton load
capacity, jeep vehicles, travelalls and similar types of vehicles used for commercial
purposes are permitted in all zones. Trucks and other commercial vehicles, not
mentioned above, shall not be parked overnight or stored overnight in any residential
zone except for vehicles engaged in construction parked or stored on an active
construction site.
G. No trailer, auto trailer, trailer coach, travel trailer or camper shall be used for dwelling
purposes or as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, nor shall any such trailer or
camper be used for storage or space for the permanent conduct of any business,
profession, occupation or trade, except that such facilities may be used for temporary
residency for the temporary replacement of a damaged dwelling unit and for temporary
use as a construction office located on a site during construction provided a temporary
permit has been issued for its use by the building inspector. This subsection shall not be
construed so as to prohibit the parking or storage of such trailers and campers on private
premises or the recreational use of same in campgrounds in conformance with all
applicable ordinances and codes.
H. The use of one (1) recreational vehicle/travel trailer/motor home/camper may be
permitted, for the purpose of security, upon those seasonal businesses, such as marinas,
from March 1 to December 31 of each year. The aforementioned vehicle, as used for
Article VII
5
security purposes, must be removed and absent from the property between January 1 and
February 28 of each year. [Amended 7/24/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-17]
§ 15-7.8. Yard areas.
A. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other buildings, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
B. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and shall conform to
the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in which located, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
C. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the
sky, except for the ordinary projections allowed by the State Uniform Construction Code
including, but not limited to, sills, belt courses, chimneys, flues, buttresses, ornamental
features, and eaves, provided, however, that none of the aforesaid projections shall
project into the minimum required yards more than 24 inches, unless otherwise permitted
by this chapter. Unroofed entrance porches or steps, which do not rise above the height
of the floor level of the ground floor, may extend into any yard providing the total area of
all such porches, which extend into such yards, does not exceed 100 square feet.
D. No principle structure shall be constructed closer than twenty (20) feet to the water’s
edge of any stream, lake, lagoon or other body of water, in addition, no accessory
structure shall be constructed closer than fifteen (15) feet to the water’s edge of any
stream, lake, lagoon or other body of water.
E. Additions or alterations to existing single-family dwellings that remain within the
existing footprint of the enclosed roofed area shall be permitted.
F. Within any residential zone, no heating, ventilating and/or air-conditioning units, ducts,
heaters, furnaces, well pumps or other aboveground mechanicals shall be placed within
four feet of any property line nor within any front yard setback. Air conditioning units
requiring replacement due to destruction by flood or fire may be placed within three feet
of any property line but shall not be placed within any front yard setback. [Amended
1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
G. Access ramps. Access ramps for handicapped individuals shall be exempt from the
building setback requirements for the particular zoning district.
H. Unroofed patios, decks or terraces shall be considered part of the principal structure and
shall not extend into any yard area unless such unroofed patio, deck or terrace does not
rise more than eighteen (18) inches above ground level.
Article VII
6
I. In order to accommodate elevated building construction in Areas of Special Flood
Hazard as set forth in §185-7, uncovered stairs may encroach into the required front
yard setback as required to elevate the building to the minimum of the ABFE or the
BFE, plus any required freeboard. No such additional encroachment shall exceed five
(5) feet. [Amended 1/24/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
§15-7.9. Private, residential swimming pools.
A. Permanent underground.
(1) Permanent aboveground: aboveground pools equipped with fences built above the
top level of the pool.
(2) Temporary aboveground: aboveground pools not equipped with fences built
above the top of the pool.
B. Lighting. All lighting fixtures for a private swimming pool shall be installed so as to
comply with all applicable safety regulation and shall be shielded so as to prevent any
direct beam of light from shining on any adjoining property.
C. Electric lines. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any swimming pool or
wading area.
D. An application for a permit to construct a private swimming pool shall include a plot plan
or survey of the property clearly showing the location of the proposed pool with setback
distances from the property lines and distances from buildings and structures on the
property. The plan shall be adequate for the Construction Official to clearly identify the
proposed pool location in the field.
E. Pools that are less than twenty-four (24) inches deep or having a surface area less than
two hundred fifty (250) square feet, except when such pools are permanently equipped
with a water-re-circulation system or involve structural materials, shall not require a
permit.
F. If required by the Construction Official, the application for an in-ground swimming pool
shall include a grading plan showing existing and proposed grades and the proposed flow
of surface drainage. This plan shall also show the location of the proposed pool and any
appurtenances and be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey.
G. Pump location.
(1) A pump or a filtration or pumping station for a private residential swimming pool
shall be situated a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
(2) The location of a pump of a filtration or pumping station for a private residential
swimming pool shall meet the minimum required side yard setback distances for
principal buildings, as specified in this chapter, for the zoning district within
which the property is located.
Article VII
7
H. Enclosure.
(1) In-ground pools shall be surrounded entirely by a fence, with no openings greater
than a two-inch square, and shall be capable of holding a live load of two hundred
fifty (250) pounds between posts located not more than eight (8) feet apart;
however, the residence may serve as part of the enclosure. The fence shall be
located not less than six (6) feet from the closest edge of the pool. Fences shall be
at least four (4) feet high above grade and no more than six (6) feet in height, an,
if made of wire, they must be of the chain-link type. All supporting structures
shall be on the inside of the fence, and the top of such support shall be at least one
(1) inch lower than the top of the fence.
(2) Permanent aboveground pools constructed with an attached deck and fence being
at least four (4) feet in height above ground level and capable of holding a live
load of two hundred fifty (250) pounds between posts located not more than eight
(8) feet apart need no additional fencing.
(3) Temporary aboveground pools, when not in use, must be emptied or covered with
a suitable protective covering, securely fastened or locked in place unless
enclosed by a fence meeting the requirements for a permanent underground pool.
I. Any opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the pool shall be equipped with a
gate similar to the fence and shall extend from not more than two (2) inches above the
ground to the height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type, opening
outwardly only, and shall be equipped with a lock and key or padlock and chain and shall
be kept locked, except when the pool is in use.
§ 15-7.10. Frontage on improved street.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a public street
improved to meet the Township requirements or for which such improvement has been
guaranteed by the posting of a performance guaranty pursuant to this chapter unless relief
has been granted under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the Master Plan or the Official Map
of the Township or the Subdivision and Site Plan Resolution of the County of Ocean
indicates is proposed for right-of-way widening or the street does not conform to the
minimum right-of-way width requirements in this chapter or the above-indicated
documents, the required front yard setback shall be measured from such required or
proposed right-of-way line.
C. Access to every lot shall conform to the standards of the State Highway Access
Management Code or any County or Municipal Access Management Code adopted.
§ 15-7.11. Sight triangles at intersections.
Unless more stringent regulations are provided by other provisions of this chapter, at the
intersection of two or more streets, no hedge, fence, screening strip or wall higher than 30 inches
above curb level and no obstruction to vision, other than a post not exceeding one foot in
Article VII
8
diameter, shall be permitted on any lot within the triangular area formed by two intersecting
street lines bounding said lot, or the projection of such lines, and by a line connecting a point on
each street line located 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines.
§ 15-7.12. Number of principal buildings.
No lot utilized for single-family or two-family dwelling purposes shall contain more than one (1)
principal building.
§ 15-7.13. Contiguous lot ownership.
Where two (2) or more lots created by the filing of a map pursuant to the Map Filing Law prior
to establishment of the Planning Board have any contiguous lines and are in single ownership
and one (1) or more of the lots is nonconforming in any aspect, the lots involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said
parcel shall be conveyed or divided except through the filing of an approved subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-7.14. Accessory Buildings. [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]; [Amended
12/12/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-040]
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, accessory buildings shall conform to the following
regulations:
A. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in all respects with
the yard requirements of this Chapter for principal buildings within the appropriate zone.
B. Accessory buildings shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
C. Accessory buildings or structures must be located on the same lot as the principal use to
which they are an accessory.
D. Accessory buildings shall not occupy a front yard setback in any zone and no more than
35 percent of the available rear yard area in any zone.
E. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located closer to the street than the front
building line of the principal structure and shall be governed by the individual zoning
district requirements for the side and rear yard setback limits.
F. Any building with a gross floor area in excess of 900 square feet or containing living
space shall not be considered an accessory building.
§ 15-7.15. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting. [Amended 3/25/2010 by Ord. No. 2010-
06]
Article VII
9
A. Purpose. An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of
facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as
plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
Section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
contest, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number shall include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(1) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) – A conveyance
or system or conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying Stormwater. MS4s
do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are
designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
Stormwater from streets and other sources.
(2) PERSON – Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
(3) STORM DRAIN INLET – An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening,
slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
(4) WATERS OF THE STATE – The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and
bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
C. Prohibited Conduct. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot
with one single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair
of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt
emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in
direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain
inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below t control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section D below prior to the
completion of the project.
D. Design Standard. Storm drain inlets identified in Section C above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, “solid and floatable materials” means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see Section D(3) below.
Article VII
10
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a
grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect Stormwater from that
surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe
grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines
(April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of
no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches
across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and Stormwater basing floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactures treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space four and give-eights inches long and one and
one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash truck rack that has parallel bars
with one-inch (1”) spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
E. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Official of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty allowable under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as
well as any other penalties allowed for said statute.
Article VIII
1
ARTICLE VIII.
General Administration
§ 15-8.1. Jurisdiction.
A. The Planning Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction over subdivisions, site plans,
conditional uses, the granting of variances in certain instances and such other items as set
forth in §15-3.3.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the granting of a variance
from the terms and provisions of the Zoning Regulations, except as set forth above, and
such other items as set forth in §15-3.8., 15-3.9., 15-3.10. and 15-4.
C. The Administrative Officer shall, within fourteen (14) days after receipt of a development
application, make a determination as to whether the Board to which the application is
made has jurisdiction.
§ 15-8.2. Applications requiring public hearing.
The following development applications shall require notice of a public hearing by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment prior to making a decision:
A. Major subdivisions.
B. Any application involving a variance of any kind.
C. Any application for a conditional use.
D. Any application filed pursuant to § 15-10. and 15-14.
E. Any application for a planned residential development.
F. Any application for relief of zoning requirements.
§ 15-8.3. Time periods for decisions.
Unless the developer agrees to an extension, after submission of a complete application, a Board
must grant or deny approval of a development application within the time periods established by
the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 15-8.4. Waiver of requirements and conditional approvals.
A. The rules, regulations and standards contained in this chapter shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township. Any action taken by the municipal agency under the terms of
this chapter shall give primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the
Article VIII
2
welfare of the entire community. However, if the developer or his agent can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one (1) or more of these regulations is impractical or will exact undue
hardship, the municipal agency may permit such variations or modifications as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this chapter.
B. In the event that a developer submits an application for development proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a legal action instituted
by any State agency, political subdivision or any other party to protect the public health
and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any State agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the approving
authority shall process such application for development in accordance with this chapter;
and if such application for development complies with the requirements of this chapter,
the approving authority shall approve such application conditioned on removal of such
legal barrier to development.
C. In the event that development proposed by an application for development requires an
approval by a governmental agency other than the approving authority, the approving
authority shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent
approval of such governmental agency, provided that the approving authority shall make
a decision on any application for development within the time period provided in this
chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the applicant,
unless the approving authority is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of
law.
§15-8.5. Conflicts of interest.
A. No member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall act on any matter in
which he/she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
B. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular members or alternate
members is prohibited by Subsection A. above from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interests, regular members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning
Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there
are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the
matter without any personal or financial interests, whether direct or indirect. If a choice
has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Board
of Adjustment shall make the choice.
C. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its members or alternate
members is prohibited by Subsection A. above from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interests, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall
be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Board of
Article VIII
3
Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve
in order of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter
without any personal or financial interests, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to
be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Planning
Board shall make the choice.
§ 15-8.6. Meetings.
A. Regular meetings of both the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall be
scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process or lack of a
quorum. All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on the request of any
two (2) Board members, which special meetings shall be held on notice to its members
and the public, in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L.
1975, c. 231.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the municipal agency
present at the meeting, except as otherwise required by statute. Failure of a motion to
receive the number of votes required to approve an application for development pursuant
to the exceptional vote requirements of Section 25 or 57d of the act shall be deemed an
action denying the application. Nothing herein shall be construed to contravene any act
providing for procedures for the Township Committee.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public, and notice shall
be given in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
F. Application for development in the Pinelands Area shall be bound by the meeting
requirements specified in the Little Egg Harbor Township Pinelands Area development
requirements.
G. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9. Said minutes shall be made available within ten (10) days following each
meeting. The minutes shall be marked "unapproved" if not yet adopted.
§ 15-8.7. Hearings.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall make rules governing the
conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 et seq.
Article VIII
4
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearings, or such person as he may designate, shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents
presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law P.L. 1953, c. 1983 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses, relating to an application for development,
shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer, and the right of crossexamination
shall be permitted to all interested parties through their Attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding
officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the
Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by
either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means. The Board shall allow a
transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, to be made on request by any interested
party.
F. Resolution of memorialization:
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to writing as
provided in this subsection and shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon.
(2) Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive the
number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
(3) The municipal agency shall provide such written decision, findings and
conclusion in accordance with the time limits set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g.
(4) The adoption of a resolution of memorialization, pursuant to this subsection, shall
be governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g.
(5) Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance with this
subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of the decision for
purposes of the mailings, filings and publications.
§ 15-8.8. Notice requirements for hearings.
A. Whenever a hearing is required on any application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the municipal agency in question,
the applicant shall give notice in accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
(1) All notices herein above specified in this section shall be given at least ten (10)
days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the developer shall file an affidavit of
proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the application for
development.
Article VIII
5
(2) Any notice made by certified mail as herein above required shall be deemed
complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
(3) All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall comply
with the conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11.
(4) Application for development in the Pinelands Area shall be bound by the notice of
hearing requirements specified in the Little Egg Harbor Township Pinelands Area
development requirements.
(5) Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor shall, within
seven (7) days after receipt of a request therefore and upon receipt of payment of
a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), make and certify a list from the current tax rolls of
names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to this section.
B. All appeals of a Zoning Officer's decision and all minor site plan applications shall
satisfy the notice requirements set forth in §15-8.9.A.
§ 15-8.9. Decisions.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in writing and shall
include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be made available in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10h.
C. Notice of any grant of preliminary and/or final approval for any development application
in the Pinelands Area shall be given by the applicant to the Commission as set forth in the
Little Egg Harbor Township Pinelands Area development requirements.
D. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the
municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be. A reasonable charge may be made to the
applicant for such publication. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within ten (10) days of the date of such decision.
§ 15-8.10. Payment of taxes; corporate disclosure.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every application for
development submitted to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property which is the subject of such application, or, if it is shown that
taxes or assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or other relief granted
by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner
that the municipality will be adequately protected.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq., a corporation or partnership applying to the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment for permission to subdivide a parcel of land
or applying for a variance or for approval of a site plan shall list the names and addresses
Article VIII
6
of all stockholders or individual partners owning at least ten percent (10%) of its stock of
any class or at least ten percent (10%) of the interest in the partnership, as the case may
be.
C. A corporation or partnership owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of a
corporation or ten-percent or greater interest in a partnership, subject to disclosure
pursuant to Subsection B., must disclose stockholder information in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.2.
§ 15-8.11. Reservation of public areas.
A. Before approving a subdivision or site plan, the Planning Board may require that streets,
public drainageways, flood-control basins and public areas designated for reservation on
the Master Plan or Official Map must be shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable
to their intended uses and may reserve judgment on those reservations for a period of one
(1) year in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
B. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss found to be caused by
such temporary reservation and deprivation of use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-A4.
C. Upon the submission to the approving authority of an application for development
showing development proposed for an area reserved on the Official Map or Master Plan,
the Secretary of the approving authority shall notify the Township Committee, in writing,
of such application and that the approving authority intends to grant approval for
development in the reserved area unless the Township Committee notifies the approving
authority, prior to the date for final approval, that it intends to reserve the area in question
and will provide compensation to the developer for such reservation. The notice of intent
to reserve shall be in the form of a resolution by the Township Committee. The
Township Committee shall thereupon proceed either to reach an agreement with the
developer as to the amount of compensation to be paid for such reservation or negotiate a
purchase price for the reserved site. Upon the Township arriving at the amount to be paid
the developer by way of compensation for reservation or purchase, the amount shall be
deposited in escrow for the benefit of the developer.
§ 15-8.12. Permits and approvals.
A. Development permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy. No building permit,
development permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a parcel of land or
structure on which improvements were undertaken in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or for use of a lot which was created by subdivision after the effective date of,
and not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No site improvements such as,
but not limited to, excavation or construction of improvements shall be commenced
except in conformance with this chapter in accordance with plat approvals and the
issuance of required permits. No development or building permit shall be issued until all
fee payments in connection therewith have been verified by the Municipal Clerk.
Article VIII
7
In the Pinelands Area, no building permit or development permit shall be issued unless
the requirements of Article XIII have been met.
B. Development permit. A development permit shall hereafter be obtained from the Zoning
Officer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction, erection or
alteration of any structure or upon a change in use of a structure or land.
(1) Home improvement exemptions. The following home improvements are exempt
from development permit requirements:
(a) All interior improvements.
(b) Exterior.
[1] Repair and/or renewal of existing attachments, trim, gutters and
downspouts, roofing, chimney, siding, masonry, doors and
windows and damaged curbs, sidewalks or driveways.
[2] All painting.
[3] New trim, gutter and downspouts, roofing including converting flat
to “A” type not to exceed present roof lines plus overhead, sliding
doors and or windows.
[4] All existing or new fencing, decks, bulk heading or docks of any
nature shall be at the determination of the Zoning Official.
[5] No exempt home improvement shall increase the size including
height, width or length of the existing building.
[6] The Construction Official shall determine if BOCA Code 1307.0,
special inspections, applies to any building permit application.
C. Building permit. No building or structure shall be erected, restored, added to or
structurally altered until a permit therefore has been issued by the Construction Code
Official. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall have first secured a
development permit.
D. Certificate of occupancy. No building or other structure hereafter constructed, erected or
altered, and no lot or area of land hereafter put into use, shall be occupied or used in
whole or in part for any use whatsoever and no change of use of any building, structure,
lot or area of land or part thereof shall hereafter be made until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Construction Code Official certifying that such building,
other structure, lot or area of land, or part thereof, complies with all applicable provisions
of this chapter. Certificates of occupancy shall be granted or denied by the Construction
Code Official within ten days from the date of application therefore by the owner of the
premises for such use or occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be stated in detail on at
least one copy of the application and that copy returned to the applicant.
(1) For purposes of obtaining a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit an
“as-built survey” to the Zoning Officer and Construction Official. The “as-built
survey” shall, at a minimum, contain the same information and detail as required
in Section 15-8.15.B.(1).
(2) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Chief Construction
Code Official with respect to site plan approval in accordance with the following
requirements:
Article VIII
8
(a) Upon application by a person, firm, or corporation which has secured site
plan approval and upon proof of undue hardship, expense and delay
occasioned by such conditions as weather, unavailability of material due
to strikes rationing or lack of transportation, and where structures are
erected upon the site and the site has been sufficiently improved to support
limited commercial operation of the developed site other than a site for
multiple-residential use, but in no event when less than 75 percent
completed, the Township Committee may, in its discretion, direct the
Construction Code Official of the Township to issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a period not to exceed 180 days to permit the
applicant to make such limited use of the improved site as shall be set
forth in a resolution of the Township Committee. The Township
Committee shall impose such conditions as it shall determine to be
necessary to be imposed upon such limited use, including but not limited
to the provision for the imposition of penalties for failure to complete the
site development in accordance with site plan approval and the provision
as to when applicant shall obtain final inspection and approval of the
development site. Such limited use may not have been installed at the time
application is made for a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(b) In considering an application for a temporary certificate of occupancy, the
Township Committee shall have particular regard to the nature of the
surfacing of the parking area and the number of parking spaces available,
bearing in mind the nature of the operation, the type of customers served
thereby and the frequency of entrance and exit of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
§ 15-8.13. Resolutions of approval.
Prior to the subdivision or resubdivision of land within the Township and as a condition of filing
of subdivision plats with the county Recording Officer, a resolution of approval of the Planning
Board is required as is the approval of site plans by resolution of the Planning Board as a
condition for the issuance of a permit for any development. The resolution of approval of the
Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction over the subdivision or site plan pursuant to Subsection 15-
3.8. of this chapter.
§ 15-8.14. Zoning Officer duties.
A. Appointment and duties. The Township Committee may appoint a Zoning Officer who
shall be authorized to and shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. At
the discretion of the Township Committee the position may be held by the Construction
Code Official. The Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer, as the case may be,
shall have the powers and the duties to:
(1) Receive applications for permits to construct, alter, use or occupy any building or
land and shall issue such permits to applicants having complied with the
provisions of this chapter. In no case shall a permit be granted by the Official for
Article VIII
9
the construction, alteration and use of any building or land that would be in
violation of this chapter.
(2) The Official or his duly authorized agent will have the right to enter into and
inspect any building or premises and examine any plans during the day time
course of this duties to determine whether or not any construction, alteration or
use of any building or use of land is in conformance with any permit issued
therefore under the provisions of the chapter.
(3) The Official shall order, in writing, the remedying of any condition, or the
cessation of any construction, alteration or use found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any conditions which may have been attached to
the issuance of a permit to construct, alter or use a building or lot by an official or
official body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor action under this chapter.
B. Records. The Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer, as may be the case, shall
keep record of all applications for permits and certificates issued and denied, together
with all notations, of specific conditions involved. He/she shall file and safely keep
copies of site plans and information supplemental thereto which shall be part of the
records of his/her office and shall be available for the use of the Township Committee
and of other officials of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, County or State. The
Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer, as the case may be, shall prepare a
monthly report for the Township Committee summarizing for the period since the last
previous report all permits issued and all violations found and consequent actions taken
by him/her. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the Tax Assessor.
C. Cases of doubt. Should the Official be in doubt as to the meaning or intent of any
provision of this chapter as to the location of a district boundary line on the Zoning Map
or as to the propriety of issuing any permit in the particular case, he/she shall appeal the
matter to the Board of Adjustment for interpretation and decision.
§ 15-8.15. Development permits and procedures.
A. No construction, alteration or excavation for any building or other structure nor any use
of building or land shall be begun without the issuance of a permit by the Construction
Code Official indicating that the proposal is in compliance with the provisions and
requirements of this chapter. A permit issued in accordance with the building code of
this Township of Little Egg Harbor and satisfying the requirements thereto shall also
satisfy the additional requirements of this chapter.
B. All applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the Construction Code
Official. Each such application shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in triplicate
and drawn to such scale as required to show exact dimensions and locations of all
buildings, yards, lot lines, off street parking and such other appropriate details and
information as may be necessary to provide for the administration of this chapter. All
dimensions shown on these plans relating to the lot to be used or built upon shall be
based on an actual survey, deed description or an approved subdivision plat. Where
approval of the site plan is required by the Township Planning Board, submittals shall
Article VIII
10
meet the requirements of the chapter. One copy of the approved site plan shall be
returned to the applicant, together with the permit issued by the Construction Code
Official and with such conditions as may have been attached thereto by an official body
of the Township of Little Egg Harbor acting under this chapter. In those instances where
permits are not granted, the applicant shall be advised in writing as to the specific
conditions involved. The lot and excavations shall be staked on the ground and an
inspection thereof shall be made by the Construction Code Official before work is begun.
(1) The site plan shall also require the detail of proposed projections such as, but not
limited to bay windows, awnings, steps, decks, chimneys, overhangs, and air
conditioner units.
C. The construction or alteration of any building or buildings for which a permit was issued
must be begun within six months after the date of issuance and any such construction or
alterations shall be completed or fully effected within one year after the date of issuance,
after which time such permit shall become void and subject to reapplication. The
Construction Code Official, at his/her discretion, may issue a new permit granting a
reasonable continuation of time where unavoidable conditions prevented the initiation or
completion of work within these prescribed time periods.
§ 15-8.16. Boat lifts and davits.
A. The Township has determined that boat lifting devices are permitted as an accessory
structure to residential property which front lagoons or waterways and shown on a final
major subdivision plat and/or filed minor subdivision plat as of November 1, 1987.
(1) Definitions:
BOAT LIFT – A metal frame structure, usually electric powered, attached to a
bulkhead or pilings, which elevates a boat to a higher position or out of the water.
DAVIT – A single pair of curved uprights over the bulkhead for suspending or
raising and lowering a boat.
(2) Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential property
that fronts lagoons or waterways.
(3) Permit required; application fee:
(a) Permit required: No person including the property owner shall construct a
boat lift device unless a permit is obtained for such construction.
(b) Application fee: As set forth in §15-16.1.
(4) Issuance of permits:
(a) Issuance of permits: The Zoning Officer shall require the applicant to
submit the following documentation with the application:
[1] Sealed drawings from a licensed engineer or architect.
[2] Copies of all DEP and Army Corps of Engineers approvals and
permits.
[3] Electrical permit when a boat lift is electrically operated.
[4] Other permits as required.
[5] Proof of notification to adjacent property owners and the permit
shall be issued in conformance with the conditions set forth in
Subsections (5) & (6).
Article VIII
11
(b) Appeal: In the event of any denial, the applicant seeking appeal from the
decision of the Zoning Officer may appeal to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(5) General requirements and design standards:
The purpose of this section is to establish a general uniform set of guidelines to
assist the Zoning Officer, Construction Officials and applicant in the installation
of a boat lift device prior to the issuance of a “Certificate of Use.”
(a) One lifting device per lot.
(b) No lifting device may be constructed unless a principal structure exists on
the lot and the lot abuts a lagoon or waterway.
(c) Boats, when lifted, must be parallel to the bulkhead.
(d) Reflective tape for marine use shall be affixed to all structures, davits and
poles used for boat lifting.
(e) No boat, when lifted parallel to the bulkhead, can extend beyond the side
yard setback lines of the lot.
(f) The storage of all boats shall comply with the Township’s Boat Storage
Ordinance.
(g) Appropriate inspections by Construction Code Officials are required and
must follow installation.
(h) No lifting device may extend into the lagoon or waterway more than eight
(8) feet beyond the bulkhead.
(i) The highest part of the hull of the boat shall not exceed a height of four (4)
feet above the bulkhead.
(j) No boat can be greater in length than 40% of the bulkhead length.
(k) Davits cannot exceed four (4) inches in diameter and be no higher than
five (5) feet above the bulkhead.
(6) Certificate of use. No boat lift device constructed shall be put into use in whole
or part for any use whatsoever until a “Certificate of Use” shall have been issued
by the Zoning Officer certifying that such structure complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. “Certificates of Use” shall be granted or denied by the
Zoning Officer within ten (10) days from the date of application therefore by the
owner of the property for such use, the reasons for doing so shall be stated in
detail on at least one (1) copy of the application and that copy returned to the
owner.
Article IX
1
ARTICLE IX
Application Requirements
§ 15-9. Application requirements.
A. An application for development shall include the items specified in Schedule A of this
chapter, which constitutes a checklist of items to be submitted for subdivision and site
plan review. A copy of this checklist shall be completed by the applicant and submitted
with the application form.
B. Completion of application; time limits:
(1) A subdivision and site plan application shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the Planning Board when so
certified by the Planning Board or its authorized committee or designee. In the
event that the Board, committee or designee does not certify the application to be
complete within forty-five (45) days of the date of its submission, the application
shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period unless:
(a) The application lacks information indicated on the checklist of items to be
submitted as specified in Schedule A and provided in writing to the
applicant; and,
(b) The Planning Board or its authorized committee or designee has notified
the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application within fortyfive
(45) days of submission of the application.
(2) The applicant may request that one (1) or more of the submission requirements be
waived, in which event the Board or its authorized committee shall grant or deny
the request within forty-five (45) days of the date of its submission. Nothing
herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the
application process that the applicant is entitled to approval of the application.
The Planning Board may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not specified in the
ordinance or any revisions in the accompanying documents as is reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary
for approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the Planning Board.
C. An applicant may appeal the Administrative Officer's decision concerning completeness
of an application to the Board which has jurisdiction to hear the application. The Board
shall have forty-five (45) days after receipt of a written request to schedule a public
hearing, at which time the Board will determine if the application is complete. The Board
shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Administrative Officer.
D. For an application to be placed on the agenda of a Board meeting, it must be deemed
complete by the Administrative Officer a minimum of seven (7) days prior to a caucus
Article IX
2
meeting or twenty-one (21) days prior to a regular public hearing if there is no caucus
meeting scheduled for that month.
Article X
1
ARTICLE X
Subdivisions and Site Plans
§ 15-10.1. Pre-application conference and concept plan procedures.
For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing subdivision and site plan design and
development costs, the developer may request a pre-application conference and/or concept plan
in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Pre-application conference.
(1) At the request of the applicant, the Planning Board shall authorize a preapplication
conference. The purpose of this conference is to:
(a) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements
of the Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.
(b) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan, Zoning
Ordinance and other development requirements.
(c) Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that may aid the
application.
(d) Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or
pose significant constraints for the proposed development.
(e) Review any proposed concept plans and consider opportunities to increase
development benefits and mitigate undesirable project consequences.
(f) Permit input into the general design of the project.
(2) The pre-application conference allows the applicant to meet with appropriate
municipal representatives. These individuals, who shall be designated by the
Mayor and/or Committee, may include:
(a) The Municipal Engineer.
(b) The Municipal Planner.
(c) The Municipal Construction Officer and Zoning Officer.
(d) Representative(s) from the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment.
(e) Representatives from the Municipal Environmental, Historic Preservation
and other commissions, as deemed appropriate.
(f) The Subdivision and Site Plan Committee or its representative(s), if this
committee is established.
(g) Any other municipal representative(s) invited by the Planning Board
Chairperson.
(3) Applicants seeking a pre-application conference shall submit the information
stipulated in § 15-10.1. of this chapter fifteen (15) days prior to the preapplication
conference.
(4) The applicant shall not be required to pay a fee for the pre-application conference.
If requested and paid for by the applicant, a brief written summary of the preapplication
conference shall be provided within forty-five (45) working days after
the final meeting.
Article X
2
(5) The applicant shall not be bound by the determination of the pre-application
conference, nor shall the Planning Board or Subdivision and Site Plan Committee
be bound by any such review.
B. Concept plan:
(1) In addition or as an alternative to the pre-application conference, at the request of
the applicant, the Planning Board or the Subdivision and Site Plan Committee
shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for a development for which the
applicant intends to prepare and submit an application for development. The
purpose of the concept plan is to provide the Planning Board or Subdivision and
Site Plan Committee input in the formative stages of subdivision and site plan
design.
(2) Applicants seeking concept plan informal review shall submit the items stipulated
in § 15-10.1. fifteen (15) days before the concept plan meeting. These items
provide the Subdivider and Planning Board or Subdivision and Site Plan
Committee with an opportunity to discuss the development proposal in its
formative stages.
(3) A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be provided within
forty-five (45) working days after the final meeting.
(4) The applicant may be charged reasonable fees for concept plan review. The
amount of any fees for such informal review shall be a credit towards fees for
review of the application for development.
(5) The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, nor shall the Planning Board or Subdivision and Site Plan Committee
be bound by any such review. The municipality may require notice of the concept
plan meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 15-10.2. Minor subdivision action.
A. A developer shall, prior to subdividing or re-subdividing land, submit to the
Administrative Officer five (5) copies of a complete application for classification and/or
minor subdivision approval, the fees as required in § 15-16.1. and eight (8) copies of the
sketch plat drawn to specifications pursuant to § 15-15.2., for purposes of classification
and preliminary discussions and distribution as hereinafter provided for.
B. A notation to the effect of approval shall be made on the sketch plat marked "proposed
subdivision," and none of the lots or plots resulting from such subdivision may be resubdivided
by minor subdivision within two (2) years from the date of approval. After
approval of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, one (1) copy of the sketch plat
marked "proposed subdivision" shall be signed by the municipal agency and forwarded to
the developer following compliance with any or all conditions. No further approval shall
be required by any municipal agency. The remaining copies of the approved sketch plat
shall be sent to the Township Engineer, Building Official, Tax Assessor, County
Planning Board, Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority and, in the case of the
Board of Adjustment granting a subdivision, the Township Planning Board.
Article X
3
§ 15-10.3. Minor subdivision filing.
A. Minor subdivision shall be subject to the conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47.
B. Any such deed or plat accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman,
Secretary and Board Engineer of the municipal agency. Failure to record such plat or
deed within the prescribed time shall render the approval null and void.
§ 15-10.4. Major subdivision action.
If the sketch plat is classified by the Board or its Committee as a major subdivision, a notation to
that effect shall be made on the plat, which shall then be returned, following the meeting, to the
developer for compliance with the procedures for preliminary and final approval.
§ 15-10.5. Preliminary plat.
Twenty (20) legible prints of the preliminary plat drawn to the specifications pursuant to §15-
15.2., together with six (6) completed application forms for preliminary approval and the fees as
required in §15-16.1., shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer.
§15-10.6. Action by municipal agency on preliminary plat.
A. The municipal agency shall act on the preliminary plat within the time prescribed in § 15-
8.3.
B. If the municipal agency acts favorably on a preliminary plat, with or without conditions, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, and it shall be returned to the developer
for compliance with final approval requirements.
C. If the municipal agency disapproves a preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall
be noted on the plat and returned to the developer.
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, the following rights shall be conferred upon the
developer for a period of three (3) years from the date on which the resolution of
preliminary approval is adopted:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted
shall not be changed, subject to the conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
(2) That the developer may submit for final approval, on or before the expiration date
of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary plat.
(3) That the developer may apply for and the municipal agency may grant extensions
on such preliminary approval as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
E. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of fifty (50) acres or more, the
municipal agency may grant the rights referred to in Subsection D.(1), (2) and (3) above
for such periods of time longer than three (3) years, subject to the conditions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
Article X
4
F. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary approval pursuant to
Subsection D. or E. of this section, and preliminary approval has expired before the date
on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be
the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
G. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period
determined by the Board, but not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be
the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities, and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
the required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval or the 91st day after the
developer receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to Subsections D. and
E. above.
§ 15-10.7. Final plat procedure.
The original tracing, twenty (20) legible prints of the plat drawn to the specifications of §15-
10.8., together with five (5) completed application forms for final approval and the fees as
required in §15-16.1., shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer. The final plat shall be
submitted to the Administrative Officer within three (3) years after the date of the preliminary
approval or extension. [Amended 6/12/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
§ 15-10.8. Action by municipal agency on final plat. [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No.
2002-017]; [Amended 12/12/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-040]
A. After a determination that a complete application has been submitted, the municipal
agency shall act on the final plat within the time prescribed in §15-8.3.
B. If the municipal agency acts favorably on a final plat, with or without conditions, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, and it shall be returned to the developer.
However, prior to the signing of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the required
performance bond, cash guaranty and construction/inspection fees.
C. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all other
rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to § 15-10.6., whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for two (2) years after the date on which the resolution of
final approval is adopted, provided that the rights conferred by this section shall expire if
the plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in § 15-10.9. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval and has duly recorded
the plat as required, the municipal agency may extend such period of protection for
Article X
5
extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3) extensions. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, the granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to § 15-10.6. for the section
granted final approval.
D. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant to this
section and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted,
the extension shall begin on what otherwise would be the expiration date. The developer
may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration
date.
E. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by
the Board, but not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be the expiration
date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental
entities, and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of the final approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last
legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An
extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from
granting an extension pursuant to Subsection C. of this section.
F. Deleted in its entirety. [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]; [Amended
12/12/02 by Ord. No. 2002-40]
§15-10.9. Filing of original tracing.
A. After the original tracing has been signed by the appropriate officials, the tracing shall be
returned to the developer and the developer shall proceed to file the same with the
County Recording Officer within ninety-five (95) days of the signing of the plat.
B. The municipal agency may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an
additional period not to exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of the
signing of the plat.
C. The Planning Board may extend the ninety-five- or one-hundred-ninety-day period if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining
legal required approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The
length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the
required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board. The developer may apply for
an extension either before or after the original expiration date.
Article X
6
D. Within ten (10) days of the filing of the original tracing with the County Recording
Officer, the developer shall submit to the Board the following copies of the filed plat:
twelve (12) legible prints of the filed plat and two (2) Mylar copies.
§ 15-10.10. Posting of maps.
A. The sales office of all major subdivisions consisting of ten (10) or more lots, as shown on
the developer's preliminary plats, shall display at all times within the development sales
office or a model home located on the premises the following maps:
(1) The approved preliminary plat of the subdivision.
(2) The approved final plat of the subdivision.
B. Each map shall clearly show and delineate the location of the developer's subdivision.
§ 15-10.11. Sale before approval.
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers or sells or agrees to
transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, such person may be subject to penalties as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
§ 15-10.12. Certificate of approval.
A. A prospective purchaser, mortgagor or any other person interested in any land which
forms part of a subdivision or which formed part of such subdivision three (3) years
preceding may apply in writing to the Zoning Officer for certification verifying that the
subdivision has been approved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
B. The Zoning Officer shall make and issue such certificate within fifteen (15) days after the
receipt of such written application and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). The Zoning Officer
shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively numbered, including a
statement of the fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
C. Each certificate shall be designated as a "certificate as to approval of subdivision of land"
and shall certify that the conditions required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56 have been fulfilled.
D. The Zoning Officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for such certificate issued by
him or her a fee pursuant to §15-16.1. of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The fees so
collected by the Zoning Officer shall be paid by him or her to the Township.
§ 15-10.13. When site plan approval required; use of Pinelands development credits.
A. No building permit, zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or conditional use permit
shall be issued for the construction or alteration of any structure, except as otherwise
provided by State law, unless a final site plan shall have first been approved by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, in conjunction with the processing of a use
variance, in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.
Article X
7
However, no site plan approval shall be required for a conditional use permit for a home
occupation unless in the sole discretion of the Planning Board it is deemed necessary. In
addition, no building permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
a change of use of a structure where the new use requires a greater amount of parking
under the Township Ordinances than was required for the old use. [Amended 6/27/2002
by Ord. No. 2002-017]; [Amended 12/12/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-040]
B. No development involving the use of Pinelands development credits shall be approved
until the developer has provided the Pinelands Commission and the approving authority
with evidence of his ownership of the requisite Pinelands development credits; provided,
however, that the approving authority may grant preliminary site plan approval
conditioned upon such evidence being presented as a prerequisite to final site plan
approval. For such a final site plan, the developer shall provide evidence of Pinelands
development credit ownership to secure the same proportion of lots or residential units as
was approved for Pinelands development credit use in the preliminary approval.
§ 15-10.14. Minor site plans.
A. Twenty (20) legible prints of the minor site plan drawn in conformance with the
standards, plat detail requirements for minor site plans in accordance with 15-15.4.,
together with five (5) completed application forms and the fees as required in § 15-16.1.,
shall be submitted to the Board Secretary.
B. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the site plan by the
Board.
C. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval is granted shall not be changed for a
period of two (2) years from the date of minor site plan approval.
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of the time period provided in Subsection C.
above for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one (1) year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities, and that the developer applied
promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals. A developer shall apply for this
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day after the
date on which the developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from the
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
§ 15-10.15. Preliminary site plan procedure.
Article X
8
Twenty (20) legible prints of the preliminary site plan and preliminary architectural plans and
elevations, together with five (5) completed application forms for preliminary site plan approval
and the fees as required in § 15-16.1., shall be submitted to the Board Secretary.
§ 15-10.16. Action by municipal agency on preliminary site plan.
A. The municipal agency shall act on the preliminary site plan within the time prescribed in
§ 15-8.3.
B. If the municipal agency acts favorably on a preliminary site plat, with or without
conditions, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plan, and it shall be returned to
the developer for compliance with the final approval requirements.
C. If the municipal agency disapproves a preliminary site plan, the reasons for such action
shall be noted on the plan and returned to the developer.
D. The rights conferred by preliminary site plan approval shall be the same as those set forth
in § 15-10.6.
§ 15-10.17. Final site plan procedure. [Amended 6/12/2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
Twenty (20) legible prints of the final site plan, drawn together with all necessary
documentation, five (5) completed application forms for site plan approval and the fees as
required in §15-16.1., shall be submitted to the Board Secretary, together with a reproducible
Mylar of the final plan and final construction plans. A final plat shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer within three (3) years after the date of the preliminary approval or
extension.
§ 15-10.18. Action by municipal agency on final site plan.
A. After determination that a complete application has been submitted, the municipal agency
shall act on the final site plan within the time prescribed in § 15-8.3. Prior to the signing
the municipal agency stating that performance guaranty has been approved as to form and
amount to assure completion of all required improvements.
B. If the municipal agency acts favorably on a final site plan, with or without conditions, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plan, and it shall be returned to the developer.
However, prior to the signing of the final plat by the Board Engineer, the applicant shall
post with the Township Clerk a performance guarantee as set forth in § 15-17.5.
C. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary site plan approval first granted and
all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to § 15-10.6., whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for two (2) years after the date on which
the resolution of final approval is adopted. If the developer has followed the standards
Article X
9
prescribed for final site plan approval, the municipal agency may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3) extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, the granting of
final site plan approval terminates the time period of preliminary site plan approval
pursuant to § 15-10.6. for the section granted final site plan approval. If a site plan has
been approved prior to the enactment of this chapter and if the developer has followed the
standards prescribed for final approval, has duly recorded the plat, if required, and has
initiated substantial improvement of the project, the developer shall be permitted to
continue the project in accordance with the approved plat.
D. Extension of final approval by the Planning Board on a site plan shall also comply with
requirements of § 15-10.8: D. and E.
Article XI
1
ARTICLE XI
Design Guidelines and Standards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 15-11.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a general uniform set of performance and design
standards to guide and assist the Township and future developers in the preparation, submission
and review of all developmental proposals. The standards shall be applicable to all site plans,
subdivisions and other development applications to come before an approving authority in the
Township. These general requirements are supplementary to the site plan and subdivision design
standards outlined elsewhere in this chapter and shall constitute the minimum performance
standards applicable to all future growth and development in Little Egg Harbor Township. In
addition to the requirements of this section, all development applications in the Pinelands Area
shall be bound by the Supplemental Pinelands Area Design and Development Standards and
management programs, as specified in the Little Egg Harbor Township Pinelands Area
Development Requirements.
§ 15-11.2. General requirements.
A. Minor modifications or changes in approved plans and specifications may be effected
only upon written approval of the Board Engineer, but some changes may require further
review and approval of the Planning Board prior to making any changes.
B. Any application for development shall demonstrate conformance to design standards that
will encourage sound development patterns within the Township. Where either an
Official Map and/or Master Plan have been adopted, the development shall conform to
the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets, school sites, etc., shown on the
officially adopted Master Plan shall be considered in the approval of plats. In accordance
with good design practices, extreme deviations from rectangular lot shapes and straight
lot lines shall not be allowed unless made necessary by special topographical conditions
or other special conditions acceptable to the approving authority. All improvements shall
be installed and connected with existing facilities or installed in required locations to
enable future connections with approved systems or contemplated systems and shall be
adequate to handle all present and probable future development.
C. Land which the approving authority finds to be in areas identified in the Master Plan as
having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly the land related to flooding,
improper drainage, wetlands, adverse soil conditions, adverse topography, utility
casements or other features which can reasonably be expected to be harmful to the health,
safety and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the development and/or
its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided and site plans shall not be approved unless
adequate and acceptable methods are formulated by the developer to solve the problems
by methods meeting this chapter and all other regulations.
Article XI
2
D. Whenever a development abuts or crosses a municipal boundary, access to those lots
within the Township shall be from within the Township as the general rule. Wherever
access to a development is required across land in an adjoining community as the
exception, the approving authority may require documentation that such access is legally
established and that the access road is adequately improved.
E. No buildings shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be enlarged or rebuilt nor shall
any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner
except in conformity with the yard, lot area and building location regulations designated
for the district or zone in which the building or open space is located.
F. No lot shall be used in any zone nor shall any structure be erected, altered or occupied for
any purpose except as indicated in each zone under permitted uses or conditional use
permits, except that model homes and sales homes shall be permitted as a matter of right
in all residential zones. Six (6) model homes shall be permitted for each development.
G. No subdivision or site plan approval may be given unless each lot contained in the
subdivision or site plan complies with all the requirements of the zone in which the lot is
located, unless a variance is granted.
H. Each lot shall be provided with frontage on a street in accordance with the schedule of
requirements.
I. No lot shall have erected on it more than one (1) residential building, except as elsewhere
permitted in this chapter.
§ 15-11.3. Blocks.
Block length, width and acreage shall be sufficient to accommodate the size lot required in the
zoning district and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and traffic safety.
Blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long in residential areas shall be discouraged, but where
they are used, pedestrian crosswalks and/or bikeways between lots may be required in locations
deemed necessary by the approving authority and shall be at least eight (8) feet wide and be
straight from street to street. Blocks over one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in residential
areas shall be prohibited unless access to adjoining properties is not feasible due to prevailing
physical characteristics or environmental reasons or would not provide for the extension of any
new future streets in a logical, reasonable or practical fashion. For commercial and industrial
uses, block lengths shall be sufficient to meet area and yard requirements for such uses and to
provide proper street access and circulation patterns. In all cases, wherever feasible in the
opinion of the Planning Board and Planning Board Engineer, all blocks shall be laid out in a
curvilinear configuration with tangent sections being no straighter than five hundred (500) feet.
§ 15-11.4. Lots.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the zoning provisions.
Article XI
3
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street lines.
C. Each lot must front upon a public street, paved, with a right-of-way of at least fifty (50)
feet, except as otherwise provided herein.
D. Where extra width has either been dedicated or anticipated for widening of existing
streets, zoning considerations shall begin at such new street line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where two (2) or more contiguous lots are under the same ownership, regardless of
whether or not each may have been approved as a portion of a subdivision acquired by
separate conveyance or by other operation of law, and one (1) or more of the lots does not
conform to the minimum area and/or dimension requirements for the zone in which it is
located, the contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot, and the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
F. Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the Township by the owner of a lot in
order to meet the minimum street width requirements or to implement the Master Plan,
and which lot existed at the effective date of this chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall not withhold a building and/or occupancy permit when the lot depth and/or area was
rendered substandard due to such dedication and where the owner has no adjacent lands
to meet the minimum requirements.
G. Through lots with frontage on two (2) streets will be permitted only under the following
conditions: where the length of the lot between both streets is such that future division of
the lot into two (2) lots is impractical and access shall be to the street with the lower
traffic function, and the portion of the lot abutting the other street shall be clearly labeled
on the plat and in any deed that street access is prohibited.
H. Wherever deemed practical and feasible, all lots shall be laid out in a curvilinear fashion,
with lot lines being radial to the curve.
I. In a subdivision abutting an expressway or arterial road one (1) of the following shall be
required:
(1) The frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to such roadways will
front on a street with a lower traffic function with an additional lot depth or width
of fifty (50) feet as an easement exclusively for buffering to be provided by the
developer along the arterial street;
(2) A marginal service road shall be provided along such arterial road and shall be
separated from it by a raised/planting island divider strip of at least twenty (20)
feet in width; or,
(3) Such other means of separating through and local traffic and of providing a
suitable buffer shall be provided as the Board of jurisdiction may determine to be
appropriate.
Article XI
4
§ 15-11.5. Bulkheading.
A. Any development, regardless of size, on tidal lagoons, navigable waterways or other
bodies of water, whether such water bodies are either existing or proposed, shall provide
for bulkheading. Any development, regardless of size, on nontidal bodies of water,
whether such water bodies are either existing or proposed, shall provide for bulkheading
or other appropriate permanent bank stabilization acceptable to the Planning Board.
B. Bulkheads shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 14 of the Code of Little Egg
Harbor Township. New or reconstructed lagoons shall have a minimum width of one
hundred (100) feet and shall be provided with suitable turning basins.
C. The Planning Board may consider waiver and/or modification of this requirement when
necessary, provided that minimum lot sizes may be maintained and that all development
may be made reasonably secure from erosion.
§ 15-11.6. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
A. All site plans and subdivisions shall incorporate soil erosion and sediment control
programs phased according to the scheduled progress of the development, including
anticipated starting and completion dates. The purpose is to control soil erosion and
sediment damages and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions
for surface water retention and drainage and for the protection of exposed soil surfaces in
order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and general welfare of the
community.
B. No building permit shall be issued for any development application until all provisions of
the State of New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, P.L. 1975, c. 251, as
amended, have been satisfied.
§15-11.7. Buffers.
A. Buffer areas, as defined in this chapter, shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the
primary purpose of screening views, providing physical separation and reducing noise
and glare beyond the buffer area. Buffer area widths shall be measured horizontally and
perpendicularly to lot and street lines. No structure, activity, storage of materials or
parking of vehicles shall be permitted in a buffer area. The preservation of all desirable
existing vegetation in a buffer area shall be assured through sensitive grading and
development practices. The standards for the location and design of buffer areas are
intended to provide flexibility in order to provide effective buffers. The location and
design of buffers shall consider the use of the portion of property being screened; the
distance between the use and the adjoining property or street; differences in elevation; the
type of buffer, such as planting, berming, preservation of existing vegetation, a wall,
hedge or fence; buffer height; buffer width; and other combinations of man-made and
natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded or developed with the
general guideline that the closer a use or activity is to a property line or the more intense
Article XI
5
the use, the more effective the buffer must be in obscuring light, vision and reducing
noise beyond the lot.
B. In the Highway Business Zone there shall be a twenty-five foot buffer area from the front
property line and a fifteen-foot buffer area from the side property line. The only
improvements to be constructed in this buffer area, other than landscaping, are to be those
improvements necessary to provide ingress and egress to the subject site.
C. In the Neighborhood Business and General Business Zones, there shall be a fifteen-foot
buffer area from the front property line and side property line; provided, however, that in
regard to those lots which front on a state highway, there shall be a twenty-five-foot
buffer area from the front property line. The only improvements to be constructed in this
buffer area, other than landscaping, are to be those improvements necessary to provide
ingress and egress to the subject site.
D. In the Industrial Zone, lots having a depth of three hundred (300) feet or less shall have a
forty-foot buffer area from the front property line. This buffer area shall be increased to
fifty (50) feet when the lot depth is greater than three hundred (300) feet. In addition, all
lots shall have ten-foot buffer areas from the side and rear property lines. The only
improvements to be constructed in these buffer areas, other than landscaping, are to be
those improvements necessary to provide ingress and egress to the subject site.
E. In all other zones, except residential, the minimum front buffer area shall be thirty-five
(35) feet, the minimum side buffer area shall be fifteen (15) feet and the minimum rear
buffer area shall be twenty (20) feet unless otherwise provided herein.
F. In order to provide adequate buffering between uses of differing classifications, a buffer
area shall be provided in conjunction with any nonresidential or higher density residential
use abutting a lot zoned or used for residential purposes. The minimum width of such a
buffer area shall be not less than thirty (30) feet for a building or group of buildings up to
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area, except in the HB Zone where it shall be no
less than fifty (50) feet. The width of the buffer area shall be increased one (1) foot for
each one thousand (1,000) square feet or fraction thereof if the building or group of
buildings exceeds twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, up to a maximum buffer area
width of one hundred (100) feet; except that, for light industrial uses, the minimum buffer
width abutting a residential district shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet.
G. In residential subdivisions or site plans on any lot which abuts an expressway or arterial
road, a buffer area and additional lot depth or width of fifty (50) feet shall be provided
along the property line common with the expressway or arterial road.
H. In the Scenic Gateway Overlay Zone, there shall be a fifty (50’) foot buffer area from the
front property line. To the extent that the pre-development condition of the site is
wooded, the natural vegetation shall be retained within the fifty (50’) foot buffer per §15-
11.7(A). If the site is not wooded, the fifty (50’) foot buffer shall be revegetated with
nursery-grown trees of species found in nearby wooded areas, subject to review and
Article XI
6
approval of the Township Engineer. The only improvements to be constructed in this
buffer area, other than supplemental landscaping and approved signage, are to be those
improvements necessary to provide ingress and egress to the subject site. [Amended
12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
I. In the Route 9 Gateway Overlay Zone South, there shall be a fifty (50’) foot buffer area
from the front property line. To the extent that the pre-development condition of the site
is wooded, the natural vegetation shall be retained within the fifty (50’) foot buffer per
§15-11.7(A). The only improvements to be constructed in this buffer area, other than
supplemental landscaping and approved signage, are to be those improvements necessary
to provide ingress and egress to the subject site. If the site is not wooded, the fifty (50’)
foot buffer shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of §15-11.7(H).
[Amended 3/14/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§15-11.8. Landscaping.
A. General. All land subdivision and development shall comply with the minimum
landscape architectural standards set forth herein or provide a more appropriate scheme
relative to the specific aspects of a particular site or development proposal with the
approval of the Board of jurisdiction. The Board of jurisdiction may require additional
landscape development beyond the standards set forth if necessary to provide appropriate
landscape development relative to the nature of the site and the development thereof. All
landscape development should be designed to enhance the visual quality of the site and
adjacent properties; provide safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation; protect against
potential natural and man-made hazard; enhance the microclimate of areas for human
activity; and promote the protection of health, safety and welfare. For applications in the
Pinelands Area, landscaping plans shall incorporate the elements set forth in Section 15-
13.4.A.(3). [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
B. Streetscape. Landscape architectural development of the streetscape shall be provided in
conjunction with all development, on all existing and proposed roads upon which the site
of development has or creates frontage. Improvements consistent with one (1) of the
following streetscape concepts, or an alternative concept of more appropriate design,
shall be provided:
(1) Formal tree-lined avenue. This type of streetscape development is appropriate for
the majority of streets within the Township with the exception of those areas
which are addressed by one (1) of the other two (2) concepts provided herein.
The following standards shall apply:
(a) Shade trees shall be provided along both sides of a street in the planting
area provided between the street curb and the sidewalk as per § 15-12.2.
and at a distance between trees of thirty (30) feet to fifty (50) feet, with
trees which exhibit a narrow habit at a thirty- to forty-foot spacing and
trees which exhibit a spreading habit at a forty to fifty-foot spacing. The
trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities, roadways,
sidewalks, street lights, sight distances and driveway aprons and shall not
be planted closer than eight (8) feet to fire hydrants.
Article XI
7
(b) All trees shall have a minimum size of three (3) inches to three and fivetenths
(3.5) inches caliper.
(c) Subsequent or replacement plants shall conform to the type of existing tree
in a given area, provided that, if any deviation is anticipated, it must be
done only with the permission of the Township Landscape Architect
and/or Environmental Commission. In a newly planted area, only one (1)
type of tree may be used on a given street, unless otherwise specified by
the Township Landscape Architect and/or Environmental Commission.
(d) Tree varieties which exhibit desirable characteristics, such as full
symmetrical form, deep noninvasive root system and tolerance of potential
drought and road salt, should be utilized.
(e) Trees within a sight triangle or distance area shall be of sufficient size to
be pruned to a seven-foot branching height with one (1) main stem upon
planting. Planting within a sight triangle or distance area must be
approved by the Township Engineer.
(2) Informal street trees. This type of streetscape development is appropriate along
streets within areas of development with an informal character. This type of
treatment should occur in areas of development with meandering curvilinear
roads. The following standards shall apply:
(a) Vary street tree varieties, spacing from the cartway [four (4) feet to fifteen
(15) feet] and sizes [two (2) inches to six (6) inches caliper, averaging
three (3) inches to three and five-tenths (3.5) inches]. Trees should be
placed in an informal pattern with varied spacing. Some areas will have
clustered trees, others may have an individual tree along a road. Planting
design shall accentuate views and integrate contrasting landscape
elements.
(b) The total number of trees shall average one (1) tree for every fifty (50)
linear feet of roadway on each side of the roadway.
(c) If existing trees are preserved within ten (10) feet of the curb, the
requirements for additional street tree plantings may be reduced.
(d) Trees within a sight triangle or distance area shall be of sufficient size to
be pruned to a seven-foot branching height with one (1) main stem upon
planting. Planting within a sight triangle or distance area must be
approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) Village streetscape. This type of streetscape development is appropriate along
streets within areas designated as villages by the Little Egg Harbor Township
Historic Preservation Commission, or as required by the Board of jurisdiction.
The objective shall be to provide street trees, paving, benches, lighting and other
improvements to provide an ample, well-defined, unified and distinct pedestrian
corridor along the streetscape. The following standards shall apply:
(a) Provide street trees within the right-of-way in planting areas of at least
ninety (90) square feet in surface area. An acceptable ground cover or
mass shrub planting shall be provided in all planting areas.
(b) The quantity of trees shall be equivalent to one (1) tree of three (3) inches
to three and five-tenths (3.5) inches caliper for every forty (40) feet of
frontage.
Article XI
8
(c) If existing trees are preserved within ten (10) feet of the curb, the
requirements for additional street tree plantings may be reduced.
(d) Trees within a sight triangle or distance area shall be of sufficient size to
be pruned to a seven-foot branching height with one (1) main stem upon
planting. Planting within a sight triangle or distance area must be
approved by the Township Engineer.
(e) A walkway within the right-of-way of a minimum clear width of five (5)
feet shall be provided. In areas where site furnishings are provided, the
walk width shall be widened to accommodate these amenities. The
walkway shall be constructed of a decorative pavement, i.e. brick pavers,
as approved by the Board of jurisdiction. All walks shall include ramps
for handicap access at all street corners or road crossings. The decorative
paving shall be continued across all ingress and egress drives as a
crosswalk, providing a well-defined continuous pedestrian walkway.
(f) Site furnishings such as benches, period lighting, kiosks, bus shelters,
trash receptacles and flagpoles shall be provided as appropriate or required
by the Board of jurisdiction. All site furnishings within an individual
village area shall be of a consistent or compatible design style, color,
material and location, subject to the approval of the Board of jurisdiction.
(g) Signage within the village streetscape area shall be of a consistent or
compatible design style, color, material and location, subject to the
approval of the Board of jurisdiction.
(h) All overhead utilities should be relocated underground whenever possible.
C. Cul-de-sac and traffic islands. Cul-de-sac and traffic planting islands provide the
opportunity to soften the harshness of large paved areas, create visual interest, increase
groundwater recharge, screen headlight glare into residences and preserve valuable
existing vegetation. Planted traffic control islands should be provided as necessary and
appropriate to define vehicular or pedestrian circulation. The following standards address
the planting of islands in the turnaround portion of cul-de-sac roads; provided, however,
that there remains sufficient turning radius for fire-fighting equipment and other
emergency equipment. For other islands, a landscape design consistent with the concepts
presented herewith should be provided. Planting of islands within parking areas shall
conform to the standards set forth in Subsection G. of this section.
(1) If possible, preserve the existing trees in the area of the proposed island. Assure
that the grading of the surrounding roadway is consistent with the existing grade
at the dripline of the trees and provide adequate protection during construction.
Limb all branches to a height of seven (7) feet and remove all vegetation which
exhibits a canopy between thirty (30) inches and seven (7) feet. Provide an
adequate ground cover planting as necessary to completely cover all soil and
discourage weed growth. All planting must be designed to consider the level of
expected maintenance and provide a neat and clean appearance.
(2) In areas void of existing stands of trees, planting similar to the following concept
should be provided: provide one (1) specimen tree of four and one-half (4½)
inches to five (5) inches caliper or three (3) specimen trees of two and one-half (2
½) inches to three (3) caliper for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
Article XI
9
planting area with an adequate ground cover planting as necessary to complexly
cover all soil and discourage weed growth at the time of planting. All plant
material must exhibit a mature canopy height under thirty (30) inches or above
seven (7) feet with no more than three (3) trunks in order to allow adequate
visibility. All plants shall be tolerant of harsh, dry roadside conditions.
(3) All plantings within a site triangle or distance area must be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(4) Extensive unplanted stone or mulch beds shall not be provided.
D. Stormwater areas. Stormwater management areas include retention and detention basins,
drainage ditches and swales. This subsection does not apply to underground stormwater
recharge areas, which may only be planted if approved by the Township Engineer.
Sensitively designed basins and swales can be a visually pleasing benefit to the health,
welfare and safety of Little Egg Harbor Township residents. The general design concept
of these areas should be to de-emphasize their function creating aesthetic landscape
features.
E. Open space. As a landscape feature and asset, open space is encouraged in all
developments, even when not required. The objectives of the landscape treatment of
open space is to provide the opportunity and space for active and passive recreation in all
areas of human activity and residence, to protect and enhance the Township's natural
amenities such as wooded areas, water bodies and streams and to retain or create a
visually pleasing image of Little Egg Harbor Township. The following standards shall
apply:
(1) Preservation open space. This type of open space is appropriate in areas adjacent
to and inclusive of natural amenities to be preserved, such as wooded areas, water
bodies, streams, wetlands, etc. This type of open space shall be either deed
restricted from future development by conservation easements or dedicated to the
Township or another public or quasi-public agency or organization. The
following standards shall apply:
(a) During the site planning process the applicant must preserve valuable or
unique natural amenities and designate them as preservation open space.
(b) The applicant is required to remove all undesirable debris and materials
from this area.
(c) The provision of improvements such as pedestrian paths, picnic areas and
planting may be required by the Board of jurisdiction when appropriate to
create a visually pleasing and beneficial environment.
(2) Recreational open space. Recreational open space includes lands provided for
active and passive recreation and as additions to existing recreational open space.
It can take on many forms, from a tot-lot or tennis and swimming complex in a
residential development, to an English landscape garden in an office park
development or an outdoor promenade or eating pavilion in a commercial or
industrial center. The landscape architectural design of these areas shall address
safety, visual interest, microclimate and use. The following standards shall apply:
(a) Site amenities and walkways shall be provided as required by the Board of
jurisdiction. Suggested minimum improvements for residential open
Article XI
10
space include a tot-lot (play structure with slide and a separate swing set),
seating and open lawn for field play. Outdoor sitting and eating
areas/plazas are appropriate for commercial, office and manufacturing
developments.
(b) If a recreation area fronts onto a roadway, a post and rail fence or other
protective measures shall be integrated to provide protection and
separation.
F. Buffers. Landscape buffers are plantings, berms or grading and fences or walls provided
within the landscape buffer area as designated in § 15-11.7., or as necessary, to visually
soften or screen and enhance views and minimize or separate any adverse impacts or
nuisances on a site from adjacent properties or roads. The designer and the Board of
jurisdiction should consider the dimension of a landscape buffer area, existing vegetation,
structures and topography along with the intensity and type of land use involved relative
to these standards to determine the appropriate landscape buffer. The Board of
jurisdiction may require a more or less significant landscape buffer if appropriate. The
following standards are provided for particular types of buffer areas:
(1) Nuisance landscape buffer. This type of landscape buffer is appropriate in buffer
areas provided between commercial or residential uses and adjacent commercial
or different residential uses or zones where a continuous visual screen is
appropriate. The following standards shall apply:
(a) All existing tress and valuable understory vegetation should be preserved,
and the plans must specify appropriate grading and tree protection details
to assure the preservation of the vegetation. The plans must clearly
indicate all vegetation to be preserved and removed. If the Board of
jurisdiction deems it appropriate, supplemental planting should be
provided to provide a complete visual screen. Quantities and types of
supplemental plantings must respond to the deficiencies of existing
vegetation and complement the existing vegetation and the overall design
must be indicated on the landscape plan. A minimum height of eight (8)
feet to ten (10) feet for evergreen trees, two (2) feet to two and five-tenths
(2.5) feet for shrubs and a minimum caliper of two and five-tenths (2.5)
inches to three (3) inches for shade trees shall be specified for all
supplemental plantings.
(b) Areas void of significant vegetation shall receive landscape architectural
treatment including plantings, berming, fences or walls as appropriate.
Berms, fences or walls shall be provided at a height of four (4) feet to
eight (8) feet, or as necessary to provide a visual screen, with the approval
of the Board of jurisdiction. The general design, form and materials of
fences, walls and berms should relate to the overall design and the
materials utilized for other structures on the site and be aesthetically
pleasing from all sides. Planting should be provided in conjunction with
berming, fencing or walls or may be provided solely to provide a complete
visual screen and visually interesting and pleasing area. The following
quantities and minimum size guidelines are provided. If berms, fencing or
walls are provided, a decreased quantity of planting may be provided at
Article XI
11
the discretion of the Board of jurisdiction. For every one hundred (100)
linear feet or buffer area, measured at the longest line, the following must
be provided:
Type Quantity Size
Evergreen trees 12 8 to 10 feet in height
Shade trees 3 2.5 to 3 inches caliper
Ornamental trees As required 6 to 7 feet in height, 1
to 1 ½ inches caliper
Shrubs As required 2 to 2 ½ feet in height
(2) Filtered buffer. This type of landscape buffer is appropriate in buffer areas or
green space which is provided to soften the impact of a land use yet still allow
views beyond the buffer area. In particular, this type of buffer shall be provided
around the perimeter of all parking areas, internal site access roads or lanes and
the perimeter of a site which abuts a land, street, road, highway or adjacent site
and a complete visual screen is not appropriate. A buffer shall be provided to
screen unsafe distractions such as glare from cars and light standards; to provide a
visually pleasing environment; and to provide spatial definition to avoid
confusion. The following standards shall apply:
(a) All existing trees and valuable understory vegetation should be preserved,
and the plans must specify appropriate grading and tree protection details
to assure the preservation of the vegetation. The plans must clearly
indicate all vegetation to be preserved and removed. If the Board of
jurisdiction deems it appropriate, supplemental planting should be
provided to provide a filtered visual screen. Quantities and types of
supplemental plantings must respond to the deficiencies of existing
vegetation and complement the existing vegetation and the overall design
and must be indicated on the landscape plan. A minimum height of eight
(8) to ten (10) feet for evergreen trees, two (2) to two and five-tenths (2.5)
feet for shrubs, six (6) to seven (7) feet and one (1) to one and five-tenths
(1.5) inches caliper for ornamental trees and a minimum caliper of two
and five-tenths (2.5) to three and zero-tenths (3.0) inches for shade trees
shall be specified for all supplemental plantings.
(b) Areas void of significant vegetation shall receive landscape architectural
treatment including planting, berming, fences or walls as appropriate.
Berms, fences or walls shall be provided at a height of two (2) feet to four
(4) feet, or as necessary to provide an appropriate buffer. The general
design, form and materials of fences, walls and berms should relate to the
overall design and the materials utilized for other structures on the site and
be aesthetically pleasing from all sides. Planting should be provided in
conjunction with berming, fencing or walls or may be provided solely to
Article XI
12
provide an appropriate screen and visually interesting and pleasing area
emphasizing appropriate views. Parked vehicles shall be buffered as
viewed from all areas outside of the parking area. The following
quantities and minimum size guidelines are provided. If berms, fencing or
walls are provided, a decreased quantity of planting may be provided at
the discretion of the Board of jurisdiction. For every one hundred (100)
linear feet or buffer area, measured at the longest line, the following must
be provided:
Type Quantity Size
Evergreen trees As required 8 to 10 feet in height
Shade trees 4 2.5 to 3 inches caliper
Ornamental trees As required 6 to 7 feet in height, 1
to 1 ½ inches caliper
Shrubs 55 2 to 2 ½ feet in height
(3) Windbreak/heavy screening. This type of buffer is appropriate in buffer areas
where the additional need of a windbreak to stop windborne debris from leaving a
site is necessary or around objectionable facilities or utility structures where a
dense complete visual screen is appropriate. This would include buffer areas
around outdoor storage facilities, loading areas or solid waster disposal facilities
(dumpsters) or when an undersized buffer area is provided and the standards
specified for a Nuisance landscape buffer, are not sufficient at the discretion of
the Board of jurisdiction. The following standards shall apply:
(a) Provide a fence, wall or planting which will create a dense complete visual
screen. The height of the fence, wall or planting should be designed
relative to the facility being screened and shall be subject to the approval
of the Board of jurisdiction. The general design, form and materials of
fences or walls should relate to the overall design and the materials
utilized for other structures on the site or the neighborhood and be
aesthetically pleasing from all sides. Planting should be included in
conjunction with any fence or wall.
(b) If planting alone is provided, then a double staggered row of dense
evergreen plants shall be specified. The spacing between individual plants
shall be as necessary to provide a continuous hedge with plants touching at
the time of installation. The installed and mature height of the plants must
respond to the height of the area or facility being screened and views from
adjacent areas and shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Jurisdiction.
(c) The plan submission should include an illustrative section drawing
demonstrating the effectiveness of the buffer.
Article XI
13
(4) Reverse frontage buffer. This type of buffer shall be required where the rear
yards of residential units and/or lots face or front on a roadway and when any
yard of a residential unit or lot faces or fronts on an expressway or arterial
roadway. The following landscape architectural treatment shall be provided to
screen and separate private residential spaces from the roadway:
(a) All existing trees and valuable understory vegetation should be preserved,
and the plans must specify appropriate grading and tree protection details
to assure the preservation of the vegetation. The plans must clearly
indicate all vegetation to be preserved and removed. If the Board of
jurisdiction deems it appropriate, supplemental planting, berms or walls
should be specified to provide a complete visual screen. Quantities and
types of supplemental plantings must respond to the deficiencies of the
existing vegetation and complement the existing vegetation and the overall
design and must be indicated on the landscape plan. A minimum height of
eight (8) to ten (10) feet for evergreen trees, two (2) feet to two and
five/tenths (2.5) feet for shrubs, six (6) feet to seven (7) feet, one (1) inch
to one and five-tenths (1.5) inches caliper for ornamental trees, and a
minimum caliper of two and five-tenths (2.5) inches to three (3) inches for
shade trees shall be specified for all supplemental plantings. The need for
and the height and design of supplemental berms or walls must respond to
the deficiencies of existing vegetation and the proximity of the residential
unit to the road. If the Board of jurisdiction deems it appropriate, berms or
walls may be required.
(b) Areas void of significant vegetation shall receive landscape architectural
treatment including plantings, berming, fences or walls as appropriate.
Berms, fences or walls shall be provided at a height of three (3) feet to
eight (8) feet averaging five (5) feet, or as necessary to provide a visual
screen at the discretion of the Board of jurisdiction. The general design,
form and materials of fences, walls and berms should relate to the overall
design and the materials utilized for other structures on the site and be
aesthetically pleasing from all sides. The sidewalk layout shall be
integrated with the buffer and the overall design and adjacent development
when appropriate. Planting should be provided in conjunction with
berming, fencing or walls or may be provided solely to provide an
appropriate screen and visually interesting and pleasing area. The
following quantities and minimum size guidelines are provided. If berms,
fencing or walls are provided, a decreased quantity of plantings may be
provided at the discretion of the Board of jurisdiction. For every one
hundred (100) linear feet or buffer area, measured at the longest line, the
following must be provided:
Type Quantity Size
Evergreen trees 7 8 to 10 feet in height
Shade trees 5 2.5 to 3 inches caliper
Article XI
14
Ornamental trees 1 6 to 7 feet in height, 1
to 1 ½ inches caliper
Shrubs 15 2 to 2 ½ feet in height
G. Parking Areas. The landscape architectural treatment of all parking areas shall be
designed to promote safe and convenient circulation; to limit vehicular/pedestrian
conflicts; to limit paved areas; to provide shade and reduce heat island effects; and to
soften the overall visual impact of parking areas. The design of all parking areas shall
comply with the requirements of Section 15-12.16. Off-street parking and loading areas,
with landscape architectural treatments shall be provided as follows:
(1) Shade trees within the parking area shall be provided at a minimum rate of two
(2) trees for every ten (10) parking spaces.
(2) In the islands provided at the end of individual rows of parking spaces between
access roads and aisles, planting shall be provided to buffer the view of parked
cars, provide shade and cover the ground plane.
(3) Plant sizes shall be a minimum of two and five-tents (2.5) to three and zero-tenths
(3.0) inches caliper and thirteen (13) to fifteen (15) feet in height for shade trees
and two (20 to two and five-tenths (2.5) feet in height for shrubs.
(4) Large parking areas shall be subdivided into modules. Separation of modules
should be achieved by a landscape island of a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
Integration of pedestrian walkways within this island, aligned with building
entrances or focal points, is encouraged and should be considered.
(5) Pedestrian/vehicular conflicts shall be minimized through design, yet, when
necessary, clearly indicated by a change of vehicular and pedestrian paving and
plant materials.
(6) Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape islands. Trees shall not
hinder safe lighting coverage.
H. Green Space. The landscape plan or site plan for all site plan and subdivision plan
submissions shall address the planting of all green space in accordance with the standards
set forth herein or another appropriate manner. In the site planning process, the provision
and landscaping of green space or planting areas should be considered to enhance the
visual quantity of a site and provide spatial or directional definition as follows:
(1) A planting area and planting around all buildings as appropriate relative to the
architecture, anticipated use and to limit pavement to that necessary for access
and appropriate use shall be provided.
(2) To provide immediate buffering, visual relief, and scale for large office,
commercial, and industrial buildings [buildings of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or larger] larger-size trees shall be provided near the building perimeter
[within seventy-five (75) feet]. The quantity of trees shall be equal to one (1) tree
for every forty (40) feet of general building perimeter.
(a) The tree size shall be based upon the height of the building as follows:
Article XI
15
Building
Stories
Tree Size
(caliper in inches)
1 to 2 2.5 to 3.0
3 3.0 to 3.5
(b) These trees shall be located in a manner consistent with architectural and
site design and shall provide maximum visual impact. Preserved or
relocated existing vegetation may be utilized to meet this requirement.
(3) In residential developments, trees shall be planted throughout a site at a rate of
one (1) tree per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of upland lot area
or fraction thereof. In non-residential developments, trees shall be planted
throughout a site at a minimum size of two and five-tenths (2.5) to three and zerotenths
(3.0) caliper and/or evergreen trees at ten (10) to twelve (12) feet in height,
and forty percent (40%) shall be shade trees a minimum size of two (2) to two and
five-tenths (2.5) inches caliper and/or evergreen trees at six (6) to eight (8) feet in
height. Existing, mature upland forest [containing a predominance of four (4)
inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) at the approval of the Board Engineer]
which are preserved and adequately protected and not injured during and
subsequent to construction may be deducted from the quantity of trees required at
the rate of one (1) tree for every two thousand (2,000) square feet of mature
upland forest. Only upland areas and existing trees which are located on the
property being developed shall be considered for this requirement; plantings
provided in conjunction with other ordinance requirements shall not be
considered; trees within the right-of-way also are not to be considered.
(4) In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not occupied by buildings and
required improvements shall be appropriately landscaped with grading and
planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs and trees as part of the landscape
plan approved by the Board of jurisdiction. Planting of trees along streets and in
front yard areas shall be provided as required by ordinance and as necessary to
create a harmonious, pleasant view from all roads.
I. Pedestrian spaces. All site plan and subdivision plans shall address pedestrian spaces and
circulation. The objectives shall be to promote free and safe movement of pedestrians
and bicycles into, in between and through the proposed and existing facilities and to
provide pleasant pedestrian spaces at building entrances and nodes. The following
standards shall apply:
(1) Pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided from public roadways, parking
lots and adjacent land uses where appropriate.
(2) The layout of pedestrian walkways shall be consistent with the overall design. In
natural landscapes, walkways shall meander through plantings and berms. Formal
landscapes may require long straight walkways. The views of pedestrians shall be
visually interesting.
(3) Benches and sitting areas along pathways shall be provided where appropriate and
particularly where they can incorporate or provide views of a significant
landscape feature, recreational facility or interesting site design of the project.
Article XI
16
(4) Connections to open space areas and facilities on adjacent properties shall be
provided. Pedestrian easements between lots with a paved driveway may be
required.
(5) Pedestrian bridges over streams, ravines or drainage swales shall be required
when necessary to make connections in pedestrian system(s). They are subject to
all regulatory agency permit requirements.
(6) Pedestrian amenities, such as kiosks, water fountains, pedestrian scale lighting
and gazebos, shall be provided where appropriate.
(7) Bicycle parking for each building and adequate space for bicycle movements shall
be provided.
(8) Building entrances, plazas, exterior malls, promenades and nodes shall receive
detailed pedestrian scale landscape architectural treatments. Pedestrian/vehicular
conflicts shall be avoided through design. Building entrances shall be delineated
by planting islands within the parking area. Plantings shall include shade trees,
evergreen and ornamental trees and shrubs, as appropriate. The planting design
shall provide visual variety and interest, spatial enclosure and separation from
parking areas and protection from sun and wind. Sitting areas with benches or
seat walls shall be provided as appropriate.
(9) Bicycle rental, repair or sales establishment.
(10) Bowling alley.
(11) Building materials, retails sales establishment; excluding, however, lumberyards,
or similar uses requiring outdoor storage.
§ 15-11.9. Bulk storage.
In zoning districts where bulk storage is a permitted accessory use, the following minimum
requirements shall apply:
A. No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted in any required front yard
area or within one hundred (100) feet of any public street, whichever is greater.
B. No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted between any side or rear lot
line and the required side or rear setback line.
C. All bulk storage area shall be screened from public view by means of suitable fencing
and/or evergreen plantings as required by the Planning Board. Where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone, the screening shall meet the minimum requirements of §15-
11.3. and §15-11.4. of this chapter.
D. No fence used to screen a bulk storage area shall be placed closer to any property line
than the distance constitution the required front, side or rear setbacks, and all setback
areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of §15-11.7. and § 15-
11.8. of this chapter.
Article XI
17
E. All service roads, driveways and bulk storage areas shall be paved with bituminous
concrete or other surfacing materials, as required by the Planning Board, which shall be
of sufficient strength to handle the anticipated use.
F. In no instance shall on-site bulk storage of material exceed the height of ten (10) feet.
G. No heavy equipment shall be operated or parked closer to the front property line than the
required front setback plus fifty (50) feet, except as the same may be in transit to or from
the site.
§15-11.10. Floodplain regulations.
A. The purposes of the following floodplain regulations are to implement the Land Use
Rules and Regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection for floodways and the flood-fringe portion of a flood hazard area, to
discourage construction and regrading in flood hazard areas, to prevent encroachments
into flood hazard areas which would obstruct or constrict the area through which water
must pass and to prevent pollution of watercourses during low or high-water periods by
preventing the placing or storing of unsanitary or dangerous substances in the flood
hazard areas.
B. The flood hazard design elevation shall be determined on an individual basis upon stream
encroachment line data from the Division of Water Resources or, in the absence of that
data, the flood elevation based on a one-hundred-year storm frequency. One or the other
shall be delineated on the plat. In addition, the Planning Board Engineer may, upon
receipt of the application and with the consent of the landowner and at the landowner's
expense, determine the precise location of a floodway and flood-fringe area by close
inspection, field survey or other appropriate method and cause, if requested, the same to
be marked on the ground and on the plat and notify the owner, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, and the
approving authority. The assistance of the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, United States Army Corps of Engineers and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, may be sought to
aid in delineating the flood hazard design elevation, except that, where State and Federal
agencies shall subsequently publish any reports which delineate the flood hazard design
elevation of a watercourse, the report shall be the officially delineated flood hazard area
as if the report were published in this chapter.
C. Any lot containing a floodway portion of a drainage course and on which it is proposed to
regrade and/or construct an improvement shall not be permitted unless the proposed use
is permitted by this chapter, plat approval has been granted and a floodway permit has
been issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Water Resources, where required by the State.
Article XI
18
D. Any lot containing a flood-fringe portion of the flood hazard area and on which it is
proposed to regrade and/or construct an improvement shall not be permitted unless the
proposed use is permitted by this chapter and until plat approval has been granted.
E. The procedure for reviewing any proposed regrading and/or construction shall be the
same as set forth for plat review. No application shall be approved and no permit granted
until all zoning violations have either been corrected or a variance granted.
F. Regulation of the flood-fringe portion of the flood hazard area shall be consistent in the
approving authority's determination with the criteria and standards promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection governing the flood-fringe area.
G. The applicant shall submit maps, reports and other appropriate documents permitting the
approving authority to evaluate whether the proposal has an inherent low flood damage
potential, does not obstruct flood flows or increase flood heights and/or velocities, does
not affect adversely the watercarrying capacity of any delineated floodway and/or
channel, does not increase local runoff and erosion, does not unduly stress the natural
environment of the floodplain or degrade the quality of surface water or the quality and
quantity of groundwaters, does not require channel modification or relocation, does not
require fill or the erection of structures and does not include the storage of equipment and
materials.
H. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, surface or underground drainageway
or drainage system, channel or stream, there shall be provided and dedicated a drainage
right-of-way easement to the municipality conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate to
accommodate expected stormwater runoff in the future, based upon reasonable growth
potential in the municipality. The minimum width of easement for channel sections shall
be the maximum design top width of the channel section segment plus twenty (20) feet,
rounded to the next-highest five-foot increment. However, if the floodway is not
ascertainable for a stream or open channel, the width of the drainage easement shall
extend fifty (50) feet beyond the top of the bank on both sides of the drainage course.
§ 15-11.11. Easements.
A. Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installation may be required
but are discouraged. Such easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide for one (1)
utility and five (5) additional feet, if practical, for each additional utility and shall be
located in consultation with the companies, municipal department concerned or other
jurisdictional agencies and, to the fullest extent possible, be centered on or adjacent to
rear or side lot lines.
B. Floodplains and conservation easements shall be indicated on the preliminary and final
plats and shall be shown in such a manner that their boundaries can be accurately
determined.
Article XI
19
C. The removal of trees and ground cover shall be prohibited in a conservation easement or
floodplain easement, except for the following purposes: the removal of dead or diseased
trees; limited thinning of trees and growth to encourage the most desirable growth; the
removal of trees to allow for structures designed to impound water or in areas to be
flooded in the creation of ponds or lakes; or, approved conservation plans by the Soil
Conservation District.
D. Such easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat as follows: the type of easement
granted to the Township of Little Egg Harbor and the appropriate agency.
E. Property owners across whose property a drainage or utility easement exists shall be
prohibited from performing any of the following actions: [Amended 3/25/2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-04]
(1) Modifying the ground elevations or grades so as to interfere with existing
drainage patterns.
(2) Installing any permanent infrastructure, including but not limited to:
(a) Concrete, brick paver, or bituminous concrete walkways;
(b) Patios;
(c) Decks;
(d) Retaining walls;
(e) Fences;
(f) Underground sprinkler systems;
(g) Storage sheds;
(h) Swimming pools;
(i) Trees, shrubs, plants, etc.
(3) Exception. Property owners may install permanent infrastructure within a
drainage or utility easement only if they agree to sign an encroachment agreement
with the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The property owner must agree that the
property owner is responsible to reset or replace infrastructure improvements if
the Township needs to disturb the easement area and complete work such that the
infrastructure placed by the property owner is damaged or removed. If a property
owner does not execute an encroachment agreement with the Township that is in
a form acceptable to the Township, any permanent infrastructure improvements
placed upon the easement by the property owner may be removed by the
Township or may suffer damage if the Township required work to be done with
the easement area. Any permanent infrastructure improvements constructed
within an easement area by the property owner without an encroachment
agreement shall be considered an illegal structure upon which the Township has
no legal responsibility for replacing or repairing.
(4) Subsection E herein shall apply retroactively to any existing drainage or utility
easements within the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 15-11.12. Water supply and sanitary sewer facilities.
A. The developer shall make application for review and obtain the necessary final approval
from the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority and County and State regulatory
Article XI
20
agencies having jurisdiction. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with the
jurisdictional utility and/or state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to
their approval.
B. Where public water and/or sanitary sewers are not available, a potable water supply shall
be provided to each lot on an individual well basis, and sanitary disposal shall be
provided to each lot with an individual septic system. Such wells and septic systems
shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the local, County
and/or State agencies having jurisdiction thereof. However, in any event, a determination
must be received, in writing, from the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority as
to whether a comprehensive dry water system and dry sewer system shall be required.
C. Provisions shall be made in all major subdivisions for the installation of fire hydrants in
those locations as approved by the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority. All
hydrants shall conform to the standard hydrant as accepted by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, which shall conform to all current National Fire Protection Code Requirements.
Fire hydrants shall be painted black until they become operational, at which time they
shall be painted red.
§15-11.13. Public utilities.
A. All municipal utility services and public services shall be connected to an approved
municipal utility system and/or public utility system where one exists.
B. The developer shall arrange with the servicing utilities for the underground installation of
utility distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions
of the rules and regulations of that utility and any applicable standard terms and
conditions incorporated as part of its tariffs as the same are then on file with the State of
New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
C. The developer shall submit to the approving authority, prior to the granting of final
approval, a written instrument from each serving utility, which shall evidence full
compliance or intended full compliance with the provisions of this section; provided,
however, that lots which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have theretofore been installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service utilities from such overhead lines. In the case
of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension of service or other
such condition occur as a result of the development and necessitate the replacement,
relocation or extension of such utilities, such replacement, relocation or extension shall
be underground.
D. Any installation, except streetlighting, to be performed by a servicing utility shall be
exempt from requiring performance guaranties but shall be certified by the servicing
utility, in writing, that all improvements have been satisfactorily constructed. The
certification shall be provided prior to release of the performance bond. The installation
Article XI
21
of all utilities, including streetlighting, shall be the sole cost of the developer as per
ordinances of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
E. On-site public utility uses necessary to supply needed services to the occupants of the
proposed development, excluding switching stations, substations or storage facilities of
any nature which must be provided above ground, may be permitted as a conditional use
in those zones specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the
minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
(1) A statement is submitted setting forth the reasons that the proposed installation
must be provided above ground in a specific location and why it is necessary and
convenient for the efficiency of the public utility system or for the satisfactory
and convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in
which the particular use is to be located.
(2) The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to the
general character of the area and will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is located.
(3) Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be provided.
(4) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, are provided and will be
periodically maintained. Landscaping shall conform to §15-11.8. of this chapter.
F. All electric, telephone, television and other communication facilities, both main and
service lines servicing new developments, shall be provided by underground wiring
within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the
prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such
services.
G. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed
may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. In
the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension of service
or other such condition occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the
replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be
underground.
H. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement and alignment of
poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines as follows:
(1) Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along
horizons.
(2) Clearing swaths through treed areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a
staggered alignment.
(3) Trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of
the poles and the alignments.
(4) Alignments shall follow rear lot lines and other alignments.
Article XI
22
§ 15-11.14. Fire protection.
A. Wherever a central water supply system services a development, provision shall be made
for fire hydrants along streets and/or on the walls of nonresidential structures as approved
by the Fire Commissioners or Board and in accordance with Fire Insurance Rating
Organization Standards.
B. Where streams or ponds exist or are proposed on lands to be developed, facilities shall be
provided to draft water for fire-fighting purposes. This shall include access to a public
street suitable for use by firefighting equipment and construction of or improvements to
ponds, dams or similar on-site or off-site development, where feasible. Such facilities
shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the Board Engineer and Fire Department and in
accordance with fire insurance organization standards.
C. All major site plans and major subdivisions, including cluster developments and multifamily
developments, where permitted, shall be reviewed by the Little Egg Harbor
Township Fire Marshal. The applicant shall submit to the Fire Marshal or other
appropriate fire officials complete plans of the proposed development and shall obtain
from the Fire Marshal or appropriate fire official written comments as to what items shall
be incorporated in the design of the proposed development to allow, at all times, adequate
access for fire-fighting and emergency vehicles. The applicant shall incorporate in the
site development all fire safety and fire-protection devices and provisions as required by
the Little Egg Harbor Township Fire Marshal or the appropriate fire official. In the case
of all major site plans, fire hydrants conforming to the spacing and recommendations of
either the National Fire Protection Association or the Little Egg Harbor Township Fire
Marshal or appropriate fire official shall be provided on the site plan and shall be a
specific requirement of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 15-11.15. Homeowners' association.
Homeowners' association may be established for the purposes of owning and assuming
maintenance responsibilities for the common open space and common property designed within
a development, provided that the approving authority is satisfied that the organization will have a
sufficient number of members to reasonably expect a perpetuation of the organization in a
manner enabling it to meet its obligations and responsibilities in owning and maintaining any
property for the benefit of owners or residents of the development. If established, the
organization shall incorporate the following provisions:
A. Membership by all property owners, condominium owners, stockholders under a
cooperative development and other owners of property or interest in the project shall be
mandatory. Required membership and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in
writing between the organization and each member in the form of a covenant, with each
agreeing to liability for his pro rata share of the organization's costs.
B. The organization shall be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, maintenance and any
other obligations assumed by the organization and shall hold the municipality harmless
Article XI
23
from any liability. The organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any
open space or property by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space or property for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of
its open space or property without first offering to dedicate the same to the
municipality(ies) wherein the land is located.
C. The assessment levied by the organization upon each member may become a lien on each
member's property. The organization shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet
changing needs.
D. The organization shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and obligations of each
tenant and owner, including a copy of the covenant, model deeds and articles of
incorporation of the organization and the fact that every tenant and property owner shall
have the right to use all common properties. These shall be set forth as a condition of
approval and shall be submitted prior to the granting of final approval.
E. The articles of incorporation, covenants, bylaws, model deeds and other legal instruments
shall ensure that control of the organization shall be transferred to the members based on
a percentage of the dwelling units sold and/or occupied and shall clearly indicate that, in
the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the common open space or common
property in reasonable order and condition, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the owners of the development setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space or common
property in reasonable condition, and the notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty-five (35) days thereof and shall state
the date and place of a hearing thereon, which shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the
notice. At such hearing, the designated Township body or officer, as the case may be,
may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time, not to exceed sixty-five (65) days, within which they shall be cured. If
the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be
cured within thirty-five (35) days or any permitted extension thereof, the Township, in
order to preserve the common open space and common property and maintain the same,
or designate an appropriate person or entity to maintain the same at the cost of the
property owners within the development.
F. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed pro rata against the
properties within the development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space and common property, in accordance with the assessed value at the time of
imposition of the lien, and shall become a lien and tax on the properties and be added to
and be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected
with interest in the same offices and in the same manner as other taxes.
G. The homeowners' association shall, on or before July 1 of each and every year, furnish
the Township Committee with an annual report, including but not limited to the present
disposition of all common areas and park areas owned, operated and maintained by the
Article XI
24
association. The report shall also include a list of current officers, their addresses and
telephone numbers. The report shall contain a list of emergency telephone numbers at
which one (1) or more officers of the association can be reached by a Township official
during any twenty-four-hour period. Each homeowners’ association must immediately
file with the Township Administrator all amended reports and annual reports adopted
after July 1, 1999.
§ 15-11.16. Miscellaneous performance standards.
A. Electricity. Electronic equipment shall be shielded so that there is no interference with
any radio or television reception beyond the operator's property as the result of the
operation of such equipment.
B. Glare. No use shall direct or reflect a steady or flashing light beyond its lot lines.
Exterior lighting and lighting resulting from any manufacturing or assembly operations
shall be shielded, buffered and directed as approved on the site plan so that any glare,
direct light, flashes or reflection will not interfere with the normal use of nearby
properties, dwelling units and streets. Also see §15-12.19., Lighting., in this chapter.
C. Heat. Sources of heat, including but not limited to steam, gases, vapors or products of
combustion or chemical reaction, shall not discharge onto or directly contact structures,
plant life or animal life on neighboring uses or impair the function or operation of a
neighboring use. No use, occupation, activity, operation or device shall cause an increase
in ambient temperature, as measured on the boundary between neighboring uses.
D. Radioactivity. No use, activity, operation or device concerned with the utilization or
storage of radioactive materials shall be established, modified, constructed or used
without having first obtained valid permits and certificates from the Office of Radiation
Protection, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Proof of compliance
with this requirement shall be the submission of duplicate copies of the permits and
certificates.
E. Vibrations.
(1) Standard. Ground-transmitted vibrations shall be measured with a seismograph or
complement of the instruments capable of recording vibration displacement and
frequency in the three (3) mutually perpendicular directions simultaneously.
(2) Vibration level restrictions. Vibration levels shall not exceed a particle velocity
of five-tenths (0.5) inch per second in any district. During the hours of 9:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. in residential districts, vibration levels shall not exceed a particle
velocity of two-tenths (0.2) inch per second. Measurements shall be made at the
points of maximum vibration intensity and on or beyond adjacent lot lines or
neighboring uses, whichever is more restrictive.
F. Airborne emissions. In all districts, no use, activity, operation or device shall be
established, modified, constructed or used without having obtained valid permits and
certificates from the Bureau of Air Pollution Control pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-8.
Article XI
25
Specifically, no use, activity, operation or device shall be established, modified or
constructed without a valid permit to construct. No use, activity, operation or device
shall be operated, occupied or used without a valid certificate to operate control apparatus
or equipment. Proof of compliance with this requirement shall be the submission of
duplicate copies of the permit to construct and certificate to operate. In addition to the
requirements of the New Jersey Administrative Code, the following shall also apply:
(1) Steam emission. No visible emission of steam, having an equivalent capacity
greater than sixty percent (60%) and expecting direct results of combustion, shall
be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district.
(2) Toxic matter. Emissions of chemicals, gases, components or elements listed as
being toxic matter by the American Conference of Governmental Hygienists,
New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency shall not exceed the threshold level, as determined in
accordance with ASTM D-1391, as currently amended. The emission of
concentrations, levels or mass loading in excess of the threshold value shall be
permitted only if the emissions of the toxic matter comply with the applicable
regulations of the New Jersey Administrative Code, the New Jersey Department
of Labor and Industry and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Proof of compliance shall require the submission of duplicate copies of
certificates or permits pursuant to the New Jersey Administrative Code and the
New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry approving the concentrations, level
or loading proposed by the applicant.
(3) Odorous matter. No odor shall be emitted that is detectable by the human
olfactory sense at or beyond an adjacent lot line.
G. Noise emissions. The standards set forth in the Township Noise Ordinance, are
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth more fully herein and repeated at length:
(1) Standard. Noise emissions shall fully comply with N.J.A.C. 7:29 et seq. and P.L.
1971, c. 418. Noise shall be measured with a sound-level meter complying with
the standards of the American National Standards Institute, American Standards
Specifications for General Purpose Sound-Level Meters, ANSI 1.4-1961, or its
latest revisions. The instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and
the metering to the slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in
accordance with the American Standard Method for the Physical Measurements
of Sound, ANSI 1.2-1961, or its latest revision.
(2) Noise level restrictions. Noises shall not exceed the maximum sound levels
specified in the table, except as designated below:
(a) Noise level restrictions:
Maximum Level
Performance Category Permitted [dB(A)] Where Measured
Residential districts 55 On or beyond the
neighboring use or lot
line
Article XI
26
All other districts 65 On or beyond the
district boundaries
(b) In any residential district, the A-weighted sound levels shall not exceed
forty-five (45) dB(A)s during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Whenever a residential district abuts any other district, the most restrictive
of the limitations shall apply.
(3) Exclusions and permitted variations.
(a) The levels specified in the table may be exceeded once by ten (10) dB(A)'s
in a single period of fifteen (15) minutes during one (1) day.
(b) Peak values of short duration, also known as "impact noises," may exceed
the values specified in the table by twenty (20) dB(A)'s or have a
maximum noise level of eighty (80) dB(A)'s, whichever is more
restrictive.
(c) Noises such as alarms, sirens, emergency warnings devices, motor
vehicles licensed by the State of New Jersey and other sources not under
the direct control of a use are excluded from the above limitations.
§ 15-11.17. Open Space and Recreation. [Amended 12/10/2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
“Reserved”
§ 15-11.18. Solid Waste Management.
A. Provisions shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage and refuse.
B. Outside garbage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas approved by the
municipal agency. Such areas shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be shielded from
public view and protected by adequate fencing and/or screening.
C. Screening of refuse areas. These areas adjacent to or within the parking area designated
as refuse storage and pickup areas shall be properly screened to prevent the unsightly
display and the scattering of debris. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) The area shall be surrounded on all sides by a uniform solid fence or masonry
wall not less than five (5) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height. The fence or
wall shall be located and be of such type as to promote safety and ensure against
creation of an unsightly condition. The fence must at all times be maintained so
as to be kept in a sound, upright, fully repaired and painted condition or, if not
painted, shall be made of such material as does not corrode, rust or change
appearance if left unpainted. The opening in the fence or wall shall be so located
as to prevent the visual display of refuse from any adjacent parking area, building,
street or site.
(2) In addition, the fence or wall shall be of a design which is consistent with the
architectural design of the principle building on the site or the style of the
neighborhood, including gates, which shall screen from view, entirely, the refuse
containers and refuse storage areas.
Article XI
27
(3) No refuse enclosure or area shall be located in any area considered to be a front
yard or in any area of a site which fronts on any street.
(4) In addition to the fence or wall, plantings such as dense shrubs or trees shall be
planted around the refuse enclosure to further screen the enclosure and enhance
the enclosure aesthetically. All landscaping shall conform with §15-11.8.
D. Debris.
(1) Materials accumulated by clearing, grubbing and excavation, as above described,
shall be disposed of by the developer in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer,
except that materials suitable for embankment shall be used for that purpose if
needed therefore. Burying of the above materials will not be permitted in any
case.
(2) At the time of the tender of a plan for final approval for subdivision of real estate
in this municipality, an estimate shall be made, for and on behalf of the
municipality, by the Township Engineer as to the cost of removal of the
development debris for the development. Before final approval of the plan, such
estimate furnished by the Township Engineer shall be included in the guaranty to
be furnished by the developer.
(3) The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a constant check on debris
from the subdivision of land and construction of buildings and shall not permit
accumulations in any real estate development. In the event that there is any
substantial accumulation of such debris in any development, the Building
Inspector shall forthwith give written notice to the developer to remove such
debris from the real estate development. In the event that such debris is not
promptly removed, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
refrain from giving certificates of occupancy for building permits until the debris
is cleared up and removed.
(4) Whenever the subgrade is established to be coincident with the existing ground
surface, the vegetation and underlying topsoil of the existing ground surface
within the excavation and embankment areas shall be stripped off to a depth of
not less than four (4) inches and not more than six (6) inches. Street and roadway
excavation shall be carried out so that the subgrade throughout the work is kept
properly drained.
(5) Excavated materials shall be placed in an embankment when suitable therefore or
shall be used for backfill or other purposes. Material in excess of that required
shall be disposed of by the developer, contractor or subcontractor.
(6) Borrow excavation for road construction shall include the furnishing,
transporting, placing and consolidating of materials required for embankment in
excess of that obtained from other excavations and other incidental work. All
borrow excavation shall be suitable for embankment and approved by the
Township Engineer.
E. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) In all districts permitting such an operation, use or any activity involving the
manufacture, utilization or storage of flammable, combustible and/or explosive
materials, such storage shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations
Article XI
28
promulgated by the Department of Labor and Industry of New Jersey or the Fire
Code of the National Fire Protection Association, whichever is more restrictive.
(2) All flammable, explosive and/or combustible material shall be stored in
accordance with the National Fire Protection Association or the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry Code, whichever is more restrictive.
(3) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and equipment
stored outdoors, wherever permitted, shall be enclosed by an approved safety
fence and visual screen and shall conform to all yard requirements imposed upon
the principal buildings in the district.
(4) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that
they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any
substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render
such stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation
or which will destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
(5) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall
be stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers that are adequate to eliminate
such hazards.
E. All commercial establishments shall provide for private garbage collection. No
municipal garbage collection will be provided for commercial establishments by the
Township.
Article XII
1
ARTICLE XII
Improvement Standards
§ 15-12.1. Specific design standards and construction details.
A. General. The purpose of this section is to establish a uniform set of specific design
standards and construction details. The standards shall be applicable to all site plans,
subdivisions and other development applications and shall be used in conjunction with
the general design and performance standards outlined elsewhere in this chapter. All
improvements shall be installed in complete accordance with the standards of this chapter
as specified in this section and as set forth in Chapter 15, Zoning, with other particular
specifications approved by the Board and Township Engineer and with all other
applicable municipal, County and State regulations. All streets in residential
developments shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Subchapter 4
(“Streets and Parking”) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site Improvement Standards), as
amended.
B. Standard specifications and construction details. The Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation, latest edition,
including all addenda, and the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, latest revision, as modified, supplemented, amended or
superseded by the requirements of this chapter, by the approval of a final plat, by
particular agreement among the Board, Township Council and subdivider or by other
applicable municipal, County or State regulations shall govern the completion of the
required improvements. Such standard specifications and standard construction details
are made a part of this chapter by this reference and will not be repeated herein. It is the
responsibility of all the subdividers to familiarize themselves with these standards, copies
of which may be examined at the Office of the Township Engineer and may be obtained,
upon payment of the cost thereof, from the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
The requirement of this chapter of an approved final plat or of particular agreements and
conditions of approval and of applicable municipal, county or state regulations shall
govern and prevail in the case of conflict between them and the standard specifications or
standard construction details. Should the Township adopt, subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter, particular and specific standard construction details for Little Egg
Harbor Township, they shall govern and prevail over the Standard Construction Details
of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
§ 15-12.2. Streets and streetlighting.
A. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the extension and realignment, as
appropriate, of existing collector and primary streets. The arrangement of streets now
shown on the Master Plan or an Official Map shall be such as to provide for and
encourage the appropriate extension of existing streets, shall conform to the topography
as far as practicable and shall allow for continued logical extension into adjoining
undeveloped tracts. Streets shall be designed to promote safety and shall conform to the
current requirements and policies of the American Association of State Highway and
Article XII
2
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), except as stated in the minor street design
standards.
(1) Design of minor streets. Minor streets in residential subdivisions shall be laid out
so that there is no possibility of their use by traffic having neither origin nor
destination at the lots to which they provide access and shall conform to the
standards of this chapter.
(a) Cul-de-sac (dead-end streets) may be used where necessary but should not
have a center-line length, from the intersecting street center line to the
center point of the cul-de-sac, less than one hundred (100) feet nor longer
than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet and should not provide access
to more than twenty-five (25) lots.
(b) When their use is possible, short loop streets are preferred to cul-de-sacs.
Short loop streets should provide access to no more than forty-five (45)
lots, except that where access is provided by a combination of a short loop
street and cul-de-sacs, the maximum shall be sixty (60) lots, provided that
the length of the loop street alone will not exceed three thousand (3,000)
feet. Loop streets shall have both of their termini located on the same
major street to be so classified.
(c) In all residential zones, development bounded by any arterial or collector
streets shall control access to the streets by having all driveways intersect
minor streets. Where the size, shape, location or some other unique
circumstance may dictate no other alternative than to have a driveway
enter an arterial or collector street, the lot shall provide on-site turnaround
facilities so that it is not necessary to back any vehicle onto an arterial or
collector street, and abutting lots shall share a common access drive.
(2) Classification of streets. In any major subdivision, it shall be the duty of the
Board to classify proposed streets according to their types. The Board, in making
its decisions, shall refer to the Master Plan and shall consider conditions within
the subdivision and surrounding area.
(3) Right-of-way and paving widths and street detail. Right-of-way widths, measured
from lot line to lot line, graded widths and paving widths and other items shall be
not less than the requirements set forth in the following Subsection A.(4) unless
otherwise indicated on the Master Plan or the Official Map. Where a proposed
development will result in the extension of an existing street, the paved width of
the extension shall be as set forth in Subsection A.(4) hereafter or the paved width
of the existing street, whichever is greater.
(4) Requirements for street classifications.
Primary
Type Minor Subcollector Collector
(County Roads)
Right-of-way (row) width (feet) 50 6 80*
Paving widths, 2-way (feet) 30 40 40*
Curb radii at intersection (feet) 25 35 35
Tangents between reverse curves (min.) 100 200 300
Horizontal center-line radius (feet) 150 500 1,000
Article XII
3
Maximum center-line grades 10% 8% 6%
Minimum center-line grades 1/2% 1/2% 1/2%
Max grades at intersection,
3% for distance from
center-line intersection (feet) 100 150 150
Turnaround at end of cul-de-sac
Radius of right-of-way (feet) 60
Radius of pavement (feet) 50
Curb face required (inches) 6 6 8
Pavement crown (inches) 6 8 8
Sidewalks
Width (feet) 4 4 4
Setback (from front curb face)(feet) 4 5 6
NOTES:
* As designed or indicated on the Master Plan or mandated by the Ocean
County Engineer, Township Planning Board or Board Engineer.
(5) Vertical geometric requirements.
(a) At all points of grade changes, where the algebraic difference in
intersecting grades equals one (1) or greater, a vertical parabolic curve
shall connect the intersecting grade lines. The vertical curve shall be of a
length required to provide a smooth transition avoiding sharp crests or
sags, provide proper drainage flow and provide the required horizontal and
vertical sight and stopping distances set forth in the current requirements
and policies of the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). The vertical curve length shall be in
accordance with AASHTO criteria for the design speed of the roadway,
prevailing topographic conditions and existing horizontal and vertical
sight obstructions. In no case shall the vertical curve lengths be less than
the following minimums specified as follows:
[1] One hundred (100) feet for algebraic differences in intersection
grades of one (1) or greater and less than two (2).
[2] Two hundred (200) feet for algebraic differences in intersecting
grades of two (2) or greater and less than ten (10).
(b) Vertical sight distances. Vertical curves shall be a sufficient length to
provide the minimum sight distances as required by current AASHTO
requirements and in no case shall be less than the following:
[1] Minor streets: two hundred (200) feet.
[2] Collector streets: three hundred (300) feet.
(c) The location, by station, middle ordinate or K, length and point of vertical
intersection (PVI) station must be indicated on the profiles.
(6) Where dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) are utilized, they shall conform to the
following standards:
(a) Dead-end streets of a permanent nature (where provision for the future
extension of the street in the boundary of the adjoining property is
impractical or impossible) or of a temporary nature (where provision is
made for the future extension of the street to the boundary line of
Article XII
4
adjoining property) shall provide a turnaround at the end with a right-ofway
radius of not less than sixty (60) feet and a cartway radius of not less
than fifty (50) feet. The center point for the radius shall be on the center
line of the associated street or, if offset, to a point where the cartway
radius also becomes a tangent to one (1) of the curblines of the associated
street. If the cul-de-sac is offset, the tangent shall be on the right side of
the street, wherever possible, for approaching vehicles. In the center of
the turnaround, a planting island equal in dimension to the cartway radius
minus the cartway width of the roadway shall be provided in lieu of
excessive pavement.
(b) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, provisions shall be made for
removal of a turnaround and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the
adjoining properties as an off-tract responsibility to the developer creating
the street extension when the street is extended.
(7) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate in spelling
or phonetic sound the names of existing streets so as to be confusing therewith.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The names of
new streets must be approved by the approving authority.
(8) All streets shall be curvilinear in horizontal alignment wherever deemed practical
and feasible by either the Planning Board or the Planning Board Engineer and
shall be designed to discourage speed and monotony. The maximum straight line
distance shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet.
(9) Nonresidential streets. The widths of internal streets in business or industrial
developments designed as a whole in accordance with a comprehensive site plan
shall be determined by the Board in each case in the light of the circumstances of
the particular situation and with a view to assuring the maximum safety and
convenience of access for traffic and fire-fighting equipment, circulation and
parking, including provisions for the loading and unloading of goods, and, in
general, shall conform to collector street design standards.
(10) Subdivisions on existing streets. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing
streets which do not conform to the widths as shown on the Master Plan, the
Official Map or the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate the
required additional width along either one (1) or both sides of the street as the
Board may deem necessary.
(11) Street intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to the
following standards:
(a) No more than two (2) streets shall cross the same point.
(b) Street intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than seventy degrees (70°), measured at the center line
of streets, shall not be permitted.
(c) All intersections of less than ninety degrees (90°) shall be discouraged.
(12) Approaches to all intersections shall follow a straight line for at least one hundred
(100) feet, measured from the intersecting street corner line to the beginning of
the curve. Streets intersecting another street from opposite sides shall have at
least two hundred (200) feet between the two (2) street center lines. Any
development abutting an existing street which is classified as a collector street
Article XII
5
shall be permitted not more than one (1) new street every eight hundred (800) feet
on the same side of the street within the boundaries of the tract being subdivided.
In the spacing of streets, consideration will be given to the location of existing
intersections on both sides of the development.
(13) Sight triangles shall be provided as required in this chapter.
(14) No development showing reserve strips controlling access to streets or another
area, either developed or undeveloped, shall be approved, except where the
control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been given to the
governing body.
(15) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards and in
accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of
the New Jersey Department of Transportation as herein defined.
(a) Local and minor streets:
[1] Six (6) inches of Class A or B road gravel or an approved equal.
[2] Two (2) inches of bituminous stabilized base course.
[3] One and one-half (1½) inches of FABC-1 surface course or an
approved equal.
(b) Collector streets:
[1] Six (6) inches of Type 2, Class B, road gravel or an approved
equal.
[2] Four (4) inches of bituminous stabilized base course.
[3] Two (2) inches of FABC-1 surface course or an approved equal.
(16) Street signs shall be enameled metal of the size and color equal and similar to the
type now in use by Little Egg Harbor Township. They shall be in a workmanlike
manner. At street intersections, one (1) post shall carry two (2) signs at right
angles to denote the name of each street. Posts shall be ten (10) feet overall, with
three (3) feet in the ground surrounded with concrete.
(17) Street and road excavations shall include the work of clearing and grubbing
within the limits of the right-of-way and outside thereof, within slope areas to be
graded or as otherwise prescribed. The ground surface shall be cleared of trees,
brush, weeds, roots, matted leaves, debris and other unsuitable matter before
street and roadway subgrade operations are commenced. Trees which do not
interfere with the operations shall not be removed but shall be protected during
the progress of the work. Branches of trees overhanging the traveled way shall be
cut off to a height of fourteen (14) feet above it, and cuts made more than one (1)
inch in diameter shall be painted. Tree stumps shall be grubbed out within the
areas to be graded where the subgrade will be less than three and one-half (3½)
feet above the ground surface.
B. Streetlights.
(1) Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) When required by the provisions of this chapter or by the approving
authority, streetlights shall be installed in accordance with the
recommended practice of street and highway lighting of the Illuminating
Engineering Society along all streets within and abutting any
development.
Article XII
6
(b) Said streetlights shall be high-pressure sodium and shall meet the
standards of Conectiv, (formerly Atlantic Electric) which presently are as
follows:
Watts Lumens
50 3,600
70 5,500
100 8,550
150 14,400
250 24,750
400 45,000
(c) All streetlighting standards, fixtures or luminaries which may be required
shall be installed at the same time in a single process of installation. All
wires and other equipment necessary to serve the streetlighting system
shall be placed underground, the cost to be paid by the developer, and
arrangements shall be made with the appropriate utility for carrying out
this provision.
(2) In any development consisting of four (4) or more residential units or any other
type of nonresidential development, the developer shall be responsible for
providing streetlighting so as to provide a minimum lighting level of five-tenths
(0.5) horizontal foot-candle on all local, local collector, minor arterial and
principal arterial streets. The developer shall pay the full cost for the installation
of any streetlights. Streetlights shall be of a type approved by the Committee and
by the electric utility company serving the proposed development. Upon notice
from the Township, the developer shall deposit with the Township cash or an
equivalent in the amount determined by the electric utility to be the cost of the
initial installation of the streetlights. The Township shall utilize said cash deposit
to pay for the cost of the initial installation of said streetlights.
(3) Streetlighting shall be provided by the developer in any development which has
been approved by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Committee.
The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Committee, in case of appeal, in
approving any development shall require the developer to install streetlighting as
a condition of its approval of the development. The developer shall submit a plan
for the installation of streetlights to the Board Engineer for approval.
(4) Acceptance of streetlighting. If the Planning or Zoning Board includes as a
condition of approval of an application for development the installation of
streetlighting on a dedicated public street connected to a public utility, then upon
notification in writing by the developer to the Board of jurisdiction and Township
Committee that (1) the streetlighting on a dedicated public street has been
installed and accepted for service by the public utility and (2) that certificates of
occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling units and 50% of the
floor area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated public street or portion
thereof indicated by section pursuant to Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(C.40:55D-38), the municipality shall within the 30 days following receipt of the
notification, make appropriate arrangements with the public utility for, and
assume the payment of, the costs of the streetlighting on the dedicated public
street on a continuing basis. Compliance by the Township with the provisions of
Article XII
7
this section shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance of the street by the
municipality.
§ 15-12.3. Curbs; non-residential development.
A. Concrete curb shall be installed along every street within the development and at
intersections with local roads, County roads and State highways, except in the PA, PV
and FA Zones, where secondary local streets serving primarily a residential land access
function shall be exempt from the curb installation requirement. The standard curb
section to be used shall be not more than ten (10) feet in length and shall be set in
accordance with approved lines and grades, and radial curbs shall be formed in an arc
segment in a smooth curve. Chord segments are prohibited.
B. Concrete curbs shall be eight by six by eighteen (8 x 6 x 18) inches [six (6) inches
exposed face], using Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of
four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds per square inch.
C. Expansion joints conforming to the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation shall be provided at twenty-foot intervals in all curbing, with construction
joints being provided at ten-foot intervals.
D. At locations specified by the approving authority and at all intersections, the curbing shall
have a barrier-free design to provide a ramp for bicycles and/or wheelchairs, details for
which may be obtained from the Engineer. In certain instances, it may be necessary or
desirable to construct alternate curb types. For example, these may be required by the
Planning Board on the perimeter of channelizing islands or in areas of unusually heavy
gutter drainage flow or may be desired by the subdivider for decorative purposes or to
preserve vegetation (e.g., granite block curb, rolled concrete curb, etc.). If alternate curb
types are to be permitted, an appropriate construction detail shall be submitted for
approval with the preliminary and final plat.
E. All curbs and driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
of the Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor as contained herein.
§ 15-12.4. Curbs; residential development.
Curbs, gutters and shoulders in all residential developments shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site
Improvement Standards), as amended.
§ 15-12.5. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 of the Map Filing Law,
as amended, and shall be placed in accordance with the statute and indicated on the final map.
Article XII
8
§ 15-12.6. Planting details and tree varieties.
The following shade trees or trees of equal or better quality and suitability shall be planted in the
following locations. (Only nursery grown, healthy, cultivated varieties of the following species
shall be utilized. All plantings must be approved by the Board of jurisdiction.)
A. Plantings along streets or areas to be dedicated to Little Egg Harbor Township adjacent to
brackish waters, rivers, bay or lagoons:
(1) Platanus acerfolia, London plane-tree.
(2) Pyrus calleryana, callery pear.
(3) Sophora japonica, scholartree.
B. Plantings along streets or areas to be dedicated to Little Egg Harbor Township (uplands):
(1) Acer saccharum, sugar maple.
(2) Acer platanoides, Norway maple.
(3) Fraxinus americana, white ash.
(4) Pyrus calleryana, callery pear.
(5) Quercus borealis, red oak.
(6) Quercus phellos, willow oak.
(7) Sophora japonica, scholartree.
(8) Tilia cordata, littleleaf linden.
(9) Zelkova serrata, Zelkova.
C. Plantings along streets or areas to be dedicated to Little Egg Harbor Township (adjacent
to fresh water):
(1) Acer rubrum, red maple.
(2) Fraxinus lanceolata, green ash.
(3) Gleditsia triancanthos, honeylocust.
(4) Liquidambar styraciflua, sweetgum.
(5) Platanus acerfolia, London plane-tree.
(6) Quercus phellos, willow oak.
D. Site plantings (adjacent to fresh or brackish waters) other than areas to be dedicated to
Little Egg Harbor Township:
(1) Any tree permitted under Subsection A. or D. of this section.
(2) Betula populifolia, birch.
(3) Prunus serrulata, Japanese cherry.
(4) Crategus oxycantha, hawthorn.
(5) Quercus palustris, pin oak.
(6) Salix babylonica, willow.
E. Site plantings on uplands other than areas to be dedicated to Little Egg Harbor Township:
(1) Any tree permitted under Subsection B. of this section.
(2) Cornus florida, dogwood.
(3) Malus species, crab apple.
(4) Quercus alba, white oak.
Article XII
9
(5) Pinus strobus, white pine.
(6) Pinus thunbergi, black pine.
(7) Ilex americana, holly.
F. All plantings shall be planted in accordance with the details provided herewith, and all
landscape plans shall include planting details which conform to the details provided
herewith and additional requirements as appropriate to assure the proper installation,
survival and growth of all plantings.
G. All plantings shall conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen,
Inc., as set in the most recent addition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock
(ANSI Z60.1). Trees which are diseased, damaged, exhibit irregular or undesirable
branching, habit or form and trees with a cut or dead leader shall not be utilized.
§ 15-12.7. Trees. [Amended 5/24/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]; [Amended 12/27/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-035]; [Amended 9/9/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-24]; [Amended
4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
The Tree and Natural Habitat Protection – MINOR & MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE
PLANS
Section 1 – Definitions
Definitions in this Ordinance are as defined in the Land Use Ordinance and as follows:
“SPECIMEN TREE” any living deciduous or coniferous tree(s) that has superior characteristics
and quality when compared to trees of the same species or other trees in its vicinity within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor. Such a tree must also have a circumference that is 50% of the
registered circumference of the same species as noted in New Jersey’s Record Trees. The
determination of a “specimen tree” can be made by the Department of Community Development
and Planning with the assistance of the Township Landscape Architect and Environmental
Commission as needed.
“NATURAL HABITAT” shall mean an undisturbed natural area and its wild-growing plant life
and vegetation, which may be in a field, the undergrowth in a stand of trees, or a forest floor, and
may consist of trees, shrubs, bushes, vines, etc. Particular emphasis and preservation
consideration is to be accorded holly trees and mountain laurel, which are native to the Township
of Little Egg Harbor.
“ALTER” means to take action by cutting or pruning any tree, or by filling, surfacing, grading,
compacting or changing the drainage pattern of the soil around any tree in a manner that
threatens to diminish the vigor of the tree; provided that, as used in this chapter, the term “alter”
does not include normal seasonal trimming, shaping, thinning or pruning of a tree necessary to
its health and growth.
Article XII
10
“CRITICAL FOOTPRINT AREA” shall mean any area to be occupied by a building, driveway,
drainage field, septic tank or recreation area (tennis courts, swimming pools or similar facilities).
“DRIPLINE” shall mean a line connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a tree, projected
vertically onto the ground.
“FARMLAND ASSESSMENT ACT” shall mean the New Jersey State Law, N.J.S.A. 514:4-
23.1 et seq.
“WOODLAND MANAGEMENT PLAN” shall mean a plan prepared in accordance with criteria
set forth in Woodland Management Plan N.J.A.C. 18:15-2.10 and which is required to be filed
with the assessor and the DEP by an owner of the woodland as set forth in N.J.A.C. 18:15-2.7.
Section 2 – Purpose and Findings
A. Purpose. The intent of this provision is to encourage the preservation of existing
coniferous and deciduous trees, and shrubs, growing in a natural state in the Township of
Little Egg Harbor; to regulate the removal of trees and habitat; to protect the Township’s
natural environment; to establish the authority for tree and habitat protection; and to
provide penalties for violation of this ordinance.
B. Findings. The Township finds that excessive removal and destruction of natural habitat
impairs the stability and value of improved and unimproved real property in such area(s).
The Township further finds that regulations for the control of such indiscriminate
destruction are within the police powers of the Township.
The Township has determined that the development of unimproved and vacant land for
purposes of commercial and residential development has resulted in:
(1) The indiscriminate removal of, and excessive loss of trees.
(2) The destruction of holly trees and mountain laurel; species which are particularly
indigenous to Little Egg Harbor Township.
(3) The creation of increased surface water runoff and soil erosion.
(4) The compacting of soil and resultant loss of primary sources of natural ground
water necessary for the replenishment of aquifers within the Township.
(5) Loss of homeowner privacy and property values.
C. Applicability. The provisions of section 15-12.7 shall apply to all lands within the
Township which are the subject of a minor subdivision, major subdivisions or site plan
approval of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, with the exception of lands
within the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Pinelands Commission. [Amended 4/14/2005
by Ord. No. 2005-12]
D. Permit required: Prior to the clearing, removal, and/or destruction of trees and natural
habitat, a permit will be required to be obtained from the Department of Community
Development and Planning.
Article XII
11
Unauthorized clear-cutting is strictly prohibited.
No person, entity, or contractor, including the property owner shall remove, destroy, or
cause to be removed or destroyed, any tree(s), holly or mountain laurel, on land that is to
be developed as part of a major or minor subdivision or site plan within the Township,
unless a permit is first obtained for such removal, and such removal has specifically been
authorized by the Township, or there is an exemption for the property under Section L.
[Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
A tree clearing permit shall be required for all work within the right-of-way, easements
and stormwater management areas. A separate permit for each individual building lot
and/or site plan shall also be required. Under no circumstances shall clearing of
individual lots occur until all right-of-way, easements, stormwater management areas
clearing has been completed and an individual lot clearing permit, including a building
specific tree clearing plan has been submitted to and approved by the Department of
Community Development and Planning.
E. Permit application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Department of
Community Development and Planning and shall contain the information as required per
“Tree Permit Form 15-12, 2001” and as follows:
(1) Location on the property, of the trees, mountain laurel, and/or holly on the
removal plan. For any major or minor subdivisions, and all site plans, the tree
location plan shall be indicated on a survey prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor.
(a) The plan shall indicate the number and location of tree(s), mountain laurel,
and/or holly to be preserved.
(b) The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line.
(c) All trees greater than twelve (12) inches in caliper (DBH), American
Holly greater than eight (8) feet in height, Mountain Laurel masses greater
than four hundred (400) square feet, or any specimen tree (i.e. any unique
or remarkable tree or species) to be removed shall be indicated on the
plan. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(2) Any other information, which may reasonably be required to enable the
application to be properly evaluated (i.e. Woodland Management Plan).
(3) Minor or Major Subdivision Plans or Site Plans as approved by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with this section 15-12.7.
[Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
F. Application Fee. A tree removal permit application must be obtained from, and filed
with, the Department of Community Development and Planning.
For new construction or residential building sites, a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25)
will be required for each building lot, or buildable lot and twenty-five dollars ($25) per
acre for non-residential development. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
Article XII
12
G. Issuance of Tree Removal Permits. Where an application is made in connection with the
construction of a building or other improvements, no building permit shall be issued until
the tree removal permit has been granted.
(1) New Development. If the application is for a new development (subdivision or
site plans), trees may be removed as permitted by subsection I of this ordinance
for the purpose of clearing for roads, utilities, storm water management areas,
building envelopes and driveways, provided a Performance Guarantee is posted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 for the trees to be replanted as required by this
section. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(2) Non-residential development. All existing non-residential development shall be
required to obtain a removal permit prior to any removal of trees, mountain laurel,
and/or holly.
H. Removal Plan. Where the application is in conjunction with an application for a
subdivision, or site plan approval, a removal plan shall be submitted and shall include
the following:
(1) Total acreage of the tract.
(2) A site plan, on a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or less, showing the
location of existing wooded areas. The site plan shall include the lot and block
numbers, the street address, if assigned, and a statement of compliance with the
requirements of this section. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(3) The location of streams and watercourses.
(4) The location of slopes greater than ten percent (10%) where any removal is
proposed.
(5) The location(s), species, and caliper of all trees ten (10) inches or greater in
caliper (DBH) or greater than eight (8) feet in height for evergreens to be removed
on a survey drawing and/ or site plan. The location, species, size of existing trees
shall be established by onsite survey and may be accomplished by a representative
10,000 square foot sample (100’ x 100’) taken at one sample area per two acres of
disturbance area or portion thereof. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(6) The location of specimen trees and all trees greater than twelve (12) inches in
caliper (DBH), or any American Holly ten (10) feet in height, or Mountain Laurel
masses four hundred (400) square feet in area, if any. [Amended 4/14/2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-12]
(7) The location of existing and proposed structures including parking areas,
detention basins and other stormwater facilities.
(8) The location of replacement trees, including a replacement schedule indicating
species, quantities and size in accordance with Section N, Mitigation Required.
(9) The removal plan shall include a schedule for compliance with this section 15-
12.7 for the protection, removal and reforestation of trees. [Amended 4/14/2005
by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(10) The following information may be required, at the discretion of the reviewing
entity, for approval of tree removal:
(a) The quality, quantity and limits of vegetation on the remainder of the site.
(b) The location, species and caliper of each tree within the drip line of each
tree to be removed.
Article XII
13
(c) Existing contours and proposed grading.
(d) Proposed preservation methods of trees to remain, if necessary.
I. Standards for removal.
(1) Existing landscape. The intent of this section is to encourage the preservation of
existing deciduous and coniferous trees, mountain laurel, and holly. [Amended
4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(2) Any area occupied by the Critical Footprint Area, such as a building, driveway,
stormwater management areas, swales, areas requiring grading to improve
stormwater flow on the site, utility lines, drainage field, septic tank or recreation
area (tennis courts, swimming pools or similar facilities) may have the trees
removed for a distance of not more than fifteen (15) feet around the perimeter of
such facilities, provided that the same does not violate any buffer requirements
within the zone. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(3) The permit shall be granted if there is a finding by the Township Zoning Officer
and/or Township Landscape Architect or Engineer that the removal and
destruction will not impair the growth and development of remaining trees on the
property of the applicant or adjacent properties and would not cause erosion of
soil. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(4) The Township Zoning Officer and/or Township Landscape Architect or Engineer
shall view the land where the tree or trees are to be removed, as well as drainage,
grade and other physical conditions existing on the subject or adjoining property,
and will consider the report from the Environmental Commission when issuing a
permit.
(5) Protection of trees, mountain laurel and/or holly.
(a) No structure, equipment or movable machinery, shall be permitted to be
stored, parked, or operated within the dripline of any tree, which is to be
saved, in order not to disturb the soil and injure the tree, except when the
dripline of the tree is within the fifteen-foot area set forth in Subsection I-1
herein.
(b) If the removal of, or destruction of trees, will impede or hamper the
growth and vigor of the remaining trees, removal will not be permissible
unless a stump grinder is utilized.
(c) No soil material, equipment, temporary buildings, work areas, fuels, and
other construction items shall be placed within the dripline of trees.
(d) Trees not subject to removal under the permit granted shall be fenced or
heavily marked with ribbon so as to prevent injury or removal. The fence
installation or ribbon markings must be approved by the Township
Engineer prior to clearing. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(e) All planting shall follow the guidelines as set forth in the Landscaping
Ordinance Sections 15-11.8.
(f) Any tree of historical or environmental significance or any tree that is
significant by reason of its rarity, as determined by the Township
Engineer, shall not be cut or removed unless applicant shows substantial
evidence as to the necessity of the cutting or removal. The determination
as to whether to cut or remove such a tree shall be in the discretion of the
Article XII
14
Township Engineer. Specimen trees shall be protected in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection M herein. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-12]
J. Buffer. It is a requirement of this ordinance that, natural habitat buffer zones shall be
preserved as per Land Use Ordinance Section 15-11.7. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-12]
K. Permit revocation. The administrative office may revoke a permit when there has been a
false or misleading application or for noncompliance with an approved replacement plan.
L. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the requirements of section 15-12.7.
[Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(1) Commercial nurseries, fruit orchards, and agricultural uses. [Amended 4/14/2005
by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(2) Christmas tree plantations.
(3) Removal of trees which are dead, dying or diseased, or trees which have suffered
severe damage, or any tree or trees whose angle or growth makes them a hazard to
structures or human life.
(4) Any tree growing on or over a public right of way, when removed by the
township or other governing entity that has jurisdiction over the property upon
which the tree is growing. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(5) Township approved pruning or removal of trees within the right-of-way by utility
companies for maintenance of utility wires or pipelines.
(6) In Township forest fire hazard areas, for purposes of fire prevention, trees and
shrubs may be cleared around structures in jeopardy.
(7) Individual single family lots and individual homeowners.
M. Protection of specimen trees. Any development interfering with or affecting specimen
trees is prohibited. All development is prohibited that would significantly reduce the
amount of light reaching the crown of a specimen tree, alter the drainage patterns within
the site where the specimen tree is located, adversely affect the quality of water reaching
the site where the specimen tree is located, cause erosion or the depositing of material in
or directly adjacent to the specimen tree or otherwise injure the specimen tree. The site
of the specimen tree extends to the outer limit of the buffer area to avoid adverse impact,
or fifty (50) feet from the tree, which ever is greater. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
N. Mitigation Required
(1) Mitigation for tree removal shall be required for the following actions:
(a) Removal of trees in connection with actions that require site plan or
subdivision approval.
(b) Clearing of trees that occurs beyond the approved limit of clearing and or
the Critical Footprint Area that was not approved as part of a prior
subdivision approval. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
Article XII
15
(2) Number of Replacement Trees. Replacement shall be required in accordance with
the following schedule:
Caliper of Removed Tree Number of Replacement Trees
Mountain Laurel (1) (Min. size 3 ft. or
greater)
1 (shrub)
American Holly (1) (Min. size 5 ft. or
greater)
1
10 to 12 inches (all) 1
12 to 16 inches (all) 2
16 to 24 inches (all) 3
24+ inches (all) 4
The number of replacement trees may be reduced by the number of trees required
to be planted as set forth in Ordinance 15-11.8 (Landscaping). [Amended
4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(3) Replacement Species. Trees shall be replaced with the same species, or other
available species that is native to New Jersey. In the case where the species is
known to be disease-prone or is otherwise not ecologically or aesthetically
appropriate, other species shall be permitted.
(4) Planting Standards. All replacement trees shall be nursery grown, certified and
guaranteed and shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches for shade trees, 1.5
inches for ornamental trees, a height of two feet for shrubs and a height of 6 feet
for evergreen trees. All trees shall be balled and burlapped and planted as per
Township of Little Egg Harbor standards. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
(5) Off-Site Contributions. If all required replacement trees cannot be provided on
the subject lot(s), an off-site tract shall be selected by the Township Engineer with
the approval of the Township Committee for such replanting and a replanting plan
shall be prepared by the applicant for approval by the Township Landscape
Architect and/or the Township Engineer. In lieu of the replanting requirement
specified above, the applicant shall pay a cash equivalent to the Township of
Little Egg Harbor for each tree not replanted as determined by the Township
Landscape Architect and or the Township Engineer in accordance with subsection
N.2 of 15-12.7 to be placed in a fund entitled “Little Egg Harbor Tree Bank
Account” to be used for the purchase of replacement trees by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor for use on public property. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
In the event the cash contribution is made, such contribution shall be made prior
to the filing of final map and/or approval for construction. No tree removal
permit shall be issued until such time as the Mitigation requirement is met as
outlined above. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
Article XII
16
The following contribution schedule shall apply:
Description Value/Unit
Mountain Laurel $100.00/Shrub
American Holly $500.00/Tree
All Other Trees $300.00/Tree
The above schedule of contribution fees shall be reviewed by the Landscape
Architect/Township Engineer and modified as required to meet current values on
a bi-annual basis. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
O. Silvaculture.
Tree farming and timber harvesting must be in accordance with “Timber harvesting
guidelines” as promulgated by the N.J. Chapter, Society of American Foresters and the
N.J. Forestry Association.
Additional silvaculture regulations of the Township as follows, are to be compiled with:
(1) Undisturbed buffer areas of natural habitat will be preserved within a hundred feet
of all property lines, streets, paper streets, and/or approved or unapproved
roadways.
(2) No harvesting, clearing, cutting or destruction of holly trees or mountain laurel, is
permitted, save the unavoidable damage incurred to such species by felled trees.
Tree harvesting debris shall be removed from such areas to facilitate the growth
of such species.
P. Violation penalties. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provision
of section 15-12.7 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per violation, by imprisonment for a
term not to exceed ninety (90) days or any combination of fine, imprisonment and
community service as determined by the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
Q. The provisions of section 15-12.7 shall be enforced by the Township Zoning officer,
Code Enforcement Officer, Township Engineer, Township Planner and Township Police
Department. [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
§ 15-12.8. Sidewalks; non-residential development.
Sidewalks shall be required, except in the PA, PV and FA Zones. Sidewalks shall be at least
four (4) inches thick of Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of four
thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds per square inch. Expansion joints shall be provided at
twenty-foot intervals in sidewalks, with construction joints at four-foot intervals. Expansion
joints shall also be provided at all points where sidewalks intersect or abut concrete drive aprons
Article XII
17
and at all points where concrete drive aprons abut curbing. Concrete drive aprons shall have a
thickness of at least six (6) inches and shall be of Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day
compressive strength of four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds per square inch and shall be
air-entrained. Such driveway aprons shall be reinforced with six by six (6 x 6) inches of 10/10
welded steel wire mesh.
§ 15-12.8.1. Sidewalks; residential development.
Sidewalks in all residential developments shall be designed and constructed with Subchapter 4,
Streets and Parking, of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site Improvement Standards), as amended.
§ 15-12.9. Sight triangles.
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of streets and streets and
driveways. The area within sight triangles shall be maintained as part of the lot adjoining the
street and set aside on any subdivision or site plan as a sight triangle easement. Within a sight
triangle, no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained between thirty (30)
inches and eighty-four (84) inches above the center line grade of each street or driveway
intersection, excluding utility poles, street name signs and official traffic regulation signs.
Where any street or driveway intersection involves earth banks or vegetation, including trees, the
developer shall trim such vegetation and trees, as well as establish proper excavation and
grading, to provide the sight triangle. Trees within a sight triangle or distance area shall be of
sufficient size to be pruned to a seven-foot branching height upon planting. Planting within a
sight triangle or distance area must be approved by the Township Engineer. The "sight triangle"
is that area bounded by the intersecting street lines and a straight line which connects sight points
located on each of the two (2) intersecting center-line street lines the following distances away
from the intersecting street lines: arterial streets at three hundred (300) feet, collector streets at
two hundred (200) feet, minor collector roads at one hundred twenty (120) feet and minor streets
at ninety (90) feet. Sight points for driveways shall be located on the center line of the driveway
a distance of thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way line of the intersecting roadway and on the
center line of the intersecting roadway a distance of ninety (90) feet from the center line of the
driveway. The classification of existing and proposed streets shall be those shown on the
adopted Master Plan or as designated by the Planning Board at the time of the application for
approval for a new street not included on the Master Plan. A sight triangle easement dedication
shall be expressed on the plat as follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, planting
and construction restrictions as provided for in the Township Land Development Ordinance."
Portions of a lot set aside for the sight triangle may be calculated in determining the lot area and
may be included in establishing the minimum setbacks required by the zoning provisions.
§ 15-12.10. Grading, topsoil and seeding.
All lots, open spaces and planting areas shall be graded to secure proper drainage, to prevent the
collection of stormwater and to prevent an adverse impact on adjacent properties. The grading
shall be performed in a manner which will minimize the damage to or destruction of trees
growing on the land. This shall include the installation of protective barriers, such as four-foothigh
snow fence or silt fence along the drip line of the tree or at a distance of not less than four
Article XII
18
feet from shrubs and not less than 10 feet from trees. These barriers shall not be supported by
the plants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting. Topsoil shall be provided and/or
redistributed on the surface as cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. Gradings
shall be designed to prevent or minimize drainage to structures or improvements when major
storms, exceeding the design basis of the storm drainage system, occur. Grading plans shall have
been submitted with the preliminary and final plats, and any departure from these plans must be
approved in accordance with the requirements of this section for the modification of
improvements. When the development of an individual lot is involved, a grading waiver may be
granted with written approval by the Township Engineer.
A. Wherever possible, the land shall be graded so that the stormwater from each lot shall
drain directly to the street. If impossible to drain directly to the street, it shall be directed
to a system of interior yard drainage designed in accordance with this chapter.
B. Unless otherwise required by this chapter, all tree stumps, masonry and other obstructions
shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below existing or finished grade, whichever is
lower.
C. The minimum slope for lawns and disturbed areas shall be one and one half percent
(1½%) and, for smooth, hard-finished surfaces other than roadways, four-tenths of one
percent (4/10 of 1%). [Amended 9/8/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21]
D. The ground within eight (8’) feet, or ten (10’) feet, of a building shall be graded in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, so as to drain surface water
away from the foundation wall. The maximum grade for lawns and disturbed areas more
than ten (10’) feet from a building shall be twenty-five (25%) percent, except for
driveways the maximum grade shall be ten (10%) percent. [Amended 3/25/2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05]
E. Site grading and filling, if necessary, shall be performed such that the outside finished
grade shall be above the crown of the roadway directly in front of the structure in
accordance with the standards set forth in this section. All lots being filled shall be filled
so as to allow complete surface draining of the lot to the street or natural drainage rightof-
ways. No construction or regrading shall be permitted which creates or aggravates
water stagnation, siltation or drainage problems on adjacent properties. Any topsoil
disturbed during approved operations shall be redistributed throughout the site.
F. Sites requiring cuts or fills shall be designed with retaining walls and protective tile or
masonry rings such that a minimum amount of trees will have to be removed in order to
meet existing grades.
G. Retaining walls installed in slope-control areas shall be constructed of heavy creosoted
timber or logs, reinforced concrete, other reinforced masonry or of other construction
acceptable to the Board Engineer and shall be adequately designed and detailed on the
final plat to carry all earth pressures, including any surcharges. The heights of retaining
Article XII
19
walls shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the horizontal distance from the foundation wall
of any building to the face of the retaining wall.
H. The subdivider shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any siltation of streams
during the construction of the subdivision. The subdivider shall provide adequate
provisions to prevent all deposition of silt or other eroded material in any stream or
watercourse. Such provisions may include but are not limited to construction and
maintenance of siltation basins or holding ponds and diversion berms throughout the
course of construction and planting areas.
I. All lots, open space and planting areas shall be seeded with a suitable stabilizing ground
cover approved by the Township Engineer. On any waterfront lots or open spaces, the
Board may allow a suitable stabilizing ground cover other than seeding if approved by
the Township Engineer.
J. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as soil. Topsoil moved during the
course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at least four (4) inches of
spread cover to all seeding and planting areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting. In the event that the quantity of topsoil at the site is insufficient to
provide four (4) inches of cover for all seeding and planting areas, the developer shall
provide and distribute a sufficient quantity of topsoil to provide such a cover. Topsoil
shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
K. This section shall be applicable to all subdivisions, site plans and all individual dwelling
unit(s) site disturbances.
L. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the requirements of this section cannot be
met, a certification from a licensed Engineer or licensed Land Surveyor setting forth an
acceptable drainage and grading plan shall be necessary prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 15-12.11. Stormwater Control Ordinance for areas that are not within the Pinelands
Area. [Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
A. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through
nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural Best
Management Practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural
strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that
prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater.
Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the
origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
Article XII
20
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for “major development,” as defined in
subsection E.
C. Applicability.
(1) This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the
following major developments that require preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision review:
(a) Non-residential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not pre-empted by the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by
Little Egg Harbor Township.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements. Development approvals
issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered an
integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process
and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In
their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any
provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
E. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The definitions below are the same
as or based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP – The geographic depiction of the boundaries for Coastal
Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES – Those areas within boundaries accepted by
the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION – The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE – A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the surrounding
municipality, generally including housing and access to public transportation.
Article XII
21
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY – An agency designated by the County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
(1) A county planning agency; or
(2) A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinances.
DEPARTMENT – The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER – A State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as
designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER – A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT – The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in
the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law , N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means:
any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural
Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act , N.J.S.A. 4:1C-
1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA – A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point along
a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS – An area or feature which is of significant
environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage
priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open
space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the Department’s
Landscape Project as approved by the Department’s Endangered and Nongame Species
Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD – A neighborhood designated by the Urban
Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
Article XII
22
EROSION – The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice
or gravity.
FILTER MATERIAL – Washed gravel crushed stone, slag, or clean bank run gravel
ranging in size from one-half (½”) inch to two and one-half (2 ½”) inches free of dust,
ashes or clay.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE – A surface that has been covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION – The process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT – Any development that provides for ultimately disturbing
one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of
impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY – Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NET FILL – The total amount of fill created incidental to the completion of the project
less that amount of excavated material removed during the completion of the project,
both measured below the elevation of the edge of the flood hazard area.
NODE – An area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities
and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT – A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus, which
is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
PERSON – Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, Little
Egg Harbor Township, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law , N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT – Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic
treatment works. “Pollutant” includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE – The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
Article XII
23
SEDIMENT – Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product
of erosion.
SITE – The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
SOIL – All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOURCE MATERIAL – Any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility,
that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) – An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and
adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of
the state’s future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP – The geographic application of the State Development
and Redevelopment Plan’s goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these
goals and policies.
STORMWATER – Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs
off the land’s surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF – Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm
sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN – An excavation or embankment and related
areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may either
be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a
permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE – Any structural or nonstructural
strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or
reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration
or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
Article XII
24
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA – A flood hazard area, which may be influenced by
stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic
Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION – The time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest within a
watershed.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD – A
neighborhood given priority access to State resources through the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES – A zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone
Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et
seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA – Previously developed portions of areas:
(1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning
Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
(4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
WATERS OF THE STATE – The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands,
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries
of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND – An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
F. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed to
meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality standards in subsection G. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are
not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management
measures necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water
quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The
standards do not apply to new major development to the extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
Article XII
25
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
G. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in
accordance with subsection M.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated
flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the
Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under
N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp
pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of subsections G(6) and G(7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed
areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail
with a maximum width of fourteen (14’) feet, provided that the access is
made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of subsections G(6)
and G(7) may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or
railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through
the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies
and measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of
subsections G(6) and G(7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of
subsections G(6) and G(7), existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to
areas, including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not
falling under subsection G(4)(c) above within the upstream drainage area
of the receiving stream, that would provide additional opportunities to
mitigate the requirements of subsections G(6) and G(7)that were not
achievable on-site.
(5) Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections G(6) and
G(7)shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies, set forth in subsection G(5), into the design. The applicant shall
identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
Article XII
26
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in Paragraph (b) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site
design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow
of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration” from preconstruction
to post construction.
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention
and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns,
fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging
into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or minimize
the release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. Such source
controls include, but are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features that
satisfy subsection G(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under subsection G(5)(b)[9][b] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, “solid and floatable materials” means sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see subsection G(5)(c)[4] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
Article XII
27
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[3] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of
no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two
(2”) inches across the smallest dimension.
[4] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection G(7)(a) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at
a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(i) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches
long and one and one-half inches wide (this option
does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(ii) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1”) spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection G(7)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register
of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action
to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
Article XII
28
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to
meet the performance standards in subsection G(6) and G(7) shall be
dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction
filed with the appropriate County Clerk’s office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available
in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The
BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section 7, or
found on the Department’s website at www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to
control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater
recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major
development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection I, either:
(i) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain one hundred
(100%) percent of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
(ii) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from pre-construction to post-construction
for the 2-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the “urban redevelopment area,” or to
projects subject to G(6)(a)[2][c] below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(i) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents
and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous
materials are expected to be present in greater than
“reportable quantities” as defined by the United
Article XII
29
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at
40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with Department approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas
with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as
gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(ii) Industrial stormwater exposed to “source material.”
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
[e] The infiltration/recharge systems shall not be situated
within two hundred (200’) feet of a private well not within
five hundred (500’) feet from a municipal well.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater
runoff calculations at subsection I, complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff
hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm events do
not exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving
the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm events and that
the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of
the site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full
development under existing zoning and land use ordinances
in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction
peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10- and 100-year
storm events are fifty (50%) percent, seventy-five (75%)
percent and eighty (80%) percent, respectively, of the preconstruction
peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only
to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed
development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
Article XII
30
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with [a], [b], and [c] above shall
only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection E shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and
erosion control. For the purposes of this section, “agricultural
development” means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction
load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by
eighty (80%) percent of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management measures shall
only be required for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of
impervious surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a
discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES)
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design storm is
1.25 inches of rainfall in two (2) hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff
may take into account the implementation of non-structural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Article XII
31
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP
Manual may be obtained from the address identified in subsection J, or
found on the Department’s website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP
Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection J.
TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs
in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and methods to the
review agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of
calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at the
following address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required eighty
(80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B – (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Article XII
32
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See Section I(3)
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
(d) If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the eighty (80%) percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from
the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate can be
demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the
maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the
anticipated load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated
from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to
the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient
removal while still achieving the performance standards in subsections
G(6) and G(7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in subsection J.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all
waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One
waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil
Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be
established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance, exceptional
water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated and
protected as follows:
Article XII
33
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
[a] A three hundred (300’) foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway from
the top of the bank outwards or from the centerline of the
waterway where the bank is not defined, consisting of
existing vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under Subsection [a] above shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred (for example, active agricultural use, parking area
or maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be
allowed where applicant demonstrates that the functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than one
hundred fifty (150’) feet as measured perpendicular to the
top of bank of the waterway or centerline of the waterway
where the bank is undefined. All encroachments proposed
under this subparagraph shall be subject to review and
approval by the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the “Standards For Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey,” established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act , N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the “Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey,” established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act , N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then
the stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of
the above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one
hundred fifty (150’) feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on the
receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and overall
Article XII
34
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional
stormwater management planning committee as an element of a
regional stormwater management plan, or by a municipality
through an adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If a
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
subsection G(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan shall be
the applicable special water resource protection area requirements
for that waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to G(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in G(7)(h)[1][a] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special
Water Resource Protection Area to less than one hundred fifty
(150’) feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to
this subsection.
[5] Paragraph G(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of one (1)
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
H. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following
methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 – Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction condition of a
site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic
condition. The term “runoff coefficient” applies to both the NRCS
methodology at subsection H(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified
Article XII
35
Rational Methods at subsection H(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used on
all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the
hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at
least five (5) years without interruption prior to the time of application. If
more than one land cover has existed on the site during the five (5) years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use
type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation
treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(c) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design engineer
shall account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds,
wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction
stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately
compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To
calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious
area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 –
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be
employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is
below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13,
the design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the
design of structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated
herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information regarding
the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/ dep/njgs/; or at
New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton,
New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
I. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into
account the existing site conditions, including, for example,
environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth
to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage
area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate
rocks (limestone).
Article XII
36
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure
proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet
structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one (1”) inch
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality design
storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater than onethird
(1/3) the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3) the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one (1”) inch
and a maximum spacing between bars of six (6”) inches. In addition, the
design of trash racks must comply with the requirements of subsection
K.4.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the
orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½”)inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum
safety standards for stormwater management basins at subsection K.
(2) Dams and embankments.
(a) The minimum top width for all dams and embankments are listed below.
These values have been adopted from the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey published by the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Committee.
MINIMUM TOP WIDTHS
Height (ft) Width (ft) Top
0-15 10
15-20 12
20-25 or greater 14
(b) The design top elevation of all dams and embankments after all settlement
has taken place, shall be equal to or greater than the maximum water
surface elevation in the basin resulting from the routed freeboard
hydrograph. Therefore, the design height of the dam or embankment,
defined as the vertical distance from the top down to the bottom of the
deepest cut, shall be increased by the amount needed to ensure the design
top elevation will be maintained following all settlement. This increase
shall not be less than five percent. Where necessary, the Engineer shall
require consolidation tests of the undisturbed foundation soil to more
accurately determine the necessary increase in design height.
(c) All earth fill shall be free from brush, roots, and other organic material
subject to decomposition.
Article XII
37
(d) Cutoff trenches are to be excavated along the dam or embankment center
line to impervious subsoil.
(e) The fill material in all earth dams and embankments shall be compacted to
at least ninety-five (95%) percent of the maximum dry density obtained
from compaction tests performed by the appropriate method in ASTM
D698.
(3) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the
proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity,
groundwater recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by subsection G of this ordinance.
(4) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of
subsection G of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
(5) Stormwater basin bottoms.
(a) To promote complete emptying and prevent standing water or soggy
surfaces, vegetated bottoms shall have a minimum slope of two (2%)
percent and shall be graded to the outlet structure or low flow channel, or
low point (for infiltration basin).
(b) To promote compete emptying and prevent standing water or soggy
surfaces, the lowest point in the bottom shall be at least one and one-half
(1½’)feet (or four (4’) feet for infiltration basin) above the seasonally high
groundwater level unless adequate subsurface drains are provided
(c) To provide adequate drying time, to avoid delaying scheduled
maintenance efforts, and to prevent mosquito breeding, the maximum
storage or ponding duration should not exceed forty-eight (48) hours.
(d) Subsurface drains connected to low flow channel, principal outlet
structure, or other downstream discharge point shall be employed
whenever possible to promote quick and thorough drying of the facility
bottom.
(e) To minimize routine grass maintenance such as mowing and fertilizing,
the use of grass varieties that relatively slow growing and tolerant of poor
soil conditions are encouraged.
(f) To facilitate removal efforts, sedimentation shall be promoted at localized,
readily accessible areas. The use of sediment traps at inflow and outflow
points is encouraged, especially those lined with materials which have
smooth, easily cleaned surfaces such as concrete. For this reason, the use
of loose stone, rip rap, and other irregular linings which require manual
removal of weeds, sediment, and debris should be avoided.
(g) Subsurface detention/infiltration facilities shall provide suitable access,
observation points and/or monitoring wells to facilitate inspection and
cleaning.
(6) Detention facilities in flood hazard areas.
Article XII
38
(a) Whenever practicable, developments and their stormwater detention
facilities should be beyond the extent of the flood hazard area of a stream.
When that is not possible and detention facilities are proposed to be
located partially or wholly within the flood hazard area (as defined by the
New Jersey Division of Water Resources, Bureau of Flood Plain
Management), or other areas which are frequently flooded, some storm
conditions will make the facility ineffective at providing retention of site
runoff. This will happen if the stream is already overflowing its banks and
the detention basin causing the basin to be filled prior to the time it is
needed. In such cases the standards established in these regulations will
be modified in order to give only partial credit to detention capacities
located within a flood hazard area. The credit will vary in a ration
intended to reflect the probability that storage in a detention basin will be
available at the time a storm occurs at the site.
(b) Detention storage provided below the elevation of the edge of the 100-
year flood plain will be credited as effective storage at a reduced
proportion as indicated in the table below:
SIZE OF DRAINAGE AREA*
Elevation Less than Sq
Miles
5-100 Sq
Miles
Greater than
100 Sq. Miles
Less than 2’below 40% 65% 90%
Between 2’ and 4’
below
25% 50% 75%
Over 4” below 10% 25% 50%
*Area contributing floodwaters to the flood hazard area at the site in
question.
(c) This effective detention storage will be required to provide for drainage of
the developed land in accordance with the criteria already established in
these regulations. However, the gross storage considered for crediting will
not exceed that which would be filled by runoff of a 100-year storm from
the site.
(d) As an alternative to approach (b) above, if the developer can demonstrate
that the detention provided would be effective, during runoff from the
100-year 24-hour Type 11 storm, peaking simultaneously at the site and
on the flood hazard area, his or her plan will be accepted as complying
with provisions of subparagraph (b) above.
(e) In making computations under subparagraph (b) or (c) above, the volume
of net fill added to the flood hazard area portion of the project's site will be
subtracted from the capacity of effective detention storage provided.
(f) Where detention basins are proposed to be located in areas which are
frequently flooded but have not been mapped as flood hazard areas, the
provisions of either subparagraph (b) or (c) will be applied, utilizing the
elevation of a computed 100-year flood.
Article XII
39
(g) Developers are also required to show compliance with the flood hazard
areas regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection
(7) Methods for Assessing Soil Suitability for Infiltration Stormwater Management
BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall serve as the basis for the
site selection and design of stormwater infiltration BMPs. The subsurface
investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a series of soil test pits and soil
permeability tests conducted in accordance with the following:
(a) All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be performed under the
direct supervision of a Professional Engineer. All soil logs and
permeability test data shall be accompanied by a certification by a
Professional Engineer. The results and location (horizontal and vertical)
of all soil test pits and soil permeability tests, both passing and failing,
shall be reported to Little Egg Harbor Township.
(b) During all subsurface investigations and soil test procedures, adequate
safety measures shall be taken to prohibit unauthorized access to the
excavations at all times. It is the responsibility of persons performing or
witnessing subsurface investigations and soil permeability tests to comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations governing
occupational safety.
(c) A minimum of two (2) soil test pits shall be excavated within the footprint
of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the suitability and
distribution of soil types present at the site. Placement of the test pits shall
be within twenty (20’) feet of the basin perimeter, located along the
longest axis bisecting the BMP. For BMPs larger than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet in area, a minimum of one (1) additional soil test pit
shall be conducted within each additional area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. The additional test pit(s) shall be placed approximately
equidistant to other test pits, so as to provide adequate characterization of
the subsurface material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be excavated in
order to accurately characterize the subsurface conditions below the
proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits shall extend to a minimum depth
of eight (8’) feet below the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth that is at least two (2) times the maximum potential water depth in
the proposed infiltration BMP, whichever is greater.
(d) A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit. The test pit log
shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of the existing ground surface,
the depth and thickness (in inches) of each soil horizon or substratum, the
dominant matrix or background and mottle colors using the Munsell
system of classification for hue, value and chroma, the appropriate textural
class as shown on the USDA textural triangle, the volume percentage of
coarse fragments (larger than two (2) millimeters in diameter), the
abundance, size, and contrast of mottles, the soil structure, soil
consistence, and soil moisture condition, using standard USDA
classification terminology for each of these soil properties. Soil test pit
logs shall identify the presence of any soil horizon, substratum or other
Article XII
40
feature that exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than one (1”) inch
per hour.
(e) Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally high water level,
either perched or regional, and the static water level based upon the
presence of soil mottles or other redoximorphic features, and observed
seepage or saturation. Where redoximorphic features including soil
mottles resulting from soil saturation are present, they shall be interpreted
to represent the depth to the seasonal high water table unless soil
saturation or seepage is observed at a higher level. When the
determination of the seasonally high water table shall be made in ground
previously disturbed by excavation, direct observation of the static water
table during the months of January through April shall be the only method
permitted.
(f) Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately below a perched
zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to exhibit unacceptable
permeability (less than one (1”) inch per hour). The perched zone of
saturation may be observed directly, inferred based upon soil morphology,
or confirmed by performance of a hydraulic head test as defined at
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
(g) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils that exhibit
artesian groundwater conditions. A permeability test shall be conducted in
all soils that immediately underlie a perched zone of saturation. Any zone
of saturation which is present below a soil horizon which exhibits an inplace
permeability of less than 0.2 inches per hour shall be considered an
artesian zone of saturation unless a minimum one foot thick zone of
unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other redoximorphic features and
possessing a chroma of four or higher, exists immediately below the
unsuitable soil.
(h) A minimum of one (1) permeability test shall be performed at each soil
test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be determined using test
methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter
Test), 6.5 (Pit Bailing Test) or 6.6 (Piezometer Test). When the tube
permeameter test is used, a minimum of two (2) replicate samples shall be
taken and tested. Alternative permeability test procedures may be
accepted by the approving authority provided the test procedure attains
saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head effects on
infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units expressed in
inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source reference.
Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical or
engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals.
Neither a Soil Permeability Class Rating Test, as described in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.3, nor a Percolation Test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are
acceptable tests for establishing permeability values for the purpose of
complying with this ordinance.
Article XII
41
(i) Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most hydraulically
restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in place below the basin as
follows. Where no soil replacement is proposed, the permeability tests
shall be conducted on the most hydraulically restrictive horizon or
substratum within four (4’) feet of the lowest elevation of the basin bottom
or to a depth equal to two (2) times the maximum potential water depth
within the basin, whichever is greater. Where soil replacement is
proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted within the soil
immediately below the depth of proposed soil replacement or within the
most hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to a depth equal to
two (2) times the maximum potential water depth within the basin,
whichever is greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at depths greater than
those identified above based upon the discretion of the design or testing
engineer. The tested infiltration rate should then be divided by two (2) to
establish the soil’s design permeability rate. Such division will provide a
one hundred (100%) percent safety factor to the tested rate.
(j) The minimum acceptable “tested permeability rate” of any soil horizon or
substratum shall be one (1”) inch per hour. Soil materials that exhibit
tested permeability rates slower than one (1”) inch per hour shall be
considered unsuitable for stormwater infiltration. The maximum
reportable “tested permeability rate” of any soil horizon or substratum
shall be no greater than twenty (20”) inches per hour regardless of the rate
attained in the test procedure.
(k) After all construction activities have been completed on the development
site and the finished grade has been established in the infiltration BMP, a
minimum of one (1) permeability test shall be conducted within the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizon or substratum below the as-built
BMP to ensure the performance of the infiltration BMP is as designed.
Hand tools and manual permeability test procedures shall be used for the
purpose of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the infiltration
BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to demonstrate the
performance of the BMP. Test results shall be certified to the municipal
engineer.
(l) A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for each stormwater
infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding analysis shall calculate the
maximum height of the groundwater mound based upon the volume of the
maximum design storm. The Professional Engineer conducting the
analysis shall provide the municipal engineer with the methodology and
supporting documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall certify
to Little Egg Harbor Township, based upon the analysis, that the
groundwater mound will not cause stormwater or groundwater to breakout
to the land surface or cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water
bodies, wetlands or subsurface structures including but not limited to
basements and septic systems. If there is more than one infiltration BMP
proposed, the model shall indicate if and how the mounds will interact.
Article XII
42
The mounding analysis shall be calculated using the most restrictive soil
horizon that will remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness
unless alternative analyses is authorized by the municipal engineer. The
mounding analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section of the
infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the mound analysis
shall extend out to the point(s) at which the mound intersects with the
preexisting maximum water table elevation.
(m) The Applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater infiltration BMPs meet
the forty-eight (48) hour drain time requirement established in subsection
H(2)(a) of this ordinance.
(8) Soil, geology, and groundwater
(a) The Board's Engineer may require additional information relative to soil
structure, geology and groundwater elevations adjacent to or below the
proposed basin or disposal area. However, the following information shall
be required in all cases:
(b) The number of test borings or pits shall be as specified by this subsection.
(c) The minimum depth of test borings or pits shall be ten feet or four feet
below the bottom elevation of the proposed basin or recharge system,
whichever is greater. Power augers may be used to advance of clean out
test holes to sampling depths but may not be used to retrieve soil samples.
Split spoon samplers, plug samplers or other sampling devices may be
used which retrieve a relatively undisturbed soil sample. Hand augers
may be used as long as the test hold remains "open" and does not cave or
slump.
(d) Reports of the type, nature and depth of the soil as found the depth to
groundwater when encountered, and the seasonal high water table
elevation shall be shown on the plans. Three options are open to the
applicant for determining depth to seasonal high water table. First, if sole
reliance is on the measurement of depth to groundwater (the actual
physical measurement), then the test must be taken between January and
April inclusive and with the absence of mottling. Second, the applicant
may use available maps and data from the Soil Conservation Service
provided the soil series mapped is verified by actual on-site soils testing.
Or third, as determined by mottling.
(e) Locations and results or percolation/permeability tests, locations of soil
borings and boring logs shall be shown on the plans.
(f) Fill material. Fill material used for stormwater facility construction shall
have a percolation rate equal to or greater than existing soil conditions.
Fill material shall be as free of clay soils as possible. Sieve analyses shall
be performed on representative soil samples of all fill material and the
effective size and the uniformity coefficient determined. Fill material
shall meet or exceed the quality of the existing soil as determined by the
sieve analyses. Test results shall be obtained by a certified laboratory and
shall be submitted to the Township Engineer prior to the commencement
of grading operations.
Article XII
43
J. Sources for Technical Guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed at (a) and (b) below, which are available from Maps and
Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State
Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended.
Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment
devices, pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet
ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated
into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by
contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil
Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location,
address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be
obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(c) The Ocean County Soil Conservation District, 714 Lacey Road, Forked
River, NJ 08731; Telephone Number: (609) 971-7002, Facsimile Number:
(609) 971-3391, Email Address: info@ocscd.org, Web Address:
www.ocscd.org.
K. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
(1) This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper
design and operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to
any new stormwater management basin.
(2) Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to
the outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper
functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six (6”)
inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
Article XII
44
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5’) feet per second under the full range
of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of
the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand
a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow
structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall
meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across
the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand
a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph (c), escape provisions means the permanent
installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily
accessible means of egress from stormwater management basins.
Stormwater management basins shall include escape provisions as
follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape
provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the
prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in subsection
K(3) a free-standing outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of water
deeper than two and one-half (2.5’) feet. Such safety ledges shall
be comprised of two (2) steps. Each step shall be four (4’) feet to
six (6’) feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two
and one-half (2.5’) feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one (1’) foot to one and one-half (1.5’)
feet above the permanent water surface. See subsection K(4) for
an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
(3) Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department) that
the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
(4) Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin
Article XII
45
Article XII
46
L. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan
(1) Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject
to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the required components
of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at subsection
L(3) below as part of the submission of the applicant's application for
subdivision or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set
forth in this ordinance.
(c) The applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection L.3 of this ordinance.
(2) Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval.
The applicant's Site Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied
and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance.
(3) Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream
tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended
that the topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends a
minimum of two hundred (200’) feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development, at a scale of 1"=200' or greater, showing two (2’) foot
contour intervals. The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following:
existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade features
not otherwise shown.
(b) Vicinity Map. Applicants must prepare a map at a scale of one inch
equals 400 feet (1” = 400’) or greater on a paper print of the latest air
photographs available, updated in the field to reflect current conditions,
showing the relationship of the proposed development to significant
features in the general surroundings. The map must indicate at least the
following: roads, pedestrian ways, access to the site, adjacent land uses,
existing open space, public facilities, landmarks, places of architectural
and historic significance, utilities, drainage (including, specifically,
streams and surface water shown on U.S.G.S. and soils maps), and other
significant features not otherwise shown.
(c) Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of the
natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
Article XII
47
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features
and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development.
(d) Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the
topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent structures. The
map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal
high ground water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(e) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide a
demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections F through I
are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is
being developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater
recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the
source by land management and source controls whenever possible.
(f) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map, shall
be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours,
land area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities
and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan
to control and dispose of stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and
after construction, including discharge provisions, discharge
capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention and
emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity
of each spillway.
(g) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for
the pre-development and post-development conditions for the
design storms specified in subsection G of this ordinance.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties of
soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall
be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined
based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure.
(h) Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the stormwater
management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of
subsection M.
Article XII
48
(i) Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or board
reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in consultation with
the municipal engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in
subsections L(3)(a) through L(3)(f) of this ordinance when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it
would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
(j) Stormwater Review Fee. Subdivisions and site plans requiring
Preliminary or Final Approval, and Road Improvement Plans, that all meet
the latest definition of “Major Development” per Section E, Definitions,
shall pay the Stormwater Review Fee outlined in the Land Use Land
Development Ordinance Article 15-16.3.
M. Maintenance and Repair.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Projects subject to review as in subsection C of this ordinance shall
comply with the requirements of subsections M(2) and M(3).
(2) General Maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major
development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance
tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment,
debris, or trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and corrective
maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency
or homeowners’ association) as having the responsibility for maintenance,
the plan shall include documentation of such person’s agreement to
assume this responsibility, or of the developer’s obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an applicable
ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the
owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or
project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
M(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future
revisions based on subsection M(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the
deed of record for each property on which the maintenance described in
the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain
the function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or
Article XII
49
replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of
nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
M(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a
record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work
orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
M(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at
least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under subsection
M(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public
entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over
the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
subsections M(2)(f) and M(2)(7) above.
(i) The requirements of subsections M(2)(c) and M(2)(d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by
the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to
public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair,
the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days
to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is
approved by the municipal engineer or his designee. The municipality, in
its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and
repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Stormwater Basin Access.
(a) The facility must be readily accessible from a street or other public rightof-
way. Inspection and maintenance easements, connected to the street or
right-of-way, should be provided around the entire facility. The exact
limits of the easements and right-of-ways should be specified on the
project plans and other appropriate documents.
(b) Access roads and gates shall be wide enough to allow passage of
necessary maintenance vehicles and equipment, including trucks,
backhoes, grass mowers, and mosquito control equipment. In general, a
minimum right-of-way width of fifteen (15’) feet and a minimum roadway
width of twelve (12’) feet is required.
(c) To facilitate entry, a curb cut shall be provided where an access road
meets a curbed roadway.
Article XII
50
(d) To allow safe movement of maintenance vehicles, access ramps shall be
provided to the bottom of all detention facilities greater than three feet in
depth. Access ramps should not exceed ten percent in grade.
(e) Access roads and ramps shall be stable and suitably lined to prevent
rutting and other damage by maintenance vehicles and equipment.
(f) When backing-up is difficult or dangerous, turning around areas should be
provided at the end of all access roads.
(g) All stormwater basins shall be perimeter fenced for safety purposes. The
minimum fence height shall be six feet.
(h) To allow safe movement of maintenance personnel and safe operation of
equipment, fences shall be located at least three (3’) feet beyond the top or
toe of any slope steeper than five horizontal to one vertical.
(i) Fences shall be constructed of durable, vandal-resistant materials. Fences
must meet all municipal code requirements.
(j) Bottom fence rails shall be set at a maximum height of six (6”) inches
above finished grade.
(k) Facility perimeters should be sized and stabilized to allow movement and
operation of maintenance and mosquito control equipment. A minimum
perimeter width of twenty-five (25’) feet between the facility and adjacent
structures is required along at least one side of the facility. This portion of
the perimeter shall be readily accessible from a street or other public or
private right-of- way. Gates shall be equipped with a double lock system
in cooperation with the Ocean County Mosquito Commission to permit
same access to the basins.
(l) The top of bank for facilities constructed in cut and the toe of slope for
facilities constructed in fill shall be located no closer than ten (10’) feet to
an existing or proposed property line.
(m) Detention basins shall be attractively buffered and landscaped, and
designed as to minimize propaganda of insects, particularly mosquitoes.
All landscaping and buffering shall be approved by the Board Engineer.
(n) For safe movement of personnel and safe operation of equipment, side
slopes greater than five (5’) feet in height shall not be steeper than four
horizontal to one vertical. Side slopes five (5’) feet or less in height shall
not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes
shall be constructed wherever possible.
(o) For safe movement of personnel and safe operation of equipment, side
slopes steeper than five to one and higher than four (4’) feet shall be
terraced at their midpoints. The terrace shall have a minimum width of
three (3’) feet and shall be graded at two (2%) percent towards the lower
half of the slope.
(p) Suitable access to and along side slopes shall be provided for maintenance
personnel and equipment.
(4) Maintenance Guarantee. The Applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee to
ensure that all stormwater management measures required under the provisions of
this ordinance will be maintained in perpetuity according to the specifications
established herein. Conditioned upon Little Egg Harbor Township's approval,
Article XII
51
this may be accomplished by various mechanisms, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) The Applicant may be required to post a bond or other financial assurance
mechanism in the amount Little Egg Harbor Township determines is
needed to provide maintenance in perpetuity of all stormwater
management measures;
(b) Little Egg Harbor Township may collect an up-front fee from the
Applicant in the amount Little Egg Harbor Township determines is needed
to provide maintenance in perpetuity of all stormwater management
measures. This up-front fee shall be expended by Little Egg Harbor
Township for the sole purpose of conducting maintenance activities
(including repair and renovation, if needed) for all stormwater
management measures required under the Applicant's major development
application approval;
(c) The Applicant may dedicate all stormwater management measures to the
Little Egg Harbor Township, subsequent to which the Township shall
assume all maintenance responsibilities; or
(d) The Applicant may be required to deposit funds in escrow in the amount
Little Egg Harbor Township determines is needed to provide maintenance
in perpetuity of all stormwater management measures.
(5) Stormwater management maintenance fees. For purposes of this section, the
calculation of the maintenance fee will be based on the type of stormwater
management system, which is to serve the development, that is, a surface system,
such as a detention or retention basin and subsurface infiltration system or a
combination of the above. The fee shall be determined as follows:
(a) Surface stormwater management systems (detention or retention basins).
The amount of the maintenance fee shall be the annual maintenance cost
per acre multiplied. by the twenty-five year maintenance period multiplied
by the maintenance area in acres. The maintenance area of the stormwater
management basin shall be defined to be the area included within a line
drawn around the top of the bank of the basin, plus an additional twentyfive
(25’) feet outward from the top of the bank. The annual maintenance
cost per acre shall be $1,281.25. The minimum contribution regardless of
the size of the basin, will be $12,500.00.
(b) Surface infiltration system. The amount of the maintenance fee shall be
determined as follows: $1.25 per linear foot of the infiltration system per
year for maintenance multiplied by a twenty-five year period, plus twice
the cost of the subsurface infiltration system (not including structures).
The replacement cost shall be the amount of the performance guaranties
for the subsurface infiltration system, plus the amount of $34.50 per linear
foot for road repair for any portion of the roadway disturbed by such
replacement determined by the Township Engineer. The minimum fee,
regardless of the length of infiltration system, shall be $12,500.00.
(c) Combination systems. The required fee shall be based on a combined
total of the above.
Article XII
52
N. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty
($1,250.00) dollars, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or
by community service of not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination of
fine, imprisonment and community service as determined by the Municipal Court
Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
(2) The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to abatement
summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 15-12.12. Drainage
A. All streets shall be provided with storm water inlets and pipes where same may be
necessary for proper surface drainage. The system shall be adequate to carry off and/or
store the stormwater and natural drainage water, which originates beyond the
development boundaries and passes through the development calculated on the basis of
maximum potential development as permitted under this chapter. No stormwater
development as permitted under this chapter. No stormwater run-off or natural drainage
water shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or
the need for additional drainage structure on the other lands without proper and approved
provisions being made for taking care of these conditions, including off-tract
improvements. All drainage design and computation factors shall be submitted to the
Board Engineer for review and approval and shall be conforming to the requirements of
this chapter.
(1) The duration of storm used in computing stormwater run-off shall be the
equivalent of the time required for water falling at the most remote point of the
drainage area to reach the point in the drainage system under consideration.
(2) No pipe size in any storm drainage system shall be less than 15 inch diameter
reinforced concrete pipe or its equivalent.
(3) Dished gutters shall not be permitted on any streets and intersections.
(4) Storm drain pipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe in all cases and shall be of the
size specified and laid to the exact lines and grades approved by the Planning
Board Engineer. Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the most current
A.S.T.M. Specifications C76. All pipe shall be Class III, Wall B strength except
where stronger pipe is required as determined by the board engineer. All pipe
shall be designed for AASHO H20-44 loading, and shall meet the minimum cover
requirements.
Article XII
53
In locations other than within the right-of-way of public roads where, because of
severe topographic conditions or the desire to minimize the destruction of trees
and vegetation, corrugated aluminum pipe, pipe arch, helical corrugated pipe, or
fully coated corrugated metal pipe, may be used. The material used shall comply
with the Standard Specifications for Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Culvert Pipe
and Pipe Arch AASHO designation M-196-62 or the Standard Specification for
Aluminum Alloy Helical Pipe AASHO designation M-211-65. The minimum
thickness of the aluminum pipe to be used shall be: less than 24 inch diameter or
equivalent, 0.075 inches; 24 inch diameter and less than 48 inch diameter or
equivalent, 0.105 inches; 49 inch but less than 72 inch diameter or equivalent,
0.135 inch; and 72 inch diameter or equivalent, and larger, 0.165 inches except
where stronger pipe may be required as determined by the Board Engineer.
(5) For all development, blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage
away from all buildings and to prevent the collection of storm water in pools and
to avoid concentration of storm water from each lot to adjacent lots. Easements
or right-of-ways shall be required in accordance with Subsection 15-11.11.
entitled “Easements” where storm drains are installed outside streets.
(6) Runoff. All storm drains shall be designed to carry the runoff from the entire
upstream watershed. The quantity of the runoff shall be determined by the
rational formula (or other formula acceptable to the Board Engineer).
(7) Conduit sizing. The sizing of conduit for the transmission of storm flow shall be
determined by the use of the Manning Formula.
(8) Coefficient of runoff. The following minimum coefficients shall be used in
determining runoff from all offsite contributing areas based upon permitted land
use as determined by the current Zoning Ordinance:
Residential use-lot size one acre or greater……………….………………...C=0.30
Residential use lot size-20,000 sq. ft. or greater but less than one acre…….C=0.40
Residential use-lot size less than 20,000 square feet……………………….C=0.50
Multi-family use……………………………………………………………C=0.70
Commercial use…………………………………………………………….C=0.85
Industrial use……………………………………………………………….C=0.80
Parks, and other permanent open space……………………………………C=0.20
In lieu of more detailed analysis, the above values shall be used to determine the
runoff from onsite contributing areas. If the designer wishes to present a more
detailed analysis the following coefficients shall be used in determining the
average overall coefficient.
Paved surface (streets, drives, roofs, etc.)………………………..……….C=0.95
Unpaved bare surfaces………………………………………..…………..C=0.60
Grassed areas (flat-less than two percent)………………………….…….C=0.20
Grassed areas (average between two and ten percent)…………..………..C=0.30
Grassed areas (steep-more than ten percent)……………………..……….C=0.40
Article XII
54
(9) Intensity or rainfall. All subdivision and site plan drainage collection systems
shall be designed for a ten year frequency rainfall, or if the above results in a
conduit size at least equivalent to a 27 inch reinforced concrete pipe then a 25
year frequency rainfall shall be used or if the above results in a conduit size at
least equivalent to a 54 inch reinforced concrete pipe then a 50 year frequency
rainfall shall be used using the applicable time of concentration.
Rainfall data shall be taken from the U.S. Department of Commerce Technical
Paper No. 25 “Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves” using the Atlantic
City weather station data. Stream relocations, bridges, box culverts, pipes over 72
inches in diameter and other critical waterways, as determined by the Board
Engineer, shall be designed for a 100 year frequency rainfall. In all cases, grading
should be arranged so that flood damage to buildings and parked motor vehicles
can be eliminated.
Detention, retention and recharge facilities are required for certain projects and
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter.
(10) Coefficient of roughness. The following coefficient of roughness shall be used in
the Manning Formula to determine pipe capacity:
Concrete pipe……………………………………………………………….C=.013
Concrete pipe box culverts…………………………………………………C=.015
Corrugated metal pipe/pipe arch 2-2/3 x ½ Corr…………………………..C=.024
Corrugated metal pipe 3 x 1 Corr………………………………………….C=.026
Corrugated metal pipe/pipe arch (fully paved)…………………………….C=.015
Corrugated metal pipe arch (paved invert)………………………………...C=.019
The following minimum values shall be used for open channels:
Concrete lined………………………………………………………………C=.015
Earth channels………………………………………………………………C=.025
Natural channels………………………………………………………C=.030-.050
(11) Velocity restrictions. In general, velocities in closed conduits at design flow
should be at least two and one half feet per second but not more than that velocity
which will cause erosion damage to the conduit. In general, velocities in open
channels at design flow shall not be less than five-tenths foot per second and not
greater than that velocity which will begin to cause erosion or scouring the
channel. For unlined earth channels, the maximum velocity allowed will be two
feet per second. For other channels sufficient design data and soil tests to
determine the character of the channel shall be made by the subdivider and shall
be made available to the Board at the time of drainage review. At the transitions
between closed conduits and open channels or different types of open channels,
suitable provisions must be made to accommodate the velocity transitions. These
provisions may include rip rapping, gabions, lining, aprons, chutes and checks or
Article XII
55
others, all suitable detailed and approved. For all open channel flows tailwater
depth and velocity calculations shall be submitted.
(12) Drainage structures. All drainage structures including manholes, inlets, headwalls
and section and box culverts shall conform to the current details of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation. Unless approved otherwise by the board
engineer, all curb inlets shall be standard type “B” with curb piece heights equal
to the exposed curb face of the adjacent curb plus two inches. All lawn inlets
shall be standard type “E.” When the pipe size is such as to require a larger
structure, standard type “B1” or “B2,” “E1” or “E2” shall be used. If still larger
sizes are required, they shall be specifically detailed using standard frames and
grates.
(13) Inlet capacity. The maximum collecting capacity of an inlet shall be: five cubic
feet per second for Type “b” inlets and two cubic feet per second for Type “E”
inlets, and in addition to gutter flow shall also be limited to provide a maximum
gutter flow surface width of eight feet.
(14) Inlet location and spacing. Inlets shall be located as follows: At all street low
points; in all gutters spaced to insure that the runoff to each inlet does not exceed
the collecting capacity as previously established; in yards and swales as required
and as required at intersections to eliminate rocker gutters. In no event shall inlets
be placed more than 600 feet apart.
(15) Alignment. Curved alignments shall not be permitted. All pipes shall be
constructed on a tangent alignment.
(16) End section. All discharge pipes shall terminates with an end section which may
be: precast flared concrete; flared corrugated metal; straight cast in place concrete
or cast in place concrete with flared wingwalls. The final determination as to type
of end treatment shall be subject to approval of the Board Engineer.
(17) Offsite drainage. All drainage systems shall terminate in an existing permanent
natural body of water, drainage course, or as otherwise determined and approved
by the Board Engineer.
(18) Open channels. Generally, unlined open channel cross section shall have side
slopes not steeper than four to one for channel depths of two feet or less and not
steeper than six to one for channel depths or more than two feet. Lined open
channel sides slopes shall not be steeper than two to one. The bottom of all
unlined channels and the channel side slopes to at least the design flow level will
be sodded with suitable course grass sod. All unlined open channel side slopes
above the design minimum flow level will be topsoiled and seeded or otherwise
suitable stabilized in accordance with an approval soil disturbance permit. All
unlined open channels which can be expected to have base flow of five cubic feet
per second or more for at least two out of every 12 months will be provided with a
Article XII
56
low flow channel using gabions, rip-rap, lining, one third pipe section or other
arrangements approved as part of the final plat submission.
(19) N.J.D.E.P. jurisdiction. All drainage facilities carrying runoff from tributary areas
larger than one half square miles or located within a flood plain must have the
approval of the N.J. Division of Water Policy and Supply. All encroachments of
natural waterways must be referred to the N.J. Division of Water Policy and
Supply for approval in accordance with statute. The State may retain jurisdiction,
in which case a permit will be necessary as set forth, or may refer the matter to the
County Engineer for review.
(20) Nonpipe culverts. All nonpipe culverts shall be designed for AASHO H20-44
loading. All culverts of any type shall be carried to the roadway right-of-way and
shall terminate with headwalls or other approved end treatment. All conduits
terminating or beginning in open channels shall be provided with headwalls or
other appropriate end treatment.
(21) Guiderails. Guiderails and/or railings shall be placed at all drainage structures
where the interests of pedestrians or vehicular safety would dictate. The Board
may require that any open channel other than naturally occurring streams be
fenced within 48 inch high chain link fencing if the banks of the channel are
steeper than one foot vertical for every four feet horizontal and either the total
depth of the channel exceeds four feet or the channel would be expected to have a
depth of flow greater than two feet more often than once every ten years. For
maintenance purposes, gates may be required by the Board at specified intervals.
(22) General drainage requirements.
(23) All development applications must be accompanied by the drainage area map and
drainage calculations. No drainage pipe or easement shall be permitted within 25
feet of any existing or proposed individual sewerage disposal system. At least
one foot and zero inches of minimum cover over the top of the pipe at all times,
including during construction, must be provided.
(a) Subject to review and approval by the Board, the design of a subdivision
may be modified to take advantage of the natural drainage features of the
land. In such review the Board will use the following criteria:
[1] The utilization of the natural drainage system to the extent
possible.
[2] The maintenance of the natural drainage system as much as
possible in its unimproved state.
[3] When drainage channels are required, wide shallow swales with
natural vegetation will be preferred to other sections.
[4] The construction of flow-retarding devices, detention areas and
recharge berms to minimize runoff value increases.
[5] Maintenance of base flow in streams, reservoirs and ponds.
Article XII
57
[6] The reinforcement, improvement and/or extension of the natural
drainage system to such extent as is necessary to eliminate
flooding and excess maintenance requirements.
(b) All developments or portions of total schemes of development which,
based upon the preliminary plat submission, total 15 or more acres will be
expected, to the extent that the Board considers possible, to limit the total
stormwater runoff from the site after development to not more than the
runoff from the site in its undeveloped state. The utilization of the
provisions of this subsection to limit such runoff is encouraged. However,
the Board may require the use of reasonable artificial methods of detention
and/or recharge if it determines that natural provisions are not feasible.
[1] The Board may waive the provisions of this subsection if the
nature of the development, the character of adjacent previously
developed areas or other factors make the utilization of natural
drainage features or runoff limiting devices inadvisable or
impractical.
[2] When a subdivider or the Engineer determines that it will be
necessary to utilize design standards in addition to or other than
those minimum requirements established herein, the Engineer is
advised to consult with the Board Engineer prior to beginning the
detailed design for review and approval of the proposed design
standards. Standards utilized should generally be nationally
recognized and in common use in this area.
[3] When the Board and/or Board Engineer finds it necessary, they
may waive any or all of the requirements established herein and
may require additional information, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51.
[4] The Township shall ascertain, in each drainage instance, the
drainage area of which the specific subdivision is a part, and
apportion the fair costs of adequate drainage for the whole
drainage area among landowners who contribute to or who will
contribute to the stormwater runoff if the subdivision is approved.
[5] Each applicant for a subdivision requiring provisions for overall
drainage of stormwater runoff shall install an adequate drainage
system in the specific subdivision and shall also pay in cash to the
Township the fair cost so apportioned to the specific subdivision
for the ultimate disposal of the stormwater runoff to such ultimate
adequate outlet for final disposal as aforesaid. Each payment made
to the Township shall be held by it in trust until the overall
ultimate disposal system is constructed for the drainage area in
question, at which time the trust funds raised for that drainage area
may be used for such construction in and for that area.
(24) Flood plain regulations. The purposes of the following flood plain regulations
are: (a) to implement the land use rules and regulations promulgated by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for floodways and the flood
fringe portion of a flood hazard area; (b) to discourage construction and regrading
Article XII
58
in flood hazards areas; (c) to prevent encroachments into flood hazard areas which
would obstruct or constrict the area through which water must pass; and (d) to
prevent pollution of water courses during low or high water periods by preventing
the placing or storing of unsanitary or dangerous substances in the flood hazard
areas.
(a) The flood hazard design elevation shall be determined on an individual
basis based upon stream encroachment line data from the division of water
resources or, in the absence of that data, the flood elevation based on a 100
year storm frequency. One or the other shall be delineated on the plat. In
addition, the Planning Board Engineer may, upon receipt of the
application and with the consent of the landowner, and at the landowner’s
expense, determine the precise location of a floodway and flood fringe
area by close inspection, field survey or other appropriate method and
cause, if requested the same to be marked on the ground and on the plat,
and notifying the owner, the N.J. Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Water Resources and the approving authority. The
assistance of the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Corps of Engineers, and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources
may be sought to aid in delineating the flood hazard design elevation
except that where State or Federal agencies shall subsequently publish any
reports which delineate the flood hazard design elevation of a water
course, the report shall be the officially delineated flood hazard area as if
the report were published in this chapter.
(b) Any lot containing a floodway portion of a drainage course and on which
it is proposed to regrade and/or construct an improvement shall not be
permitted unless the proposed use is permitted by this chapter, plat
approval has been granted, and a floodway permit has been issued by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources where required by state regulations.
(c) Any lot containing a flood fringe portion of the flood hazard area an on
which it is proposed to regrade and/or construct an improvement shall not
be permitted unless the proposed use is permitted by this chapter and until
plat approval has been granted.
(d) The procedure for reviewing any proposed regrading and/or construction
shall be the same as set forth for plat review. No application shall be
approved and no permit granted until all zoning violations have either
been corrected or a variance granted.
(e) Regulation of the flood fringe portion of the flood hazard area shall be
consistent in the approving the authority’s determination with the criteria
and standards promulgated by the N.J. Department of Environmental
Protection governing the flood fringe area.
(f) The applicant shall submit maps, reports, and other appropriate documents
permitting the approving authority to evaluate whether the proposal has an
inherent low flood damage potential; does not obstruct flood flows or
increase flood heights and/or velocities; does not affect adversely the
Article XII
59
water carrying capacity of any delineated floodway and/or channel; does
not increase local run-off and erosion; does not unduly stress the natural
environment of the flood plain or degrade the quality of surface water or
the quality and quantity of ground waters; does not require channel
modification or relocation; does not require fill or the erection of
structures; does not include the storage of equipment and materials.
(g) Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, surface or
underground drainageway or drainage system, channel or stream, there
shall be provided and dedicated a drainage right-of-way easement to the
municipality conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse,
and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate to
accommodate expected storm water run-off in the future based upon
reasonable growth potential in the municipality. The minimum width of
easement for channel sections shall be the maximum design top width of
the channel section segment plus 20 feet rounded to the next highest fivefoot
increment. However, if the floodway is not ascertainable for a stream
or open channel, the width of drainage easement shall extend 50 feet
beyond the top of bank on both sides of the drainage course.
§ 15-12.13. Township acceptance of stormwater management system.
An applicant shall be required to dedicate proposed stormwater management systems to the
Township and shall enter into an agreement with the Township to that end. Such agreement
shall be a condition of final approval and shall be fully executed prior to release of performance
guarantees, and acceptance of the stormwater management agreement shall require payment of
the fee set forth in Section 15-12.14. in consideration of the Township assuming all future
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities. The form of agreement shall be approved
by the Township Attorney. The agreement, upon execution, shall be recorded by the applicant in
the Office of the County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter file a copy of the recorded
agreement with the Township. Upon certification by the Township Engineer that the
performance guarantee for the project may be released, acceptance of the stormwater
management facilities by the Township shall be specifically stated in the resolution authorizing
the guarantee release. The Township shall retain the cash portion of the guarantee a sum equal to
the maintenance fee approved as to amount by the Township Engineer in accordance with the
formula in this chapter. In the event that the cash portion of the guarantee is less than the
required maintenance fee, the developer shall post the deficit in cash. Any interim performance
guarantee reductions authorized by the Township shall not be construed to mean that all or any
part of the stormwater management system has been accepted by the Township nor shall any
such interim reduction reduce the cash portion of the guarantee to an amount less than the
required maintenance fee. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to maintain the stormwater
management system during construction.
§ 15-12.14. Stormwater management maintenance fee.
A. For purposes of this section, the calculation of the maintenance fee will be based on the
type of stormwater management system which is to serve the development, that is, a
Article XII
60
surface system, such as a detention or retention basin and subsurface infiltration system
or a combination of the above. The fee shall be determined as follows:
(1) Surface stormwater management systems (detention or retention basins). The
amount of the maintenance fee shall be the annual maintenance cost per acre
multiplied by the twenty-five year maintenance period multiplied by the
maintenance area in acres. The maintenance area of the stormwater management
basin shall be defined to be the area included within a line drawn around the top
of the bank of the basin, plus an additional 25 feet outward from the top of the
bank. The annual maintenance cost per acre shall be $1,281.25. The minimum
contribution regardless of the size of the basin, will be $12,500.00. [Amended
10/8/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-29]
(2) Surface infiltration system. The amount of the maintenance fee shall be
determined as follows: $1.25 per linear foot of the infiltration system per year for
maintenance multiplied by a twenty-five year period, plus twice the cost of the
subsurface infiltration system (not including structures). The replacement cost
shall be the amount of the performance guaranties for the subsurface infiltration
system, plus the amount of $34.50 per linear foot for road repair for any portion
of the roadway disturbed by such replacement determined by the Township
Engineer. The minimum fee, regardless of the length of infiltration system, shall
be $12,500.00. [Amended 10/8/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-29]
(3) Combination systems. The required fee shall be based on a combined total of the
above.
§ 15-12.15. Driveways
A. Traffic circulation. The site plan shall provide a safe and efficient circulation system for
the movement of vehicles and pedestrians off the site and on the tract.
B. Access driveways.
(1) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located so as to afford maximum safety
and minimum disruption of traffic on the street.
(2) The dimensions of entrance and exit driveways and internal roads shall be
adequate to accommodate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to be
using the site. The required dimensions for driveways and interior roads shall be
as follows:
(a) Twelve (12) feet minimum for one-way operation.
(b) Twenty-four (24) feet minimum for two-way operation.
(c) Twenty-eight (28) feet minimum for fire lanes.
(3) Driveways serving a development having fifty (50) or fewer parking spaces may
use a one-and-one-half-inch-high depressed curb and concrete apron driveway
and concrete walk. Those having more than fifty (50) parking spaces, however,
shall use curb returns of not less than ten (10) feet minimum nor twenty (20) feet
maximum in radius, except as otherwise directed by the New Jersey Department
of Transportation.
(4) Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of
any vehicle undercarriage.
Article XII
61
(5) Driveway grades shall adhere to the following: three-fourths percent (3/4%)
minimum to ten percent (10%) maximum. A maximum slope of two percent (2%)
for the first twenty (20) feet from the street line shall be maintained.
(6) Curb cuts to a public street shall not be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the
point of curvature or point of tangent of the corner radius curb of an intersecting
street, or, if required parking spaces exceed one hundred (100), then the driveway
curb cuts shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet to the point of curvature
or point of tangent of the corner radius of the intersecting street.
(7) The number of permitted driveways provided from a site shall be related to the
type of street and traffic volume thereon and the number and location of other
access points therefrom.
(8) Driveway pavement shall extend to the paved portion of the street with which it
connects and shall be constructed with a minimum of two (2) inches of stabilized
base course and one and one-half (11/2) inches of FABC surface course or an
approved equal.
(9) Driveways are to be curbed on both sides.
(10) Within all residential zones within the Township, with exception of the R-50
Zone, the minimum side yard setback for a driveway shall be:
(a) Five (5) feet where the garage doors front a public street or where the
garage is detached from the principal structure; or
(b) Three (3) feet where the garage doors do not front a public street (i.e., side
load garage).
(11) All pavement area shall be constructed with six (6) inches of Type 2, Class A or
B, gravel subbase, in addition to bituminous stabilized base course and FABC
surface course as specified, or an approved equal.
(12) In parking lots having a capacity of more than one hundred (100) cars, a main
access drive shall be provided from points of ingress and egress. No parking shall
be permitted on the main access drive, nor shall it serve as an access aisle to
adjacent parking spaces.
(13) All access drives shall provide a minimum outside turning radius of thirty (30)
feet unless as a fire lane, in which case they shall provide a minimum outside
turning radius of fifty (50) feet.
(14) The maximum width of a driveway depression for a two-car capacity driveway
shall be twenty-three (23) feet.
§ 15-12.16. Off-street parking and loading areas.
A. Design requirements.
(1) The number and size of all parking and loading spaces shall meet the
requirements of this section.
(2) Any off-street loading spaces shall have a minimum height clearance of fifteen
(15) feet and be designed in accordance with the following criteria:
Loading Space Apron/Aisle Length
Length Width (90°) (60°)
(feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
60 10 72 66
Article XII
62
60 12 62 57
60 14 60 54
(3) Ingress to and egress from a parking or loading area shall be paved and shall
include turning areas to assure ease of mobility, ample clearance and the safety of
vehicles and pedestrians.
(4) Parking areas serving light-duty vehicles shall be constructed with a minimum of
two (2) inches of stabilized base course and one and one-half (11/2) inches of
FABC surface course, or an approved equal, and shall be sufficiently drained so
as to prevent an accumulation of water on the site.
(5) All pavement areas shall be constructed with six-inch-thick Type 2, Class A or B,
gravel subbase, in addition to the bituminous stabilized base course and FABC
surface course as specified.
(6) A parking area shall be illuminated if used after sunset, and such illumination
shall provide a minimum of five tenths (0.5) lumen per square foot throughout the
area and be shielded from adjoining streets or properties. The location of the
parking lot light structure shall be in accordance with the requirements of § 15-
12.16.
(7) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to prevent the maneuvering
of vehicles into or out of parking or loading spaces within any portion of any
street.
(a) The plan shall include both inside curve radius and outside curve radius
for all curves on the site. This is to include the entrances to and exits from
fire lanes, loading areas, parking aisles and all entrances and exits from the
site. The minimum curve radius shall meet the requirements as outlined in
the Design Vehicles and Minimum Turning Path Chart.
(8) Parking dimensions shall meet the following standards:
(a) Each dead-storage bay of an off-street parking space may be perpendicular
with the aisle, parallel with the aisle or at any angle between sixty degrees
(60°) and ninety degrees (90°).
(b) No angle parking layout shall be permitted with an angle less than sixty
degrees (60°). The following are minimum stall and aisle dimensions:
Type Aisle Width Stall Dimensions
(feet) (feet)
90-degree parking 24 9 x 18
60-degree parking 18 9 x 18
Parallel parking
1-way operation 12 9 x 22
2-way operation 24 9 x 22
(9) Parking or loading space stripes shall be four (4) inches wide using white
reflective paint. Hatch lines shall be on an angle of forty-five degrees (45°) and
shall consist of stripes four (4) inches wide using yellow reflective paint two (2)
feet on center.
(10) All parking and loading areas are to be curbed.
(11) No paved area shall be closer to any property line than fifteen (15) feet, unless
otherwise permitted herein.
Article XII
63
(12) The maximum grade permitted in parking areas shall be six percent (6%); the
minimum grade permitted in parking areas shall be three-fourths percent (3/4%).
(13) Location of parking. Where parking is permitted between the front building line
and the street line, a safety island or raised median separating the public street
from the parking area shall be provided for intermediate and large parking in
accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(a) The width of the safety island shall be that width between the proposed
street curbline and a point five (5) feet inside the property line. When this
width is less than twenty-five (25) feet, the parking area shall be reduced
to provide a minimum width for the safety island of fifteen (15) feet. All
required tree and shrub plantings shall be planted on the on-site portion of
the safety island, with the exception of streetscape plantings as required
herein.
(b) Safety islands shall be raised a minimum of six (6) inches above the
adjacent parking area.
(c) Safety islands shall be topsoiled and seeded or otherwise landscaped as
required by § 15-11.8.
(14) Small parking areas. Parking lots having ten (10) or fewer spaces shall comply
with all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall also be bordered by a
fifteen-foot unbroken, landscaped strip along side property lines from the street
line to the rear lot line, unless the Board, for good cause, shall waive such
requirements; provided, however, that for parking lots having ten (10) or fewer
spaces, only a two-inch compacted thickness bituminous concrete FABC surface
course on six-inch compacted gravel base course will be required.
(15) Intermediate-size parking areas. Parking areas having more than ten (10) spaces
but fewer than one hundred one (101) spaces shall be designed to fulfill the
following minimum requirements:
(a) A safety island or raised median shall be provided as herein described.
(b) Not more than one (1) two-way access driveway or two (2) one-way
access driveways shall be provided on any one (1) street unless approval
otherwise is obtained from the body, agency or official having jurisdiction
over the plan.
(c) Design of the parking area shall include planting islands, which shall be a
minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total parking area. These islands
shall include planting as required by §15-11.8. Parking bays shall be
separated from access or circulation drives by a planting island (of tenfoot
minimum width) or area for the full width of a bay at the ends of
rows.
(16) Large parking areas. Parking lots which have a capacity for parking more than
one hundred (100) vehicles shall incorporate the following minimum design
standards:
(a) No parking stalls, which shall require the use of the entrance and exit
driveways as access aisles, shall be permitted.
(b) All access driveways located along one-way streets or divided highways
shall be separate on-way driveways. The driveways shall be located so
that vehicles enter the parking area at the beginning of the property and
Article XII
64
exit at the far end of the property, unless other considerations, such as
median openings, dictate otherwise.
(c) All directional (one-way) driveways shall be marked by appropriate signs
facing all peripheral service roads serving the property as well as the
parking area.
(d) No driveway shall be located less than thirty (30) feet from the existing
drive.
(e) The design of the parking area shall include planting islands, which shall
be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total parking area. These islands
shall include planting as required by §15-11.8. Parking bays shall be
separated from access or circulation drives by a planting island (of tenfoot
minimum width) or area for the full width of a bay at the ends of
rows. The parking lot shall, where possible, be subdivided into modular
parking bays or lots of not greater than fifty (50) spaces each. These
modules shall be separated by a landscape island of a minimum ten-foot
width. When appropriate, pedestrian walkways shall be provided on these
islands. A single line or row within a bay should be no more than twenty
(20) spaces in length.
(f) The parking area shall contain location markers clearly visible from all
areas of the parking lot Location markers shall be placed, at a minimum, at
one (1) marker per twenty-five (25) parking stalls.
(17) Intermediate and large parking areas shall be designed so as to provide for a Fire
Zone adjacent to the building(s). Parking shall not be permitted in a Fire Zone.
Fire Zones shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width and may be used for on-site
traffic circulation but shall have a turning radius of fifty (50) feet at any entrance
and exit of the site. These zones shall be labeled "Fire Zones, No Stopping or
Standing."
(18) Parking for the handicapped.
(a) Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located to provide convenient
access to building entrances by way of depressed curbs and ramps in
accordance with state regulations. All handicapped spaces shall comply
with state design standards. The number of spaces to be provided shall be
determined by the following table:
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
Article XII
65
[1] One (1) in every eight (8) accessible spaces, but not less than one
(1), shall be served by an access aisle ninety-six (96) inches wide
minimum and shall be designated "Van-Accessible" as required by
Subsection A.(18)(e). The vertical clearance at such spaces shall
comply with Subsection A.(18)(f). All such spaces may be
grouped on one (1) level of a parking structure.
[2] If Passenger Loading Zones are provided, then at least one (1)
Passenger Loading Zone shall comply with Subsection A.(18)(g).
[3] At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons
with mobility impairments, parking spaces complying with
Subsection A.(18)(b) through (g) shall be provided in accordance
with Subsection A.(18)(a), except as follows:
[a] Outpatient units and facilities: ten percent (10%) of the
total number of parking spaces provided serving each such
outpatient unit or facility.
[b] Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services
for persons with mobility impairments: twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of parking spaces provided
serving each such unit or facility.
[4] Valet parking. Valet parking facilities shall provide a Passenger
Loading Zone complying with Subsection A.(18)(g) located on an
accessible route to the entrance of the facility. Subsections
A.(18)(a), (a)[1] and (a)[3] in this section do not apply to valet
parking facilities.
(b) Minimum number. Parking spaces required to be accessible by
Subsection A.(18)(a) shall comply with Subsection A.(18)(c) through (f).
Passenger Loading Zones required to be accessible by Subsection
A.(18)(a) shall comply with Subsection A.(18)(f) and (g).
(c) Location. Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be
located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to
an accessible entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular
building, accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible
route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking,
accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the
accessible entrances.
(d) Parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be at least eight (8) feet
wide. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the
building or facility entrance and shall comply with accessible route
requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (UCC). Two (2) accessible parking spaces may share a
common aisle. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width
of an accessible route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with
surface slopes not exceeding one to fifty (1:50) [two percent (2%)] in all
directions.
Article XII
66
(e) Signage. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a
sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Spaces complying with
Subsection A.(18)(a) shall have an additional sign "Van-Accessible"
mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so
they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parking in the space.
(f) Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of nine and five-tenths
(9.5) feet shall be provided at accessible Passenger Loading Zones and
along at least one (1) vehicle access route to such areas from site
entrance(s) and exit(s). At parking spaces complying with Subsection
A.(18)(a), a minimum vertical clearance of ninety-eight (98) inches at the
parking space and along at least one (1) vehicle access route to such
spaces from site entrance(s) and exit(s) shall be provided.
(g) Passenger Loading Zones. Passenger Loading Zones shall provide an
access aisle at least five (5) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long adjacent
and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space. If there are curbs between the
access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space, then a curb ramp complying
with the New Jersey UCC shall be provided. Vehicle standing spaces and
access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding one to fifty
(1:50) [two percent (2%)] in all directions.
(19) Landscaping. Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be shown on the
landscaping plan. Trees shall be staggered and/or spaced so as not to interfere
with driver vision and have branches no lower than six (6) feet. All areas between
the parking area and the building shall be landscaped.
(20) Minimum parking requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Automotive repair garage or body shop: four (4) parking spaces per each
bay.
(b) Automotive sales and service: one (1) parking space for each four hundred
(400) square feet of gross floor area shall be provided for customer and
employee parking. These areas shall be in addition to areas utilized for
display and storage of vehicles. Site plans shall specify which parking
spaces are designated for customers, employees, display and storage.
(c) Automotive service station:
[1] Gas only: four (4) parking spaces.
[2] Gas and convenience store: six (6) parking spaces.
[3] Gas, convenience store and service bays: ten (10) parking spaces.
[4] Gas, convenience store and car wash: eight (8) parking spaces.
(d) Banks: three (3) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
(e) Bar: fifteen (15) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area or five-tenths (0.5) parking space per seat.
(f) Barber and beauty shop: three (3) parking spaces for each beautician chair
or two (2) parking spaces for each barber chair (if known), but not fewer
than one (1) parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area.
(g) Car washes: one (1) parking space per employee, plus off-street storage
(stacking) space equal to at least ten (10) spaces per washing lane. For
Article XII
67
self-wash or self-service car washes, off-street storage space shall be five
(5) spaces per washing lane.
(h) Church, synagogue, temple or mosque: thirty-three hundredths (0.33)
parking space per seat.
(i) Convalescent home, nursing home or residential health-care facility: one
(1) parking space for each three (3) beds based on its licensed bed
capacity.
(j) Fast-food establishment: one (1) parking space for each seventy-five (75)
square feet of gross floor area. If located within a shopping center, then
one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross
floor area or:
[1] Drive-up: three-tenths (0.3) parking space per seat.
[2] With drive-through: three-tenths (0.3) parking space per seat.
[3] Without drive-through: five-tenths (0.5) parking space per seat.
(k) Funeral home: five and four-tenths (5.4) parking spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(l) Furniture or carpet store: one and two-tenths (1.2) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
(m) Hospital: one and eighty-three hundredths (1.83) parking spaces for each
bed, based on its licensed capacity.
(n) Hotel or motel: one (1) parking space per room, plus five-tenths (0.5)
parking space per employee; adjust upward for restaurants.
(o) Industrial uses:
[1] Assembly operations: one and twenty-five hundredths (1.25)
parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
[2] Industrial, light: two and one-tenth (2.1) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or one and fivetenths
(1.5) parking spaces per employee of largest shift.
[3] Manufacturing: one and six-tenths (1.6) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or seven-tenths
(0.7) parking spaces per employee of largest shift.
[4] Research lab: two and five-tenths (2.5) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) parking
space per employee of largest shift.
[5] Warehouse/high tech or flex space: sixty-six hundredths (0.66)
parking space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
(p) Library or museum: three and three-tenths (3.3) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(q) Medical center: one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area.
(r) Office uses:
[1] General: three and five-tenths 3.5) parking spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Article XII
68
[2] Dental or medical: five (5) parking spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(s) Recreational uses:
[1] Bowling alley: four and five-tenths (4.5) parking spaces per lane.
[2] Golf course: eight (8) parking spaces per hole.
[3] Health club: eight and five-tenths (8.5) parking spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
[4] Marina: five-tenths (0.5) parking space per boat slip.
[5] Miniature golf: one and five-tenths (1.5) parking spaces per hole.
[6] Pool hall/arcade: four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
[7] Skating rink: seven (7) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
[8] Stadium: twenty-five hundredths (0.25) parking space per seat.
[9] Swimming pool: twenty-five hundredths (0.25) parking space per
person in pool.
[10] Tennis court: three (3) parking spaces per court.
(t) Restaurant:
[1] High turnover: five-tenths (0.5) parking space per seat.
[2] Lower turnover: three-tenths (0.3) parking space per seat.
(21) Retail store, freestanding: four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of gross leasable area.
(22) Schools.
(a) Nursery, elementary or intermediate: one and five-tenths (1.5) parking
spaces per classroom, but not less than one (1) parking space per teacher
and staff.
(b) High school: twenty-three hundredths (0.23) parking space per student.
(c) College: sixty-two hundredths (0.62) parking space per student.
(23) Shopping center (includes neighborhood, community, regional and super
regional):
(a) Under six hundred thousand (600,000) square feet: four (4) parking spaces
per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area; adjust upward
for theaters and restaurants.
(b) Greater than six hundred thousand (600,000) square feet: five (5) parking
spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
(24) Storage, self: one (1) parking space for each unit, plus one (1) parking space for
each employee.
(25) Supermarket; freestanding: seven (7) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
(26) Theater: four-tenths (0.4) parking space per seat.
(27) Veterinary clinics or hospitals or animal care facilities: one (1) parking space for
each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
(28) The parking space required for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be
the same as required for a use of similar nature, as determined by the Board,
based upon that use enumerated herein which is most similar to the proposed use.
If there is no use enumerated herein having sufficient similarity to the proposed
Article XII
69
use to enable the Board to establish rational parking requirements, the Board may,
in its discretion, direct the applicant to furnish the Board with such data as may be
necessary to enable the Board to establish rational parking requirements.
(29) Off-street parking requirements for residential land uses.
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Residential Use Spaces
Single-family detached
2-bedroom 1.5
3-bedroom 2.0
4-bedroom 2.5
5-bedroom 3.0
Garden apartment
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0
3-bedroom 2.1
Townhouse
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.3
3-bedroom 2.4
Mobile home
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0
(30) Miscellaneous criteria for calculating the amount of parking required. In
computing the number of above-required parking spaces, the following rules shall
govern:
(a) Where fractional space results, the required number shall be construed to
be the nearest whole number.
(b) Nothing in the above requirements shall be construed to prevent the joint
use of off-street parking facilities by two (2) or more uses, provided that
the total of such spaces shall not be fewer than the sum of the
requirements for various individual uses computed separately by the above
requirements.
(c) All required parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or parcel as
the structure or use they shall serve. In the case of nonresidential uses,
parking facilities may be provided on other lots or parcels but shall not be
greater than three hundred (300) feet from the structure or use they shall
serve.
(d) Where special traffic problems exist, the Planning Board may require a
special survey of conditions, at the applicant's cost, and require the
location of entrances and exits in the parking lot to be altered to minimize
congestion and hazard.
B. Minimum loading requirements. Adequate off-street loading and maneuvering space
shall be provided for every retail or wholesale commercial and/or industrial use. The
following standards shall be applied:
(1) Required number of off-street loading spaces:
(a) Schools: one (1) loading space.
Article XII
70
(b) Hospitals with gross floor area:
[1] Under ten thousand (10,000) square feet: one (1) loading space.
[2] From ten thousand (10,000) to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet
of gross floor area: two (2) loading spaces.
(c) Funeral homes: one (1) loading space.
(d) Office, hotel, retail service, wholesale, warehouse, manufacturing or
processing or repairing uses with a gross floor area:
[1] Under ten thousand (10,000) square feet: one (1) loading space
required.
[2] From ten thousand (10,000) to twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet of gross floor area: two (2) loading spaces.
[3] From twenty-five thousand one (25,001) to sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet of gross floor area: three (3) loading spaces.
[4] From sixty thousand one (60,001) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area: four (4) loading spaces.
(e) Off-street loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the
total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use, and provided that all regulations governing the
location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to
and that no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a required
space for more than one (1) use.
(2) There shall be a minimum of one (1) trash/refuse enclosure and collection
location, separate from any parking or loading area and located in a separate
enclosure area. The refuse collection or enclosure area shall be totally enclosed
and screened from view in accordance with the requirements in §15-11.18,
screening of refuse area. The refuse enclosure area may be located adjacent or
within the general loading area(s), provided that containers or enclosures in no
way interfere with or restrict loading and unloading.
(3) Where any use is located on a tract of at least fifty (50) acres and no portion of a
loading area, including maneuvering areas, is closer than two hundred (200) feet
to any property line and where the length of the driveway connecting the loading
area to the street is at least three hundred (300) feet, the number of off-street
loading spaces may be less than the number required by the schedule above,
provided that the applicant, as part of the site plan, shall document to the
approving authority how the number of spaces to be provided will be adequate to
meet the needs of the specific use proposed
(4) Access to truck standing, loading and unloading areas may be provided directly
from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will not interfere with
public convenience and will permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
(5) Unless otherwise permitted, Fire Zones shall not be used as standing, loading or
unloading areas.
(6) Loading areas, as required under this section, shall be provided in addition to offstreet
parking spaces and shall not be considered as supplying off-street parking
spaces.
(7) No off-street loading or unloading area shall be permitted in any required front
yard area.
Article XII
71
C. Location of parking and loading areas.
(1) Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use being served, may abut
the served rather than requiring a setback from the building and shall be located to
directly serve the building for which the space is being provided. Loading spaces
shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any building being served. No offstreet
parking or loading space shall have direct access from a street.
(2) No loading and parking spaces shall be located in any required buffer area.
(3) No parking shall be permitted in fire lanes, streets, driveways, aisles, sidewalks or
turning areas.
(4) Off-street loading spaces shall have fifteen (15) feet of vertical clearance and be
designed in accordance with the following criteria:
Loading Space Apron/Aisle Length
Length Width (90°) (60°)
(feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
60 10 72 66
60 12 62 57
60 14 60 54
§ 15-12.17. Fences.
A. A "fence" or "fencing" shall be defined as any wood, masonry, metal or aluminum
structure(s) or any wall or hedges constructed on the front, side or rear yard and
designated to shield, screen or protect a lot(s) or a portion of a lot(s).
B. General requirements.
(1) All fences hereinafter erected, rebuilt, renovated and maintained in any residential
district in the Township shall be subject to the following rules, requirements and
regulations:
(a) On any lot in any residential district, no fence, wall or hedge shall be
erected, built, renovated or maintained so that said fence, wall or hedge
shall exceed six (6) feet in height. See-through fencing may be
constructed to a maximum height of six (6) feet in accordance with all
other provisions contained herein.
(b) The height of all fences, walls and hedges shall be measured from the
ground elevation or finished grade a vertical distance of six (6) feet.
(c) "See-through fencing" shall be defined as any fence or fencing having a
consistent density of not greater than fifty percent (50%) for all fences,
living fences and hedges.
(d) Fences on lagoon properties shall be of a see-through type or variety for a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any bulkhead or rear property line
along the side line or side yard of any residential lot so as not to obstruct
the view of the lagoon. The entire rear line or rear yard fence shall also be
of a see-through type or variety. All living fences and hedges shall adhere
to the above-stated fifteen-foot side-line regulations and shall not be
constructed in a continuous non-see-through manner.
Article XII
72
(e) All fences shall be constructed with the face or finished side away from
the structural side toward the interior of the lot(s) on which they are
erected.
(f) Fences which are painted or stained shall be of one (1) harmonious color
throughout each individual lot(s) and blend with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood.
(g) No fence shall be constructed with barbed wire or electrified or topped
with spikes, sharp points or any other dangerous object(s) which may be
hazardous to persons or animals.
(h) Living fences, hedges or screen plantings shall be planted no closer than
six (6) inches to a property line and shall be maintained in a neatly
trimmed and aesthetically pleasing condition.
(i) Fences shall not be erected on a property line without the approval, in
writing, of the adjoining property owners. All fences shall be erected a
minimum of six (6) inches from the property line on which they will be
located.
(j) Fences shall be erected in a proper manner so as to permit the free flow of
natural drainage and prohibit the blocking, obstruction, damming and/or
ponding of surface water on the lot on which they are erected and on all
contiguous and adjoining properties.
(k) No fence, wall or hedge shall be used as a side of a shed, building or
accessory structure.
(l) No fence, wall or hedge shall encroach upon any public right-of-way,
public easement or other private property(s) other than the lot(s) which it
is intended to serve.
C. A fence permit shall be required and shall be issued, in conformance with these rules,
regulations and requirements, by the Township Building Department for all fences,
except living fences, erected in the Township.
D. Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within such triangles, no
vision-obstructing objects shall be permitted which exceed the height of thirty (30) inches
above the elevation of the existing street. This restriction shall not prohibit the
construction of see-through-type fences at the height limitation prescribed above.
E. All fences placed in the front yard of a residential area shall be at least fifty percent
(50%) of an open, see-through variety.
§ 15-12.18. Groundwater quality protection: best management practices.
The following principals, measures and guidelines shall be utilized, to the maximum extent
practicable, to minimize the impact of development and/or activities on the quality of the
township's groundwater resources and to limit the risk of contamination of the Township's
potable water supply:
Article XII
73
A. All commercial and residential development shall minimize impervious coverage and
maximize the amount of natural unoccupied open space.
B. The preservation of naturally vegetated areas and landscaped areas utilizing native plant
material requiring minimal fertilization and pesticide and herbicide application are
encouraged.
C. Storage of hazardous materials shall, except as otherwise regulated by State or Federal
regulation, allow access for physical inspection and monitoring and shall utilize the best
available technology to provide for automatic and immediate alarm or detection of
releases.
D. Users of hazardous materials shall have a plan to detect and control hazardous material
leaks and spills, including but not limited to inspections, notification procedures and
emergency containment and cleanup procedure.
§ 15-12.19. Lighting.
A. All exterior lighting shall be designed to provide a minimum lighting intensity of fivetenths
(0.5) lumen per square foot. Lighting shall be of a soft or glare-free type such as
sodium vapor lights, and shall not cast an illumination color which shall be distractive,
obliterate or obscure the view, be ultraviolet, strobic, pulsating, flashing or of any
unnatural kind or create a public nuisance, discomfort or hazard.
B. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be designed, manufactured, installed and aimed in such
manner as to shield glare from reflecting onto adjacent streets, properties, residences or
public areas.
C. All lighting fixtures shall conform with all applicable requirements of the BOCA Basic
Energy Conservation Code and the Lighting Power Budget Determination Procedure,
EMS-1, of the Illuminating Engineer's Society.
D. All site plans or other development plans proposing the use of exterior lighting, either
freestanding or building-mounted, shall include complete data regarding the proposed
exterior illumination, including the proposed direction and location of illumination;
intensity of illumination, as expressed either in horizontal foot-candles or lumens per
square foot; the hours of illumination; detail drawings and specifications of lighting
fixtures, including but not limited to the type of lighting, fixture details, mounting details,
mounting height and lighting isobar patterns; illumination areas as shown on the site
plan; and provisions to shield glare from reflecting onto adjacent thoroughfares and
properties; and, in addition, any additional specific and special detailed data deemed
appropriate for the particular lighting application as required by the Township Engineer,
Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer, Planning Board, Environmental
Commission, Electrical Subcode Official, Police Department, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or other agency.
Article XII
74
E. The location of the parking lot light structure shall be in accordance with the
requirements of § 15-11.8.
Article XIII
1
ARTICLE XIII
Supplementary Standards Pinelands Area
§15-13.1. Supplementary design and performance standards, Little Egg Harbor
Township Pinelands Area.
A. General provisions. All development in the Pinelands Area of Little Egg Harbor
Township shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(1) Applicability. The provision of this section shall apply only to the Pinelands Area
of Little Egg Harbor Township and shall be considered supplemental to the
requirements of the balance of this chapter. No land within the Pinelands Area of
Little Egg Harbor Township, as defined, herein, shall be developed unless all
provisions of this chapter shall have been complied with. The requirements of
this section shall not apply in those portions of the Township outside of the
Pinelands Area.
(2) Interpretation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, when a
requirement or definition of this section conflicts with any other provisions of this
chapter, the provision of this section shall supersede the provisions of the
remainder of this chapter and shall control.
(3) Expansion of existing uses and nonconforming uses.
(a) Notwithstanding the use restrictions contained in Subsections 15-4.25.
through 15-4.28., any use existing on January 14, 1981 that is currently
nonconforming or any use which was constructed based upon an approval
granted pursuant to the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan that
is currently nonconforming, other than intensive recreation facilities and
those uses which are expressly limited in Subsection 15-13.4., may be
expanded or altered provided that:
[1] The use was not abandoned or terminated subsequent to January
14, 1981;
[2] The expansion or alteration of the use is in accordance with all of
the minimum standards of Subsection 15-13.4.; and
[3] The area of expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area, the
area of the use or capacity of the use, whichever is applicable, on
January 14, 1981 or which was approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4, Part V. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(4) Special procedures regarding development in the Pinelands Area – exempt
development.
(a) Except as provided in Paragraph (4)(b) below, the following shall not be
subject to the procedures set forth in this section:
[1] The improvement, expansion, or reconstruction within five years
of destruction or demolition, of any single-family dwelling unit or
appurtenance thereto;
[2] The improvement, expansion, construction, or reconstruction of
any structure accessory to a single-family dwelling;
Article XIII
2
[3] The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any
structure used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural
purposes;
[4] The construction, repair or removal of any sign, except for the
construction or replacement of any off-site commercial advertising
sign;
[5] The repair of existing utility distribution lines; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[6] The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of land;
[7] The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any
nonresidential use or any multi-family residential structure
provided that said addition or structure will be located on or below
an existing impermeable surface, that the existing use is served by
public sewers, and that said addition or structure will cover an area
of no more than 1,000 square feet;
[8] The demolition of any structure that is less than 50 years old;
[9] The installation of utility distribution lines, except for sewage
lines, to serve areas which are effectively developed or
development which has received all necessary approvals and
permits; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[10] The repair or replacement of any existing on-site waste water
disposal system; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[11] The repaving of existing paved roads, provided no increase in the
paved width of said roads will occur; [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
[12] The clearing of land solely for agricultural purposes; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[13] Fences, provided no more than 1,500 square feet of land is to be
cleared; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[14] Above ground telephone equipment cabinets; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[15] Tree pruning; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[16] The following forestry activities:
[a] Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are 5 acres or less in size;
[b] Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one (1) cord of
wood per 5 acres of land is harvested in any one (1) year
and that no more than five (5) cords of wood are harvested
from the entire parcel in any one (1) year;
[c] Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not
exceed 5 acres in any one (1) year, no soil disturbance
occurs other than that caused by the planting activity and
no trees other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25
are to be planted; and
[d] Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees
and brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance
Article XIII
3
occurs and that the total land area on the parcel in which
the activity occurs does not exceed 5 acres in any one year;
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[17] Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire breaks;
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08] or
[18] Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a landscaping
plan is required pursuant to Subsections 15-11.8. or 15-
13.4.A.(3)(c). [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(b) The exceptions contained in Paragraph (4)(a) above shall not apply to any
historic resources designated by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
(c) Nothing herein shall preclude any local or State agency from reviewing, in
accordance with the provisions of any applicable ordinance or regulation,
any proposed development which does not require any application to the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to this section.
(5) Substandard lots. Notwithstanding the density limitations or other provisions of
this chapter, a single-family dwelling may be developed on any parcel of land of
one (1) acre or more in the Forest Area Zone, Forest Area Cluster Zone or
Pinelands Village Zone, provided that: [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-
08]
(a) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner or
a member of the immediate family of the property owner; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(b) The parcel has been in continuous ownership since February 7, 1979 of
the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a member
of that person’s immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in which
members of that person’s immediate family collectively own more than a
majority interest in such partnership or corporation; [Amended 5/10/2001
by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(c) The parcel was not in common ownership with any contiguous land on or
after February 8, 1979 that contains substantial improvements; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08] and,
(d) The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in common ownership on
or after February 8, 1979. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(6) Height limitations.
(a) No structure, including radio and television transmission and other
communication facilities which are not accessory to an otherwise
permitted use, shall exceed a height of 35 feet except as provided in
Paragraphs 2. and 3. below. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(b) The height limitation in Paragraph 1. above shall not apply to any of the
following structures, provided that such structures are compatible with
uses in the immediate vicinity and conform with the objectives of
Subsection 15-13.4.A.(9): antennas which do not exceed a height of 200
feet and which are accessory to an otherwise permitted use, silos, barns
and other agricultural structures, church spires, cupolas, domes,
monuments, water towers, fire observation towers, electric transmission
Article XIII
4
lines and supporting structures, windmills, smokestacks, derricks,
conveyors, flag poles and masts, aerials, solar energy facilities, chimneys
and similar structures to be placed above the roof level and not intended
for human occupancy. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(c) The height limitation in Paragraph 1. above shall not apply to the antenna
and any supporting structure of a local communication facility of greater
than 35 feet, provided that the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c)
are met. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(7) No more than one use per lot. No more than one principal use shall be located on
one lot, except for forestry, agriculture, horticulture, fish and wildlife
management and recreational development on agricultural lands.
§ 15-13.2. Additional procedure requirements for development approval.
A. Development approval required. No person shall carry out any development as defined
in this chapter, within the Pinelands Area, without first obtaining all development
approvals in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
B. Application requirements. In addition to any information required by Article XV and the
fees mandated pursuant to Article XVI, applications for development in the Pinelands
Area, shall contain the information required by Subsection 15-13.3. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
C. Application submission and modifications. Written notification will be given by the
Township to the Pinelands Commission within seven days after a determination is made
by the Township that an application for development is complete or if a determination is
made by the approval agency that the application has been modified. Said notice shall
contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The docket number of the certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands Commission
and the date on which it was issued;
(3) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was filed and any
docket number or other identifying number assigned to the application by the
approval agency;
(4) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency on the
application for development which have not been previously submitted to the
commission;
(5) The content of any change made to the application since it was filed with the
commission, including a copy of any revised plan or reports; and,
(6) The nature of the municipal approval being sought.
D. Notice of hearings or meetings. Where a hearing on an application for development
approval within the Pinelands Area is required, the applicant, in addition to the
requirements set forth in Subsection 15-8.8. of this chapter, shall provide notice to the
Pinelands Commission by regular mail or delivery of the same to the principal office of
Article XIII
5
the commission at least five days prior to such hearing. Such notice shall contain at least
the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The docket number of the certificate of filing, if any, issued by the Pinelands
Commission and the date on which it was issued;
(3) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing, or other formal proceeding;
(4) The name of the approving authority or representative thereof which will be
conducting the meeting, hearing, or other formal proceeding;
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approving authority on the
application for development which have not been previously submitted to the
commission;
(6) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding is to be
held; and,
(7) Proof of provision of said notice shall be submitted to the local approving
authority.
E. Notice of approvals. The Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all approvals and
denials of development in the Pinelands Area, whether the approval occurs by action or
inaction of any approving authority. The applicant shall within five days of the approval
give notice by certified mail to the Pinelands Commission. Such notice shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the property which the
applicant proposes to develop;
(3) The docket number of the certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission, if any, and the date on which it was issued;
(4) The date on which the approving authority’s approval was issued;
(5) Any written reports or comments received concerning the application for
development approval not previously submitted;
(6) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the commission;
(7) A copy of the resolution, permit, or other documentation of the approval or
denial; and,
(8) The names and addresses of all persons who actively participated in the
proceedings.
F. Appeal of decision. Where an appeal of a decision is made to the Board of Adjustment or
governing body, the applicant shall notify the Pinelands Commission by certified mail of
the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or governing body within five days
following the decision of such an appeal. Such notification shall contain the information
set forth in Paragraph E. above.
G. Review by commission.
(1) Upon receipt of the notice of approval by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
Paragraph E. above, the Executive Director shall determine whether the
application for development approval shall be reviewed by the commission in
accordance with the provisions in N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through N.J.A.C.7:50-4.43.
Article XIII
6
The approval of the Township shall not be effective and no development shall be
carried out prior to the Executive Director determining whether the development
approval will be reviewed by the commission. If the Executive Director notifies
the applicant of the decision to have the commission review the application for
development, no development shall be carried out until such review has been
completed.
(2) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.1(b) and until January 14, 1991, approvals issued by
the Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands Commission under the
Interim Rules and Regulations shall serve as the basis for Pinelands Commission
review of local approval under this section.
(3) Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all denials, no such
denial actions are subject to further review and action by the Pinelands
Commission.
H. Condition on prior approvals by Township approving authority. Where a prior approval
has been granted by the Township, no subsequent approval of an application for
development approval shall be obtained until one of the following is satisfied:
(1) Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission that review of the
Township’s approval is not required; or,
(2) Review of the Township’s approval has been completed pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.37 through 4.42 and a final order regarding the approval is received by the
Township from the Pinelands Commission.
I. Effect of Pinelands Commission’s decision on Township’s approval. If the commission
disapproves an application for development previously approved by an approving
authority, such approval shall be revoked by the approving authority and within 30 days
of the Commission’s action and the agency shall thereafter deny approval of the
application. If the Commission approves the decision of an approving subject to
conditions, the approving authority which had previously approved the application shall,
within 30 days, modify its approval to include all conditions imposed by the
Commission; and if final approval of the application is required, shall grant final approval
only of the application for approval demonstrates that the conditions specified by the
Commission have been met by the applicant.
J. Waivers. If any application for development approval conflicts with a provision of this
section, adopted pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act, the Planning Board may
disapprove the application, approve the application subject to the applicant obtaining a
waiver from the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.55, or suspend
further review of the application, with the consent of the applicant, until a waiver is
obtained. In no event is the Planning Board or any other approving authority authorized
to waive the applicability of any provision of this section adopted pursuant to the
Pinelands Protection Act.
K. Participation of Pinelands Commission in public hearings. The Pinelands Commission
may participate in a hearing held in Little Egg Harbor Township involving the
development of land in the Pinelands Area pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36 et. seq.
Article XIII
7
L. Public development. All developments proposed by Little Egg Harbor Township or any
agency thereof will comply with all the requirements for public development set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51 et. seq.
M. Conflicting provisions. The standards and regulations in this section applicable to the
Pinelands Area are intended to be the minimum provisions necessary to achieve the
purposes and objectives of this section and the Pinelands Protection Act. In the event of
a conflict between any provisions, the stricter provision shall apply.
N. Amendments. In amending this section, the Township’s Master Plan, or any other
section regulating the use of land, the Township shall comply with all the requirements of
N.J.A.C.7:50-3.45.
§ 15-13.3. Supplemental information requirements.
A. Minor development applications. Any application for approval of minor development
shall include at least the following information:
(1) The applicant’s name and address and the interest in the subject property;
(2) The owner’s name and address, if different from the applicant’s, and the owner’s
signed consent to the filing of the application;
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and street address, if
any, of the subject property;
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property;
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed development;
(6) A USGS Quadrangle Map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the municipal Tax Map
Sheet on which the boundaries of the subject property and the Pinelands
Management Area Designation and the Zoning Designation are shown;
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject property, the
location of all proposed development, and existing or proposed facilities to
provide water for the use and consumption of occupants of all buildings and
sanitary facilities which will serve the proposed development. The following
information shall be included with respect to existing or proposed sanitary
facilities:
(a) On-site treatment facilities. Location, size, type and capacity of any
proposed on-site waste water treatment facilities; and,
(b) Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewerage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
shall be submitted at suitable location with a tract map showing location,
logs, elevations of all test holes, indicating where ground water was
encountered, estimating the seasonal highwater table and demonstrating
that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality standards contained
in Subsection 15-13.4.
(8) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet beyond each
boundary of the subject property, showing ownership boundary lines, the
Article XIII
8
boundary of the proposed development, owners of holdings adjoining and
adjacent to the subject property, existing facilities, buildings and structures on the
site, all proposed development, wetlands, streams (intermittent streams), rivers,
lakes and other water bodies and existing roads;
(9) A soils map including a county soils survey which conforms to the guidelines of
the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, showing
the location of all proposed development;
(10) A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant vegetation types in
the area, and showing proposed landscaping of the subject property, including the
location of the tree line before and after development and all areas to be disturbed
as a result of the proposed development;
(11) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of prior approval from the
Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
the Interim Rules and Regulations; and,
(12) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the Township,
evidence of Pinelands Commission review pursuant to Subsection 15-13.2.G.
B. Major development applications. Any application for approval of major development,
except for forestry or resource extraction operations, shall include at least the following
information:
(1) The applicant’s name and address and the interest in the subject property;
(2) The owner’s name and address, if different from the applicant’s, and the owner’s
signed consent to the filing of the application;
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and street address, if
any, of the subject property;
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property;
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed development; the
number of total units; and the floor area of all units; [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
(6) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed development; the
number of total units; and the floor area of all units to be included in the proposed
development; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject property, the
location of all proposed development, and existing or proposed facilities to
provide water for the use and consumption of occupants of all buildings and
sanitary facilities which will serve the proposed development. The following
information shall be included with respect to existing or proposed waste water
treatment facilities:
(a) Sanitary sewer distribution: Location, size and direction of flow of all
existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines and pumping stations serving
the proposed development and all existing and proposed connections to
existing facilities;
(b) On-site treatment facilities. Location, size, type and capacity of any
proposed on-site water treatment facilities including, except with respect
Article XIII
9
to discharges into an individual residential septic system, quantities,
composition, proposed pretreatment and ultimate means of disposal;
(c) Soil borings and percolation tests: If on-site sewerage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in accordance with
the requirements of N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto shall be submitted with a tract map showing the location,
logs and elevations of all test holes, indicating where ground water was
encountered, and estimating the seasonal high water table; and,
(d) The proposed hours and days of operation and number of employees of
any nonresidential facility.
(8) A project site base map, at a scale of no less than one inch to 200 feet and
including the area extending at least 300 feet beyond each boundary of the subject
property, showing ownership boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed
development, owners of holdings, if any, adjoining and adjacent to the subject
property existing facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams), rivers, lakes, and
other water bodies, and existing roads;
(9) A soils map including a county soils survey in conformance with the guidelines of
the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, at the
same size and scale as the project site base map, delineating all soil series at an
appropriate level of detail and, in sewered projects, sufficient soil borings to
confirm the accuracy of the soils map;
(10) A slope map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map, indicating
contour elevations at two-foot intervals;
(11) A resource capability map, at the same size and scale at the project site base map,
indicating the cumulative limitations to development due to the standards and the
guidelines contained in this plan. This map should be prepared prior to any
engineering, site layout or design work;
(12) A proposed development map, at the same size and scale as the project site base
map, showing areas of proposed development; the location of surveyor’s tape or
other markers placed on the site delineating the boundaries of the property; the
number of residential lots and other type of development in each general area; all
proposed lot lines; areas proposed to be retained as open space; the applicable
land use areas boundaries; the location of proposed facilities such as dams and
impoundments, public or private water systems, storm drainage systems, public or
private sewerage systems, public utilities, soil erosion and sedimentation control
devices, industrial waste water discharges and solid waste disposal areas; sources
of air pollution; the proposed primary network; all areas to be disturbed by
construction activities; existing vegetation, identifying the predominant vegetation
types in the area; and all vegetation which is to be removed or disturbed as a
result of the proposed development, and the tree line before and after
development;
(13) A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map, showing storm
water drainage patterns and calculations and the applicant’s proposed stormwater
run-off management plan, which shall contain results of all percolation tests and
Article XIII
10
soil borings performed in each recharge area including the estimated seasonal
high water table;
(14) Legal instruments, evidencing the applicant’s right, title or interest in any
Pinelands Development Credits and any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
easements relating to the subject parcel;
(15) Landscaping plans shall incorporate the elements set forth in Section 15-
13.4.A.(3).; [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(16) All public service, infrastructure agreements, or other documentation, evidencing
the availability of electric, gas, water, sewer and other necessary public service
infrastructure;
(17) The cultural resources survey described in Subsection 15-13.4.A.(15);
(18) A list of all permits required for the proposed development from municipal,
County, State and Federal agencies;
(19) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of prior approval from the
Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
the Interim Rules and Regulations; and,
(20) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the Township,
evidence of Pinelands Commission review pursuant to Subsection 15-13.2.
§ 15-13.4. Supplemental Pinelands Area design and development standards and
management programs.
A. No development in the Pinelands Area shall be carried out by any person unless it is in
conformance with each of the standards set forth in this subsection. These standards shall
be deemed supplemental to the normal standards and requirements of this section
applicable to all development. In the case of conflict with other standards of this chapter,
the design and development standards and management programs contained in this
section shall supersede all other requirements and standards.
(1) Wetlands. No development in the Pinelands Area shall be permitted in a wetland
or in wetlands transition areas except for the following uses:
(a) Horticulture of native Pinelands species;
(b) Berry agriculture in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
(c) Beekeeping;
(d) Forestry in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
(e) Fish and wildlife management, provided there is no significant adverse
impact on the wetland as set forth in Paragraph (k) below;
(f) Hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and swimming, provided that
such uses do not involve any structure other than those authorized in
Paragraphs (g) and (h) below. Other similar low intensity recreational
uses shall be permitted provided that any associated development does not
have a significant adverse impact, as set forth in Paragraph (k) below, on
the wetland in which the use is carried out;
(g) Docks, piers, moorings, and boat launches for the use of a landowner,
provided that the use will not result in a significant adverse impact, as set
Article XIII
11
forth in Paragraph (k) below, and conforms to all State and Federal
regulations;
(h) Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings, and boat launches provided
that:
[1] There is a demonstrated need for the facility that cannot be met by
existing facilities;
[2] The development conforms with all State and Federal regulations;
and,
[3] The development will not result in a significant adverse impact, as
set forth in Paragraph (k) below.
(i) Bridges, roads, trails, and utility transmission and distribution facilities
and other similar linear facilities provided that:
[1] There is no feasible alternate route for the facility that does not
involve the development in a wetland, or, if none, that another
feasible route which results in less significant adverse impacts on
wetlands does not exist;
[2] The need for the proposed linear improvement cannot be met by
existing facilities or modification thereof;
[3] The use represents a need which overrides the importance of
protecting the wetland;
[4] Development of the facility will include all practical measures to
mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland; and,
[5] The resources of the Pinelands will not be substantially impaired as
a result of the facility and its development as determined
exclusively based on the existence of special and unusual
circumstances.
(j) No development, except for those uses which are specifically authorized
in Paragraph A. above, shall be carried out within 300 feet of any wetland
unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development will
not result in a significant adverse impact on the wetlands as defined in
Paragraph (k) below; and,
(k) A significant adverse impact shall be deemed to exist where it is
determined that one or more of the following modifications of a wetland
will have an irreversible effect on the ecological integrity of the wetland
and its biotic components including but not limited to, threatened or
endangered species of plants or animals:
[1] An increase in surface water runoff discharging into a wetland;
[2] A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns in the wetland;
[3] An alteration of the water table in the wetland;
[4] An increase in erosion resulting in increased sedimentation in the
wetland;
[5] A change in the natural chemistry of the ground or surface water in
the wetland;
[6] A loss of wetland habitat;
[7] A reduction in wetlands species composition;
[8] A change in wetlands species composition; or,
Article XIII
12
[9] A significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous and
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
(2) Determination under Paragraph (k) above shall consider the cumulative
modifications of the wetlands due to the development being proposed and any
other existing or potential development which may affect the wetland.
(3) Vegetation and landscaping.
(a) All clearing and soil disturbance activities shall be limited to that which is
necessary to accommodate an activity, use or structure which is permitted
by this chapter. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(b) Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities associates with
an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture, forestry and resource
extraction, shall:
[1] Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey’s Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated; and,
[2] Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or disturbed
during development activities. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-08]
(c) All applications for major development shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan which incorporates the elements set forth in Paragraph
(d) below. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(d) In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and reduce pollution
from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil supplements, all
landscaping or revegetation plans prepared pursuant to Paragraph (c)
above or required pursuant to Section 15-11.8. shall incorporate the
following elements:
[1] The limits of clearing shall be identified;
[2] Existing vegetation, including New Jersey’s Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated, shall be incorporated
into the landscape design where practical;
[3] Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those specifically
intended for active human use such as play fields, golf courses and
lawns associated with a residence or other principal nonresidential
use. Existing wooded areas shall not be cleared and converted to
lawns except when directly associated with and adjacent to a
proposed structure; and,
[4] Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall be used
for revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and trees
may be used in the following circumstances:
[a] When the parcel to be developed or its environs contain a
predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized by
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25;
[b] For limited ornamental purposes around buildings and
other structures; or,
Article XIII
13
[c] When limited use of other shrubs or tree species is required
for proper screening or buffering. [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
(e) Development prohibited in the vicinity of threatened or endangered plants.
No development shall be carried out by any person in the Pinelands Area
unless it is designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on the survival
of any local populations of threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands designated in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27. [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
(4) Fish and wildlife.
(a) No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are critical
to the survival of any local populations of those threatened or endangered
by animal species designated by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et. seq.
(b) All development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area in a manner
which avoids disturbance to distinct fish and wildlife habitats that are
essential to the continued nesting, resting, breeding and feeding of
significant populations of fish and wildlife in the Pinelands.
(5) Forestry.
(a) Permit required. No forestry in the Pinelands Area of the Township shall
be carried out by any person unless a permit for such activity has been
issued by the Township Zoning Officer. Notwithstanding this
requirement, no such permits shall be required for the following forestry
activities:
[1] Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially improved
parcels of land that are 5 acres or less in size;
[2] Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one (1) cord of wood
per 5 acres of land is harvested in any one (1) year and that no
more than five (5) cords of wood are harvested from the entire
parcel in any one (1) year;
[3] Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not exceed
5 acres in any one (1) year, no soil disturbance occurs other than
that caused by the planting activity and no trees other than those
authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be planted;
[4] Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees and
brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs and that
the total land area on the parcel in which the activity occurs does
not exceed 5 acres in any one (1) year; and,
[5] Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire breaks.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(b) Forestry application requirements. The information in Paragraphs [1], [2]
or [3] below shall be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer prior to
the issuance of any forestry permit:
[1] For forestry activities on a parcel of land enrolled in the New
Jersey Forest Stewardship Program, a copy of the approved New
Article XIII
14
Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan. This document shall serve as
evidence of the completion of an application with the Pinelands
Commission as well as evidence that the activities are consistent
with the standards of the Comprehensive Management Plan. No
certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission shall be
required.
[2] For forestry activities on a parcel of land approved for woodland
assessment that is not enrolled in the New Jersey Forest
Stewardship Program:
[a] A copy of the Woodland Management Plan, the scaled map
of the parcel and a completed woodland data form,
prepared pursuant to the Farmland Assessment
Requirements of N.J.A.C. 18:15-2.7 through 2.15;
[b] If not already contained in the Woodland Management Plan
required in Paragraph [2][a] above, the following shall be
submitted:
[i] The applicant’s name, address and interest in the
subject parcel;
[ii] The owner’s name and address, if different from the
applicant’s, and the owner’s signed consent to the
filing of the application;
[iii] The block and lot designation and street address, if
any, of the subject parcel;
[iv] A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed forestry activities; and,
[v] The relevant portion of a USGS Quadrangle Map,
or copy thereof, and a copy of the relevant portion
of the municipal tax map sheet on which the
boundaries of the subject parcel and the municipal
zoning designation are shown.
[c] A scaled map or statement indicating how the standards set
forth in Paragraphs (c)[2], [3], [4], [6], [9] and [10] below
will be met;
[d] A letter from the Office of Natural Lands Management
indicating whether any threatened or endangered plants or
animals have been reported on or in the immediate vicinity
of the parcel and a detailed description of the measures
proposed by the applicant to meet the standards for the
protection of such plants and animals set forth in Sections
15-13.4.A.(3)(e) and 15-13.4.A.(4)(a);
[e] Unless the Pinelands Commission determines that it is
unnecessary, a cultural resource survey documenting
cultural resources on those portions of the parcel where
ground disturbance due to site preparation or road
construction will occur and a detailed description of the
Article XIII
15
measures proposed by the applicant to treat those cultural
resources in accordance with Section 15-13.4.A.(15);
[f] A statement identifying the type, location and frequency of
any proposed herbicide treatments and how such treatments
will comply with the standards set forth in Paragraph (c)[8]
below;
[g] A statement identifying the specific steps to be taken to
ensure that trees or areas to be harvested are properly
identified so as to ensure that only those trees intended for
harvesting are harvested;
[h] A letter from the New Jersey State Forester indicating that
the proposed forestry activities adhere to the silvicultural
practices contained in the Society of American Foresters
Forestry Handbook, Second Edition, pages 413 through
455;
[i] A letter from the New Jersey State Forester commenting on
the extent to which the proposed forestry activities are
consistent with the guidelines contained in the New Jersey
Forestry and Wetlands Best Management Practices Manual
developed by the Department of Environmental Protection.
If the letter indicates that the proposed activities are not
consistent with the Best Management Practices Manual, the
applicant must submit a written statement addressing the
inconsistencies in terms of their potential impact on the
standards set forth in Paragraphs (c)[9] and [10] below;
[j] A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission
issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and,
[k] When prior approval for the forestry activities has been
granted by the Zoning Officer or other Township approval
agency, a letter from the Pinelands Commission indicating
that the prior approval has been reviewed pursuant to
Section 15-13.2.
[3] For forestry activities on a parcel of land that has not been
approved for woodland assessment and is not enrolled in the New
Jersey Forest Stewardship Program:
[a] The information required in Paragraph (b)[2][b] through [k]
above; and,
[b] A forestry activity plan which includes, as appropriate:
[i] A cover page for the forestry activity plan
containing:
[A] The name, mailing address and telephone
number of the owner of the subject parcel;
[B] The municipality and county in which the
subject parcel is located;
[C] The block and lot designation and street
address, if any, of the subject parcel;
Article XIII
16
[D] The name and address of the forester who
prepared the plan, if not prepared by the
owner of the subject parcel; and,
[E] The date the plan was prepared and the
period of time the plan is intended to cover.
[ii] A clear and concise statement of the owner’s
objectives for undertaking the proposed forestry
activities, silvicultural prescriptions and
management practices;
[iii] A description of each forest stand in which a
proposed activity, prescription or practice will
occur. These stand descriptions shall be keyed to an
activity map and shall include, as appropriate, the
following information:
[A] The number of acres;
[B] The species composition, including
overstory and understory;
[C] The general condition and quality;
[D] The structure, including age classes,
diameter breast height (DBH) classes and
crown classes;
[E] The overall site quality;
[F] The condition and species composition of
advanced regeneration when applicable;
and,
[G] The stocking levels, growth rates and
volume.
[iv] A description of the forestry activities, silvicultural
prescriptions, management activities and practices
proposed during the permit period. These may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, a
description of:
[A] Stand improvement practices;
[B] Site preparation practices;
[C] Harvesting practices;
[D] Regeneration and reforestation practices;
[E] Improvements, including road construction,
stream crossings, landings, loading areas
and skid trails; and,
[F] Herbicide treatments.
[v] A description, if appropriate, of the forest products
to be harvested, including the following:
[A] Volume: cords, board feet;
[B] Diameter breast height (DBH) classes and
average diameter;
[C] Age;
Article XIII
17
[D] Heights; and,
[E] Number of trees per acre.
[vi] A property map of the entire parcel which includes
the following:
[A] The owner’s name, address and the date the
map was prepared;
[B] An arrow designating the north direction;
[C] A scale which is not smaller than one inch
equals 2,000 feet or larger than one inch
equals 400 feet;
[D] The location of all property lines;
[E] A delineation of the physical features such
as roads, streams and structures;
[F] The identification of soil types (a separate
map may be used for this purpose);
[G] A map inset showing the location of the
parcel in relation to the local area;
[H] Clear location of the area and acreage in
which each proposed activity, prescription
or practice will occur. If shown on other
than the property map, the map or maps
shall note the scale, which shall not be
smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet or
larger than one inch equals 400 feet, and
shall be approximately keyed to the property
map; and,
[I] A legend defining the symbols appearing on
the map. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-08]
(c) Forestry standards. Forestry operations shall be approved if the standards
set forth below will be met:
[1] All silvicultural practices shall be conducted in accordance with
the standards set forth in the Society of American Foresters
Forestry Handbook, Second Edition, pages 413 through 455.
Submission of an approved New Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan or
the letter required pursuant to Paragraph (b)[2][h] above shall
serve as evidence that this standard is met;
[2] Any newly developed access to lands proposed for harvesting shall
avoid wetland areas except as absolutely necessary to harvest
wetlands species or to otherwise gain access to a harvesting site;
[3] All silvicultural and reforestation practices shall serve to maintain
native forests, except in those areas where non-native species are
proposed to be harvested;
[4] The following actions shall be required to encourage the
reforestation of Atlantic White Cedar in cedar and hardwood
swamps:
Article XIII
18
[a] Clearcutting cedar and managing slash;
[b] Controlling competition by other plant species;
[c] Utilizing fencing and other retardants, where necessary, to
protect cedar from overbrowsing;
[d] Utilizing existing streams as cutting boundaries, where
practical;
[e] Harvesting during dry periods or when the ground is
frozen; and,
[f] Utilizing the least intrusive harvesting techniques,
including the use of winches and corduroy roads, where
practical.
[5] All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards for the protection of
threatened and endangered plants and animals set forth in Sections
15-13.4.A.(3)(e) and 15-13.4.A.(4)(a);
[6] All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards for the land application of
waste set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79;
[7] All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards for the protection of
historic, archaeological and cultural resources set forth in Section
15-13.4.A.(15);
[8] Herbicide treatments shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] The proposed treatment is identified in the forestry
application submitted to the Zoning Officer pursuant to
Paragraph (b)[2][f] above;
[b] Control of competitive plant species is clearly necessary;
[c] Control of competitive plant species by other, non-chemical
means is not feasible; and,
[d] All chemicals shall be expressly labeled for forestry use
and shall be used in a manner that is consistent with
relevant state and federal requirements;
[9] A vegetated streamside management zone shall be maintained or
established adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes and marshes, except
that no streamside management zone shall be required when
Atlantic White Cedar is proposed to be harvested or reestablished.
The streamside management zone shall be at least twenty-five (25)
feet in width. Where soils are severely erodible, slopes exceed ten
(10) percent or streamside vegetation is not vigorous, the
streamside management zone shall be increased up to a maximum
of seventy (70) feet to buffer the water body from adjacent forestry
activities. Submission of an approved New Jersey Forest
Stewardship Plan or a letter from the State Forester indicating that
the proposed forestry activities are consistent with the New Jersey
Forestry and Wetlands Best Management Practices Manual shall
serve as evidence that this standard is met;
Article XIII
19
[10] Stream crossings, access roads, timber harvesting, skid trails, log
decks, portable sawmill sites, site preparation, and reforestation
shall be designed and carried out so as to: minimize changes to
surface and ground water hydrology; minimize changes to
temperature and other existing surface water quality conditions;
prevent unnecessary soil erosion, siltation and sedimentation; and
minimize unnecessary disturbances to aquatic and forest habitats.
Submission of an approved New Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan or
a letter from the State Forestry and Wetlands Best Management
Practices Manual shall serve as evidence that this standard is met;
and,
[11] A copy of the forestry permit issued by the Township Zoning
Officer shall be conspicuously posted on the parcel, which is the
site of the forestry activity. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-08]
(d) Forestry permit procedures:
[1] Applications for forestry permits shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00).
[2] Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of an application, the Zoning
Officer shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant in writing of any additional
information which is necessary to complete the application.
Should the Zoning Officer fail to make such a determination within
fourteen (14) days, the application shall be considered to be
complete as of the fifteenth (15) day following its submission.
[3] Within forty-five (45) days of determining an application to be
complete pursuant to Paragraph (d)[2] above, or within such
further time as may be consented to be the applicant, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a forestry permit if the activities proposed in the
application comply with the standards in Paragraph (c) above or
disapprove any application which does not meet the requirements
of Paragraph (c) above. Any such notice of disapproval shall
specifically set forth the deficiencies of the application.
[4] Upon receipt of a notice of disapproval pursuant to Paragraph
(d)[3] above, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days in which to
correct the deficiencies and submit any necessary revisions to the
application to the Zoning Officer for review. The Zoning Officer
shall review the revised application to verify conformity with the
standards in Paragraph (c) above and shall, within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the revised application, issue a forestry permit or
disapprove the application pursuant to Paragraph (d)[3] above.
[5] Failure of the Zoning Officer to act within the time period
prescribed in Paragraphs (d)[3] and [4] above shall constitute
approval of the forestry application as submitted. At the request of
the applicant, a certificate as to the failure of the Zoning Officer to
Article XIII
20
act shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of municipal approval required herein.
[6] In reviewing and issuing permits for forestry applications, the
Zoning Officer shall also comply with the Pinelands Area notice
and review procedures set forth in Section 15-13.2.C-I.
[7] Forestry permits shall be valid for a period of ten (10) years.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person
from securing additional permits, provided that the requirements of
this chapter and the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan
are met. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(e) Administrative fees. Upon the issuance of a forestry permit pursuant to
Paragraph (d)[3] above, the applicant shall be required to pay of a sum of
two-hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall serve as
reimbursement for any administrative costs incurred by the municipality
during the ten year permit period. The applicant shall not be subject to
any additional fees or escrow requirements for the duration of the forestry
permit. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(f) Notification of harvesting. No harvesting shall be commenced until the
applicant has provided that Zoning Officer with seventy-two (72) hours
written notice of the intention to begin harvesting operations. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(6) Management practices for agriculture. All agricultural activities and fish and
wildlife management activities, including the preparation of land and the planting,
nurturing and harvesting of crops, shall be carried out in accordance with
recommended management practices established for the particular agricultural
activity by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the Soil Conservation
Service and the New Jersey Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers
University.
(7) Resource extraction.
(a) Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, the extraction or mining of
mineral resources other than sand, gravel, clay and ilmenite is prohibited
in the Pinelands Area.
(b) Resource extraction in the Preservation Area Zone and Forest Area Zone
is limited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI. [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
(c) All resource extraction operations in the Pinelands Area shall be
conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-
6.68. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(d) Resource extraction permits shall be issued for a maximum period of two
years. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit any person
from securing additional permits, provided that the provisions of this
section are met.
(e) All parcels of land which are used for resource extraction operations shall
be restored in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.69. [Amended 5/10/2001
by Ord. No. 2001-08]
Article XIII
21
(8) Water quality. All development within the Pinelands Area shall conform to the
following water quality standards:
(a) All development permitted under this section shall be designed and carried
out so that the quality of surface and ground water will be protected and
maintained. Agricultural use shall not be considered development for
purposes of this subsection.
Except as specifically authorized in this subsection, no development which
degrades surface or ground water quality or which established new point
sources of pollution shall be permitted. The following point and nonprofit
sources may be developed and operated in the Pinelands:
[1] Development of new or the expansion of existing commercial,
industrial, and waste water treatment facilities, or the development
of new or the expansion of existing non-point sources, except those
specifically regulated in Paragraphs [2] through [6] below,
provided that: [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[a] There will be no direct discharge into any surface water
body;
[b] All discharges from the facility or use are of a quality and
quantity such that ground water exiting from the parcel of
land or entering a surface body of water will not exceed
two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[c] All public waste water treatment facilities are designed to
accept and treat septage; and,
[d] All storage facilities, including ponds or lagoons, are lined
to prevent leakage into ground water.
[2] Development of new waste water treatment or collection facilities
which are designed to improve the level of nitrate/nitrogen
attenuation of more than one existing on-site waste water treatment
system where a public health problem has been identified may be
exempted from the standards of Paragraph [1] above, provided
that:
[a] There will be no direct discharge into any surface water
body;
[b] The facility is designed only to accommodate wastewater
from existing residential, commercial, and industrial
development;
[c] Adherence to Paragraph [1] above cannot be achieved due
to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply with
the standard will result in excessive user fees; and,
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[d] The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation is the
maximum possible within the cost limitations imposed by
such user fee guidelines but in no case shall ground water
exiting from the parcel or entering a surface body of water
Article XIII
22
exceed five parts per million. [Amended 5/10/2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-08]
[3] Improvements to existing commercial, industrial, and waste water
that:
[a] There is no practical alternative available that would adhere
to the standards of Paragraph [1][a] above; [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[b] There is no increase in the existing approved capacity of
the facility;
[c] The design of the system and its discharge point, and the
size of the parcel on which the system is located, will
ensure that ground water exiting from the parcel or entering
a surface body of water will not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen;
[d] The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
[e] Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth
of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an
impermeable clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall be
cased to at least 50 feet;
[f] The system will be maintained and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter;
[g] The technology to be used has been approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; and,
[h] Any effluent from other than standard subsurface sewerage
disposal systems will be monitored in accordance with the
requirements periodically established by the Pinelands
Commission.
[4] Individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems which are
not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the waste
water, provided that:
[a] The proposed development to be served by the system is
otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter;
[b] The design of the system and its discharge point, and the
size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or
systems is located will ensure that ground water exiting
from the entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface body
of water will not exceed two parts per million
nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands
dilution model dated December 1993, as amended, subject
to the provisions of Paragraph [c] below. The entire
contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands to be
dedicated as open space as part of the proposed
development but may not include previously dedicated road
right-of-ways or any contiguous lands that have been deed
restricted pursuant to Sections 15-4.25.B. or 15-4.31.;
Article XIII
23
[c] Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning
district and Pinelands management area as the proposed
system or systems may be utilized for septic dilution
purposes, except for the development of an individual
single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of January 14,
1981, non-residential development on a lot of five acres or
less existing as of January 14, 1981, or cluster development
as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
[d] The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
[e] Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth
of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an
impermeable clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall be
cased to at least 50 feet;
[f] The system will be maintained and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of Paragraph [7] below;
[g] The technology has been approved for use by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; and,
[h] Flow values for non-residential development shall be
determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-7.4, as amended, except that number of employees
may not be utilized in calculating flow values for a specific
use, but a flow value is assigned for that use in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-
23.3(a) shall be used in calculating flow. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[5] Individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems which are
intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the waste water,
provided that:
[a] The standards set forth in Paragraphs [4][a] and [4][c]
through [h] above are met;
[b] If the proposed development is nonresidential, it is located
in the PV Zone; and
[c] The design of the system and its discharge point, and the
size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or
systems is located will ensure that ground water existing
from the entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface body
of water will not exceed two parts per million
nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands
dilution model dated December 1993, as amended, subject
to the provisions of Paragraph [4][c] above and the
assumptions and requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-
6.84(a)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may include any
contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part of
the proposed development but may not include previously
dedicated road right-of-ways or any contiguous lands that
Article XIII
24
have been deed restricted pursuant to Sections 15-4.25.B.
or 15-4.31. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[6] Surface water runoff shall comply with §15-13.5: [Amended on
12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
[a] The total runoff generated from any net increase in
impervious surfaces by a 10 year storm of a 24 hour
duration shall be retained and infiltrated on-site. Runoff
volumes shall be calculated in accordance with the United
States Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55
or the S.C.S. National Engineering Handbook, Section 4;
[b] The rates of runoff generated from the parcel by a 2 year,
10 year and 100 year storm, each of a 24 hour duration,
shall not increase as a result of the proposed development.
Runoff rates shall be calculated in accordance with the
United States Soil Conservation Service Technical Release
No. 55 or the S.C.S. National Engineering Handbook,
Section 4;
[c] Surface water runoff shall not be directed in such a way as
to increase the volume and rate of discharge into any
surface water body from that which existed prior to
development of the parcel;
[d] Excessively and somewhat excessively drained soils, as
defined by the Soil Conservation Service, should be
avoided for recharge of runoff wherever practical;
[e] A minimum separation of two feet between the elevation of
the lowest point of the bottom of the infiltration or
detention facility and the seasonal high water table is met,
or a lesser separation when it is demonstrated that the
separation, either due to soil conditions or when considered
in combination with other stormwater management
techniques, is adequate to protect ground water quality;
and,
[f] A four year maintenance guarantee is provided for the
entire stormwater management system by the applicant. In
addition, the applicant shall fund or otherwise guarantee an
inspection and maintenance program for a period of no less
than ten years. The program shall identify the entity
charged with responsibility for annual inspections and the
completion of any necessary maintenance, and the method
to finance said program. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-08]
[7] Prohibited chemicals and materials.
[a] Use of the following substances is prohibited in the
Pinelands Area to the extent that such use will result in
direct or indirect introduction of such substances to any
surface or ground water or any land:
Article XIII
25
[i] Septic tank cleaners; and,
[ii] Waste Oil.
[b] All storage facilities for de-icing chemicals shall be lined to
prevent leaking into the soil, and shall be covered with an
impermeable surface which shields the facility from
precipitation.
[c] No person shall apply any herbicide to any road or public
utility right-of-way within the Pinelands Area unless
necessary to protect and adjacent agricultural activity.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[8] Water Management. Interbasin transfer of water between
watershed shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(9) Scenic. All new development in the Pinelands Area Preservation Area Zone and
Forest Area Zone shall conform to the requirements of this subsection to ensure
that development will take advantage of and enhance the visual character of the
Pinelands.
(a) Except for those roads which provide for internal circulation within
residentially developed areas, no building shall be located within 200 feet
of the center line of a public paved road, unless environmental or other
physical considerations make it impractical to do so, provided however,
that the development shall be set back as close to 200 feet as practicable
and the site shall be landscaped so as to provide screening from the
corridor.
(b) Subparagraph (a) above shall not apply to agricultural commercial
establishments.
(c) If an applicant for development approval demonstrates that existing
development patterns of the corridor are such that buildings are set back
less than 200 feet within 1,000 feet of the site proposed for development,
then a setback shall be set for the proposed development which is
consistent with the established development pattern, provided that the site
is landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, so as to
provide screening between the building and the corridor.
(d) Motor vehicle screening and storage. No more than ten automobiles,
trucks or other vehicles, whether or not they are in operating condition,
shall be stored on any lot unless such motor vehicles are adequately
screened from adjacent residential uses and scenic corridors. All vehicles
not in operating condition shall be stored only of the gasoline tanks of such
vehicles are drained. This subparagraph shall not apply to vehicles which
are in operating condition and which are maintained for agricultural
purposes.
(e) Location of utilities.
(f) New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to location not presently
served by utilities shall be placed underground except for those lines
which are located on or adjacent to active agricultural operations.
Article XIII
26
[1] Above-ground generating facilities, switching complexes, pumping
stations, and substations shall be screened with vegetation from
adjacent uses in accordance with Subsection 15-11.8.
[2] All electric transmission lines shall be located on existing towers
or underground to the maximum extent practical.
Water shall not be exported from the Pinelands Area except as
otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 58:1A-7.1.
(10) Signs, Preservation Area Zone. The following signs shall be permitted in the
Preservation Area Zone:
(a) Official public safety and information signs displaying road names,
numbers and safety directions;
(b) On-site signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises, provided that:
[1] The area on one side of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square
feet; and,
[2] No more than one sign is located on any parcel of land held in
common ownership.
(c) On-site identification signs for schools, churches, hospitals, or similar
public service institutions, provided that:
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet; and,
[2] No more than one sign is placed on any single property;
(d) Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway, or premises and signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling
fishing or hunting, provided that the size of such signs did not exceed 12
square feet.
(e) On-site professional, home occupation, or name signs indicating the
profession and/or activity and/or name of the occupant of the dwelling,
provided that:
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet; and,
[2] No more than one sign is permitted for any individual parcel of
land.
(f) On-site business or advertising signs, provided that:
[1] No more than two signs are located on any one premise or on the
premises leased or utilized by any one business establishment; and,
[2] The total area of such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet per
side, with the maximum height to the top of the sign not to exceed
15 feet from ground level.
(g) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for election,
provided that the size of such sign does not exceed four square feet; and,
(h) Temporary on and off-site signs advertising civil, social or political
gatherings and activities, provided that the size of such signs doe not
exceed four square feet.
(11) Signs, Pinelands Area. All signs in the Pinelands Area shall comply with the
following standards:
Article XIII
27
(a) No sign, other than warning or safety signs, which is designed or intended
to attract attention by sudden, intermittent or rhythmic movement, or
physical or lighting change, shall be permitted.
(b) No sign, other than warning or safety signs, which changes physical
position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression
of such movement or rotation, shall be permitted.
(c) No outdoor off-site commercial advertising sign, other than signs
advertising agricultural commercial establishments, shall be permitted.
Off-site outdoor signs advertising agricultural commercial establishments
shall be permitted provided that:
[1] No more than two signs shall be placed in any one direction along
each road directly approaching the establishment; and,
[2] No sign along four lane State or Federal highways shall exceed 50
square feet in area; and no sign along any other road shall exceed
32 square feet in area.
(d) No existing sign which does not conform to Subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c)
hereof shall be permitted to continue beyond January 14, 1991.
(e) To the maximum extent practical, the character and composition of
construction materials for all signs shall be harmonious with the scenic
values of the Pinelands.
(12) Fire management. No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area in
vegetated areas which are classified as moderate, high or extreme hazard under
the Fire Hazard Classification set out in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.113 unless such
development complies with the following standards:
(a) All proposed developments, or units or sections thereof, of 25 dwelling
units or more will have two access ways of a width and surface
composition sufficient to accommodate and support fire fighting
equipment;
(b) All dead-end roads will terminate in a manner which provides safe and
efficient entry and exits for fire equipment.
(c) The right-of-ways of all roads will be maintained so that they provide and
effective fire break;
(d) A fire hazard fuel break is provided around structures proposed for human
use by the selective removal or thinning of trees, bushes, shrubs and
ground cover as follows:
[1] In moderate fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 30 feet measured
outward from the structure in which:
[a] Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are
to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual
basis; and,
[b] All dead plant material is removed.
[2] In high fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 75 feet measured outward
from the structure in which:
[a] Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are
to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual
basis; and,
Article XIII
28
[b] All dead plant material is removed.
[3] In extreme high hazard areas a fuel break of 100 feet measured
outward from the structure in which:
[a] Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are
to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual
basis;
[b] No pine tree (Pinus spp.) is closer than 25 feet to another
pine tree; and,
[c] All dead plant material is removed.
(e) All structure will meet the following specifications:
[1] Roofs and exteriors will be constructed of fire resistant materials
such as asphalt rag felt roofing, tile, slate, asbestos cement
shingles, sheet iron, aluminum or brick. Fire retardant-treated
wood shingles or shake type roofs are prohibited in high or
extreme fire hazard areas;
[2] All projections such as balconies, decks and roof gables shall be
constructed of fire resistant materials or materials treated with fire
retardant chemicals;
[3] Chimneys and stovepipes which are designed to burn solid or
liquid fuels shall be equipped with screens over the outlets;
[4] Flat roofs are prohibited in areas where vegetation is higher than
the roof; and,
[5] Any openings in the roof, attic, and the floor shall be screened.
(f) All residential development of 100 dwelling units of more in high or
extreme high hazard areas will have a 200 foot perimeter fuel break
between all structures and the forest in which:
[1] Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are
selectively removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on an
annual basis;
[2] All dead plant material is removed;
[3] Roads, right-of-ways, wetlands and waste disposal sites shall be
used as fire breaks to the maximum extent practical; and,
[4] There is a specific program for maintenance.
(13) Recreation. All recreation areas and facilities in the Pinelands Area shall be
designed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.144(a)(1)-(3) and with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection’s publication “Administration
Guidelines: Barrier Free Design Standard for Parks and Recreational Facilities.”
(a) Improved bicycling facilities outside of the Pinelands Village shall be
provided only in conjunction with paved roads.
(14) Location of Utilities. New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to
locations not presently served by utilities shall be placed underground, except for
those lines which are located on or adjacent to active agricultural operations.
(15) Historic resource preservation.
(a) The Planning Board shall exercise all the powers and perform all the
duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a), including recommendations to
the governing body for designation of historic resources, in accordance
Article XIII
29
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which are determined to be significant
pursuant to Paragraph (e)(2) below.
(b) Authority to issue certificates of appropriateness.
[1] The Planning Board shall issue all certificate of appropriateness
except as specified in Paragraph [2] below.
[2] The Board of Adjustment shall issue certificates of appropriateness
for those applications for development which it is otherwise
empowered to review.
(c) Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the following:
[1] Construction, encroachment upon, alternation, remodeling,
removal, disturbance or demolition of any resource designed by the
governing body or the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.154 or any action which renders such a site inaccessible;
and,
[2] Development not otherwise exempted from review pursuant to this
chapter where a significant resource has been identified pursuant to
Paragraph (e) below.
(d) Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include the
information specified in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(b).
(e) A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
development in the Pinelands Village Zone and all applications for major
development in order to determine whether any significant historic
resources exist on the parcel. Guidelines for this survey are contained in
Appendix B of the “Cultural Resource Management Plan,” dated April
1991, as amended. In general, the survey shall include: a statement as to
the presence of any properties listed in the National and State Registers of
Historic Places on the site or within the area of the project’s potential
environmental impacts; a thorough search of State, local and any other
pertinent inventories to identify sites of potential significance; a review of
the literature and consultation with professional and avocational
archaeologist knowledgeable about the area; thorough pedestrian and
natural resources surveys; archaeological testing as necessary to provide
reasonable evidence of the presence or absence of historic resources of
significance; adequate recording of the information gained and
methodologies and sources used; and a list of personnel involved and
qualifications of the person(s) performing the survey. [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
[1] This requirement for a survey may be waived by the local
approving agency if:
[a] There is insufficient evidence of significant cultural activity
on the project site or, in the case of archaeological
resources, within the vicinity;
[b] The evidence of cultural activity on the site lacks the
potential for importance because further recording of the
available data will not contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of Pinelands culture; or,
Article XIII
30
[c] The evidence of cultural activity lacks any potential for
significance pursuant to the standards of paragraph [2]
below.
[2] A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it possesses
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association which reflects its significance in American
history, architecture, archaeology or culture under one or more of
the following criteria:
[a] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands;
[b] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
the lives of persons or institutions of significance to the
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation,
state, local community or the Pinelands;
[c] The presence of structures that represent the work of a
master, or that possess high artistic values, or that embody
the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction, or that represent a distinguishable entity of
significance to the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the Nation, State, local
community or the Pinelands, although its components may
lack individual distinction; or,
[d] The presence of a site or area which has yielded or is likely
to yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.
(f) The standards governing the issuance of certificates of appropriateness in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.146(c) shall be followed by the Planning Board and Board
of Adjustment. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(g) The effect of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness is as follows:
[1] All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or denied in
a manner consistent with the certificate of appropriateness except
as provided in Paragraph [2] below.
[2] A certificate of appropriateness issued as a result of the cultural
resource survey requirement set forth in Paragraph (e) above shall
be effective for two years. If the resource is not designated by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or by the
Township Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. within
that two year period, the historic resource standards of this section
shall no longer apply to the resource in question until such time as
the Pinelands Commission designates the resource pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
[3] The following information will be required to document resources
which are not found to be significant but which are otherwise
found to present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:
Article XIII
31
[a] A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment;
[b] Photographic documentation to record the exterior
appearance of buildings, structures, and engineering
resources;
[c] A site plan depicting in correct scale the location of all
buildings, structures and engineering resources; and
[d] A New Jersey inventory form as published by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for
buildings and a narrative description of any process or
technology if necessary to elaborate upon the photographic
record.
[4] If archaeological data is discovered on a site at any time after
construction has been commenced, the developer shall
immediately cease construction, notify the Planning Board and the
Pinelands Commission and take all reasonable steps to protect the
archaeological data in accordance with the “Guidelines for
Recovery, Notification, Reporting and Data Discovery” (36 C.F.R.
66). [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(16) Waste management. No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous
wastes, shall be stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or otherwise
used in the Pinelands Area. The land application of waste or waste derived
materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area, except as expressly authorized in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste management facilities shall only be permitted in the
Pinelands Area in accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
[Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(17) Air quality. Adherence to the standards of this section shall be determined by
means of an air quality simulation model approved by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-18.3.
(a) All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality standards
of N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq.
(b) Applications for residential development of 100 or more units and
any other development involving more than 300 parking spaces
located in a Pinelands Area Zone shall ensure that all state ambient
air quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for carbon monoxide
shall not be exceeded at places of maximum concentration and at
sensitive receptors. [Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
§15-13.5 Stormwater Control Ordinance for areas within the Pinelands Area
[Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
A. Purpose.
(1) It is hereby determined that:
(a) Land development projects and associated disturbance of vegetation and
soil and changes in land cover, including increases in impervious cover,
alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
Article XIII
32
runoff rates and volumes. If inadequately or improperly managed, this
stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater resources and increase
flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.
(b) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants.
(c) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollutants
have occurred in the past as a result of land development, and contribute to
the degradation of the water resources of Little Egg Harbor Township.
(d) Certain lands of the Little Egg Harbor Township lie within the Pinelands
Area, and therefore, development in this portion of Little Egg Harbor
Township is subject to the requirements of the Pinelands Protection Act
(N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) and the implementing regulations and
minimum standards contained in the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.) (CMP). The purpose and
intent of these regulations and standards is to promote orderly
development of the Pinelands so as to preserve and protect the significant
and unique natural, ecological, agricultural, archaeological, historical,
scenic, cultural and recreational resources of the Pinelands.
(e) Pinelands Area resources are to be protected in accordance with Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50 et seq., New Jersey's
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq. and New
Jersey's surface water quality antidegradation policies contained in the
New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq.
Permitted uses shall maintain the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands, including good water quality and natural rates and volumes of
flow.
(f) Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the sediments and pollutants
associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects
within the Pinelands Area have the potential to adversely affect Little Egg
Harbor Township’s streams and water resources and the streams and water
resources of downstream municipalities.
(g) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
(h) It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of stormwater runoff
from “major development” projects, as defined in subsection K of this
ordinance, conducted within the Pinelands Area, as provided in this
ordinance, in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff
rates and volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to control and
minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
(2) Therefore, it is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development, consistent with
the statewide stormwater requirements at N.J.A.C. 7:8, the regulations and
standards contained in the Pinelands CMP, and the provisions of the adopted
master plan and land use ordinances of the Little Egg Harbor Township.
Article XIII
33
B. Goals and Techniques.
(1) Through this ordinance, Little Egg Harbor Township has established the
following goals for stormwater control:
(a) To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and property;
(b) To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new development;
(c) To reduce soil erosion from any development or construction project;
(d) To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, and
other in-stream structures;
(e) To maintain groundwater recharge;
(f) To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
(g) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions,
as well as for drainage;
(h) To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of the streams and
water resources of Little Egg Harbor Township and the ecological
character and quality of the Pinelands Area;
(i) To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and existing
development in order to restore, protect, enhance and maintain the
chemical, physical and biological integrity of the surface and
groundwaters of Little Egg Harbor Township, to protect public health and
to enhance the domestic, municipal, recreational, industrial and other uses
of water; and
(j) To protect public safety through the proper design and operation of
stormwater management basins.
(2) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in this ordinance, the
Little Egg Harbor Township has identified the following management techniques:
(a) Implementation of multiple stormwater management Best Management
Practices (BMPs) may be necessary to achieve the performance standards
for stormwater runoff quantity and rate, groundwater recharge, erosion
control, and stormwater runoff quality established through this ordinance.
(b) Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate, groundwater
recharge, erosion control, and stormwater runoff quality standards
established through N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., and this ordinance, shall be
accomplished to the maximum extent practicable through the use of
nonstructural BMPs, before relying on structural BMPs. Nonstructural
BMPs are also known as Low Impact Development (LID) techniques.
(c) Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater.
(d) Source control plans shall be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated quantity or amount of
potential pollutants.
(e) Structural BMPs, where necessary shall be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
(f) When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater management measures,
smaller in size and distributed spatially throughout the land development
Article XIII
34
site, shall be used wherever possible to achieve the performance standards
for water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge established through
this ordinance before relying on a single, larger stormwater management
measure to achieve these performance standards.
C. Applicability.
(1) This ordinance shall apply to:
(a) All site plans, subdivisions and road improvement plans for major
developments occurring within the Pinelands Area that require preliminary
or final site plan, subdivision, or road improvement plan review; and
(b) All major development projects undertaken by Little Egg Harbor
Township within the Pinelands area shall comply with this ordinance.
D. Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures set forth in the Code of
the Little Egg Harbor Township, major developments located within the Pinelands Area
shall comply with the stormwater management requirements and specifications set forth
in this ordinance. New agricultural development that meets the definition of major
development in Section K of this ordinance shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5.4(b) 7:8.
E. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this
ordinance are to be considered an integral part of development approvals under
the subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the Applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated
by any other applicable ordinance, code, rule, regulation, statute, act or other
provision of law.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other
provision of law except that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive or stringent provisions
or higher standards shall control.
(3) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is prepared and
formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq. for any drainage area(s) or
watershed(s) of which Little Egg Harbor Township is a part, the stormwater
provisions of such a plan(s) shall be adopted by Little Egg Harbor Township
within one year of the adoption of a Regional Stormwater Management Plan
(RSWMP) as an amendment to an Area Wide Water Quality Management Plan.
Local ordinances proposed to implement the RSWMP shall be submitted to the
Commission for certification within six months of the adoption of the RSWMP
per N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50.)
Article XIII
35
F. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(1) Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(a) Whenever an Applicant seeks municipal approval of a site development
that is subject to this ordinance, the Applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
Stormwater Plan at subsection F(3) below as part of the Applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval. In addition, Applicant
shall comply with Chapter 15 Land Use and Land Development
Ordinance, Article XV “Specifications of Documents to be Submitted”,
for additional submission requirements for subdivision or site plan
approval. These required components are in addition to any other
information required under any provisions of the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) The Applicant shall demonstrate that the site development project meets
the standards set forth in this ordinance.
(c) The Applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection G(3) of this ordinance.
(2) Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval.
(a) The Applicant's site development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a
part of the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board
or official from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board
or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
(3) Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic Base Map. The Applicant shall submit a topographic base
map of the site which extends a minimum of three hundred (300’) feet
beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one (1”) inch
= two hundred (200’) feet or greater, showing one (1’) foot contour
intervals. The map shall indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, highly erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of any Category One or
Pinelands Waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing surface and subsurface human-made structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown. Little Egg Harbor Township or
the Pinelands Commission may require upstream tributary drainage
system information as necessary.
(b) Vicinity Map. Applicants must prepare a map at a scale of one inch
equals 400 feet (1” = 400’) or greater on a paper print of the latest air
photographs available, updated in the field to reflect current conditions,
showing the relationship of the proposed development to significant
Article XIII
36
features in the general surroundings. The map must indicate at least the
following: roads, pedestrian ways, access to the site, adjacent land uses,
existing open space, public facilities, landmarks, places of architectural
and historic significance, utilities, drainage (including, specifically,
streams and surface water shown on U.S.G.S. and soils maps), and other
significant features not otherwise shown.
(c) Environmental Site Analysis. The Applicant shall submit a written
description along with the drawings of the natural and human-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should include:
[1] A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil conditions,
slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities
for or constraints on development; and
[2] Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the portion of
the site proposed for installation of any stormwater BMPs,
including, at a minimum: soils report based on onsite soil tests;
locations and spot elevations in plan view of test pits and
permeability tests; permeability test data and calculations; and any
other required soil data (e.g., mounding analyses results) correlated
with location and elevation of each test site; cross-section of
proposed stormwater BMP with side-by-side depiction of soil
profile drawn to scale and seasonal high water table elevation
identified; and any other information necessary to demonstrate the
suitability of the specific proposed structural and nonstructural
stormwater management measures relative to the environmental
conditions on the portion(s) of the site proposed for
implementation of those measures.
(d) Project Description and Site Plan(s). The Applicant shall submit a map
(or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the
location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover, including
lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater elevations.
A written description of the site plan and justification for proposed
changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.
(e) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan.
[1] The Applicant shall submit a detailed Land Use Planning and
Source Control Plan which provides a description of how the site
will be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards at
subsection H through use of nonstructural or low impact
development techniques and source controls to the maximum
extent practicable before relying on structural BMPs. The Land
Use Planning and Source Control Plan shall include a detailed
Article XIII
37
narrative and associated illustrative maps and/or plans that
specifically address how each of the following nine (9)
nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the N.J.D.E.P.
Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set forth
below ((e)[1][a] through (e)[1][i]) will be implemented to the
maximum extent practicable to meet the standards at subsection H
of this ordinance on the site. If one or more of the nine (9)
nonstructural strategies will not be implemented on the site, the
Applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for
the contention that use of the strategy is not practicable on the site.
[a] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[b] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[c] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[d] Minimize the decrease in the pre-development “time of
concentration”;
[e] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[f] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil disturbance;
[g] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides for the
retention and planting of native plants and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24;
[h] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and
[i] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. These source controls shall include, but are not
limited to:
[i] Site design features that help to prevent
accumulation of trash and debris in drainage
systems;
[ii] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[iii] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
[iv] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules, when establishing vegetation
after land disturbance.
Article XIII
38
[2] For sites where stormwater will be generated from “high pollutant
loading areas” or where stormwater will be exposed to “source
material,” as defined in subsection K of this ordinance, the
Applicant shall also demonstrate in the Land Use Planning and
Source Control Plan that the requirements of subsection H have
been met.
[3] The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the performance
standards in subsection H of this ordinance is not required for
development sites creating less than one (1) acre of disturbance.
However, each application for major development and any other
application where Little Egg Harbor Township otherwise requires
a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan
in accordance with the CMP standards at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c). In
addition, the Applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum,
existing trees and vegetation on the development site will be
preserved and protected according to the minimum standards
established by provisions of the Little Egg Harbor Township Land
Use Land Development Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or by
conditions of zoning or variance approval.
(f) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The Applicant shall submit a
map, at the same scale as the topographic base map, depicting the
following information:
[1] The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon, proposed
surface contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to manage and dispose of stormwater;
and
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and
after construction, including discharge provisions, discharge
capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention (if
applicable) and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(g) Calculations (Groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume
and quality). The Applicant shall submit comprehensive hydrologic and
hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in subsection G.
The standards for groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate,
volume and quality required by subsection H shall be met using the
methods, calculations and assumptions provided in subsection G.
(h) Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan. The Applicant shall submit a
detailed plan describing how the proposed stormwater management
measure(s) shall meet the maintenance and repair requirements of
subsection J of this ordinance. Said plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following elements:
[1] The frequency with which inspections will be made;
Article XIII
39
[2] The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
[3] The name, address and telephone number for the entity responsible
for implementation of the maintenance plan;
[4] The reporting requirements; and
[5] Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting sheets.
(i) Exception from Submission Requirements. An exception may be granted
by the municipal board reviewing an application, in consultation with the
Board engineer, from submission of any of these required components
(except F(3)(g) above, Inspection, Maintenance, and Repair Plan) if its
absence will not materially affect the review process, information
requested cannot feasibly be obtained or when it would create a hardship
on the applicant. However, items required pursuant to the application
requirements in the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)) shall be
submitted to the N.J. Pinelands Commission unless the Executive Director
waives or modifies the application requirements.
(j) Stormwater Review Fee. Subdivisions and site plans requiring
Preliminary or Final Approval, and Road Improvement Plans, that all meet
the latest definition of “Major Development” per Section E, Definitions,
shall pay the Stormwater Review Fee outlined in the Land Use Land
Development Ordinance Article 15-16.3.
G. Methodologies for the Calculation of Stormwater Runoff Rate and Volume, Stormwater
Runoff Quality, and Groundwater Recharge.
(1) Method of Calculating Stormwater Runoff Rate and Volume.
(a) In complying with the Stormwater Runoff Quantity and Rate Standards in
subsection H(2), the design engineer shall calculate the stormwater runoff
rate and volume using the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless
Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630 – Hydrology and Technical Release 55 – Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds as amended and supplemented.
Alternative methods of calculation may be utilized, provided such
alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS methodology
when considered on a regional stormwater management basis.
(b) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the design
engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the runoff volumes
from pervious and directly connected impervious surfaces within a
drainage area within the parcel.
(c) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious surfaces
shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step method described in the
current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual or the
NRCS methodology.
(d) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the design
engineer shall use appropriate 24-hour rainfall depths as developed for the
Article XIII
40
project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
available online at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(e) When calculating stormwater runoff for pre-developed site conditions, the
design engineer shall use the following criteria:
[1] When selecting or calculating Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) for
pre-developed project site conditions, the project site’s land cover
shall be assumed to be woods in good condition. However,
another land cover may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five (5) years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[b] The design engineer can document the character and extent
of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
[2] If more than one land cover has existed on the site during the five
(5) years immediately prior to the time of application, the land
cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations.
[3] All pre-developed land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have
conservation treatment.
[4] In calculating pre-developed site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and structures,
such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, and culverts that
affect pre-developed site stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.
[5] Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure’s design.
(2) Method of Calculating Stormwater Runoff Quality.
(a) In complying with the Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards in subsection
H(6)(a), the design engineer shall calculate the stormwater runoff rate and
volume using the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit
Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook
Part 630 – Hydrology and Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, as amended and supplemented.
(b) The design engineer shall also use the N.J.D.E.P. Water Quality Design
Storm, which is one and one-quarter (1.25”) inches of rainfall falling in a
nonlinear pattern in two (2) hours. Details of the Water Quality Design
Storm are shown in Table 1.
(c) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for the Water
Quality Design Storm may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Article XIII
41
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution1
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall (inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall (inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(d) Total Suspended Solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
[1] If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to achieve
the required eighty (80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the
Applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS
reduction:
R = A + B – (A x B) / 100, where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from
application of both BMPs;
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to
the first BMP; and
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to
the second BMP.
[2] If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the eighty (80%)
percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the sub areas converge on site, in which case the
1 Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).
Article XIII
42
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(e) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs
[1] For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance
with the New Jersey BMP Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in subsection P(1) or found on
the N.J.D.E.P.’s website at www.N.J.stormwater.org. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2
[2] Alternative stormwater management measures, removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the Little Egg Harbor
Township. Any alternative stormwater management measure,
removal rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
subject to approval by the Little Egg Harbor Township and a copy
shall be provided to the following:
[a] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418,
Trenton, N.J., 08625-0418; and
[b] The New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O. Box 7, New
Lisbon, N.J., 08064.
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs2
Best Management
Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Total Phosphorus
Percent Removal Rate
Total Nitrogen
Percent
Removal Rate
Bioretention
Systems
90 60 30
Constructed
Stormwater
Wetland
90 50 30
Extended Detention
Basin
40-60 (final rate based
upon detention time;
see New Jersey BMP
Manual, Chap. 9)
20 20
Infiltration basin 80 60 50
Manufactured
Treatment Device
Pollutant removal rates
as certified by
N.J.D.E.P.; see Section
Pollutant removal
rates as certified by
N.J.D.E.P.; see
Pollutant
removal rates
as certified by
2 Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter 4.
Article XIII
43
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs2
G. Section G. N.J.D.E.P.;
Section G.
80 (porous paving)
80 (permeable pavers
with storage bed)
Pervious Paving
Systems
0 - volume reduction
only (permeable pavers
without storage bed)
60
0 - volume reduction
only (permeable
pavers
without storage bed)
50
0 - volume
reduction only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
Sand Filter 80 50 35
60 (turf grass)
70 (native grasses,
meadow and
planted woods)
Vegetative Filter Strip
(For filter strips with
multiple vegetated
covers, the final TSS
removal rate should
be based upon a
weighted average of
the adopted rates
shown in Table 2,
based upon the
relative flow lengths
through each cover
type.)
80 (indigenous woods)
30 30
Wet Pond /
Retention Basin
50-90 (final rate based upon pool
volume and detention time; see N.J.
BMP Manual)
50 30
(f) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of postdevelopment
nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2 presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual. If alternative stormwater BMPs are proposed,
the Applicant shall demonstrate that the selected BMPs will achieve the
nutrient removal standard required in subsection H(6).
(3) Methods of Calculating Groundwater Recharge.
(a) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in subsection
H(3)(a)[1], the design engineer may calculate groundwater recharge in
accordance with the New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet
(NJGRS) computer program incorporated herein by reference as amended
Article XIII
44
and supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available in
subsection O(1) or from the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(b) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet these
requirements may be used upon approval by the municipal engineer.
(c) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in subsection
H(3)(a)[2], the design engineer shall:
[1] Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Runoff
Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630 – Hydrology and Technical Release 55 –
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds as amended and
supplemented; and
[2] Use appropriate 2-year, 24-hour rainfall depths as developed for
the project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(d) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff for predeveloped
site conditions, the design engineer shall use the following
criteria:
[1] When selecting land covers or calculating Runoff Curve Numbers
(CNs) for pre-developed project site conditions, the project site’s
land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another land
cover may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five (5) years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[b] The design engineer can document the character and extent
of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
[2] If more than one land cover, other than woods, has existed on the
site during the five (5) years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations.
[3] All pre-developed land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have
conservation treatment.
H. Stormwater Management Performance Standards for Major Development.
(1) Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance standards in
subsection H for major development shall be met by incorporating the
nine (9) nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the N.J.
Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5), and set forth in
subsection F(3)(d)[1], into the design. The Applicant shall identify within
Article XIII
45
the Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan required by subsection
F(3)(e) of this ordinance how each of the nine (9) nonstructural measures
will be incorporated into the design of the project to the maximum extent
practicable.
(b) If the Applicant contends that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any of the nine (9)
nonstructural strategies into the design of a particular project, the
Applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for the
contention that use of the strategy is not practical on the site. This
rationale shall be submitted in accordance with the Checklist
Requirements established by subsection F to Little Egg Harbor Township.
A determination by Little Egg Harbor Township that this rationale is
inadequate or without merit shall result in a denial of the application
unless one of the following conditions are met:
[1] The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
include a description of how all nine (9) nonstructural measures
will be implemented on the development site, and the amended
Plan is approved by Little Egg Harbor Township;
[2] The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or measure that is not
included in the list of nine (9) nonstructural measures, but still
meets the performance standards in subsection H, and the amended
Plan is approved by Little Egg Harbor Township; or
[3] The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
provide an adequate rationale for the contention that use of the
particular strategy is not practical on the site, and the amended
Plan is approved by Little Egg Harbor Township.
(c) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each Applicant shall
demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the
development site will be preserved, protected and maintained according to
the minimum standards established by provisions of the Little Egg Harbor
Township Land Use Land Development Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or
by conditions of zoning or variance approval. Existing trees and
vegetation shall be protected during construction activities in accordance
with the “Standard for Tree Protection During Construction” provided in
the N.J. State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated herein by
reference as amended and supplemented.
(d) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each application for
major development, and any other application where Little Egg Harbor
Township otherwise requires a landscaping plan, shall contain a
landscaping or revegetation plan in accordance with the Pinelands CMP
standards at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c).
(e) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to
meet the performance standards in subsection H shall be dedicated to a
government entity; shall be subjected to a conservation easement filed
Article XIII
46
with the appropriate County Clerk’s office; or shall be subjected to an
equivalent form of restriction approved by the Little Egg Harbor
Township that ensures that that measure, or equivalent stormwater
management measure is maintained in perpetuity, as detailed in subsection
J of this ordinance.
(f) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available
in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in subsection P(1) or found on the N.J.D.E.P.’s website at
www.N.J.stormwater.org.
(g) Exception for major development sites creating less than one (1) acre of
disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the performance
standards in subsection H of this ordinance is not required for major
development creating less than one (1) acre of disturbance. However, the
following requirements shall be met:
[1] Each application for major development and any other application
where Little Egg Harbor Township otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan
prepared in accordance with the Pinelands CMP standards
(N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c));
[2] Each Applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing
trees and vegetation on the development site will be preserved and
protected according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of Little Egg Harbor Township Land Use Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval;
and
[3] Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during construction
activities in accordance with the “Standard for Tree Protection
During Construction” provided in the N.J. State Soil Conservation
Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as amended
and supplemented.
(2) Stormwater Runoff Quantity and Rate Standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any point or
nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands transition area, or surface
waterbody. In addition, stormwater runoff shall not be directed in such a
way as to increase the volume and/or rate of discharge into any surface
water body from that which existed prior to development of the site.
(b) For all major developments, the total runoff volume generated from the
net increase in impervious surfaces by a ten (10) year, twenty-four (24)
hour storm shall be retained and infiltrated onsite.
(c) In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations contained in
subsection G, shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs from the project
site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storms do not exceed, at any point
Article XIII
47
in time, the site’s pre-developed runoff hydrographs for the same
storms;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that under
post-developed site conditions:
[a] There is no increase in pre-developed stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storms; and
[b] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storms will not increase flood damage at or downstream of
the project site. When performing this analysis for predeveloped
site conditions, all off-site development levels
shall reflect existing conditions. When performing this
analysis for post-developed site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect full development in
accordance with current zoning and land use ordinances; or
[3] Demonstrate that the peak post-developed stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-
year storms are fifty (50%) percent, seventy-five (75%)
percent and eighty (80%) percent, respectively, of the site’s
peak pre-developed stormwater runoff rates for the same
storms. Peak outflow rates from onsite stormwater
measures for these storms shall be adjusted where
necessary to account for the discharge of increased
stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes from project site
areas not controlled by the onsite measures. These
percentages do not have to be applied to those portions of
the project site that are not proposed for development at the
time of application, provided that such areas are:
[a] Protected from future development by imposition of
a conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[b] Would be subject to review under these standards if
they are proposed for any degree of development in
the future.
(d) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with (a), (b), and (c) above shall only be applied if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood damages
below the point of discharge.
(e) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations and assumptions
provided in subsection G.
(f) To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no direct discharge of
stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect farm crops from
damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term saturation of cultivated
crops and cropland.
Article XIII
48
(3) Groundwater Recharge Standards.
(a) For all major developments, the design engineer, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
contained in subsection G, shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
post-developed project site maintains one hundred (100%) percent
of the site’s pre-developed average annual groundwater recharge
volume; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that any
increase in the project site’s stormwater runoff volume for the two
(2) year, twenty four (24) hour storm from pre-developed to postdeveloped
conditions is infiltrated on-site.
(b) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater
table and design the project site and all site groundwater recharge
measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to: raising the groundwater table so as
to cause surface ponding; flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from
completely draining via infiltration within forty-eight (48) hours of a
design storm event; and interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other surface and subsurface
facilities in the vicinity of the groundwater recharge measure.
(c) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this section shall be
met using the methods, calculations and assumptions provided in
subsection G.
(d) The infiltration/recharge systems shall not be situated within two hundred
(200’) feet of a private well or not within five hundred (500’) feet from a
municipal well.
(4) Erosion Control Standards. The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its implementing regulations, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1
through 1.4.
(5) Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any point or
nonpoint source to any wetland, wetland transition area, or surface
waterbody.
(b) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the total
suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater runoff from the postdeveloped
site by eighty (80%) percent expressed as an annual average.
(c) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce the
nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the post-developed site by the
maximum extent practicable. In achieving this reduction, the design of the
development site shall include nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving
the groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and rate, and TSS removal
standards in this section.
Article XIII
49
(d) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this section shall
be met using the methods, calculations, assumptions and pollutant removal
rates provided in subsection G.
(e) Exceptions.
[1] The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall not apply
to the following major development sites:
[a] Major development sites where less than one quarter (0.25)
acre of additional impervious surface is proposed; or
[b] Major residential development sites that create less than
one (1) acre of disturbance.
[2] The TSS reduction requirement in subsection H(6)(b) shall not
apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the NJPDES
rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a discharge specifically exempt under
a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
[3] The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in subsection
H(2) shall still be met for all major development sites.
(6) Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant loading areas and areas
where stormwater runoff is exposed to source material
(a) This subsection applies to the following areas of a major development as
defined in subsection K of this ordinance:
[1] High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and
[2] Areas where stormwater is exposed to “source material.”
(b) For a major development in areas described in (a)[1] or (a)[2] above, in
addition to the infiltration requirements specified in subsection H(2)(b)
and the groundwater recharge requirements specified in subsection H(3),
the Applicant shall demonstrate in the Land Use Planning and Source
Control Plan required in subsection F(3)(c) that the following
requirements have been met:
[1] The extent of the areas described in (a)[1] and (a)[2] above have
been minimized on the development site to the maximum extent
practicable;
[2] The stormwater runoff from the areas described in (a)[1] and (a)[2]
above is segregated to the maximum extent practicable from the
stormwater runoff generated from the remainder of the site such
that co-mingling of the stormwater runoff from the areas described
in (a)[1] and (a)[2]above and the remainder of the site will be
minimized;
[3] The amount of precipitation falling directly on the areas described
in (a)[1] and (a)[2]above is minimized to the maximum extent
practicable by means of a canopy, roof or other similar structure
that reduces the generation of stormwater runoff; and
[4] The stormwater runoff from or co-mingled with the areas
described in (a)[1] and (a)[2]above for the Water Quality Design
Storm, defined in subsection G(2), Table 1, shall be subject to
pretreatment by one or more of the following stormwater BMPs,
Article XIII
50
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual to
provide ninety (90 %) percent TSS removal:
[a] Bioretention system;
[b] Sand filter;
[c] Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically disconnected by a
minimum of two (2’) feet of vertical separation from the
seasonal high water table and shall be designed to achieve a
minimum eighty (80%) percent TSS removal rate;
[d] Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or
[e] Media filtration system manufactured treatment device with
a minimum eighty (80%) percent TSS removal as verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology
and as certified by N.J.D.E.P.
[5] If the potential for contamination of stormwater runoff by
petroleum products exists onsite, prior to being conveyed to the
pretreatment BMP required in subsection H(6)(b)[4] above, the
stormwater runoff from the areas described in (a)[1] and
(a)[2]above shall be conveyed through an oil/grease separator or
other equivalent manufactured filtering device to remove the
petroleum hydrocarbons. The Applicant shall provide the
reviewing agency with sufficient data to demonstrate acceptable
performance of the device.
(7) Threatened and Endangered Species and Associated Habitat Standards.
Stormwater management measures shall address the impacts of the development
on habitat for threatened and endangered species, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.2(c), N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27, and 7:50-6.33 and 34.
(8) Exceptions and Mitigation Requirements.
(a) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements
established by this ordinance may be granted, at the discretion of the Little
Egg Harbor Township, and subject to approval by the Pinelands
Commission, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
Article XIII
51
[1] The exception is consistent with that allowed by the Little Egg
Harbor Township;
[2] The Little Egg Harbor Township has an adopted and effective
municipal stormwater management plan in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11, and is also certified by the Pinelands
Commission. The mitigation plan shall identify what measures are
necessary to offset the deficit created by granting the exception and
the municipality shall submit a written report to the county review
agency and the N.J.D.E.P. describing the exception and the
required mitigation. Guidance for developing municipal
stormwater management plans, including mitigation plans, is
available from the N.J.D.E.P., Division of Watershed Management
and the New Jersey BMP Manual.
[3] The Applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to the
requirements of mitigation plan discussed in (b) above, will be
provided consistent with one of the following options:
[a] Mitigation may be provided off-site, but within the
Pinelands Area and within the same drainage area as the
development site, and shall meet or exceed the equivalent
recharge, quality or quantity performance standard which is
lacking on the development site due to the exception; or
[b] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary "in lieu
contribution" may be provided by the Applicant to Little
Egg Harbor Township in accordance with the following:
(i) The amount of the in lieu contribution shall be
determined by Little Egg Harbor Township, but the
maximum in lieu contribution required shall be
equivalent to the cost of implementing and
maintaining the stormwater management measure(s)
for which the exception is granted;
(ii) The in lieu contribution shall be used to fund an offsite
stormwater control mitigation project(s) located
within the Pinelands Area, within the same drainage
area as the development site, and shall meet or
exceed the equivalent recharge, quality or quantity
performance standards which is lacking on the
development site. Such mitigation project shall be
identified by the Little Egg Harbor Township in the
Township's adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. The stormwater control project
to which the monetary contribution will be applied
shall be identified by Little Egg Harbor Township at
the time the exception is granted. The Applicant
shall amend the project description and site plan
required in subsection F(3)(d) to incorporate a
Article XIII
52
description of both the standards for which an onsite
exception is being granted and of the selected
off-site mitigation project.
(iii) Little Egg Harbor Township shall expend the in lieu
contribution to implement the selected off-site
mitigation project within five (5) years from the
date that payment is received. Should Little Egg
Harbor Township fail to expend the in lieu
contribution within the required timeframe, the
mitigation option provided in subsection
H(8)(a)[3][b][i] and H(8)(a)[3][b][ii] of this
ordinance shall be void and Little Egg Harbor
Township shall be prohibited from collecting in lieu
contributions.
(b) An exception from strict compliance granted in accordance with (8)(a)
above shall not constitute a waiver of strict compliance from the
requirements of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan at
N.J.A.C. 7:50. An Applicant should contact the Pinelands Commission to
determine whether a waiver of strict compliance is also required in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50, Subchapter 4, Part V.
I. Design, Construction, and Safety Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures.
(1) General Design and Construction Standards.
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to meet the
standards established in this section. These standards have been
developed to protect public safety, conserve natural features, create an
aesthetically pleasing site and promote proper onsite stormwater
management.
(b) The following structural stormwater management measures may be
utilized as part of a stormwater management system at a major land
development in the Pinelands, provided that the Applicant demonstrates
that they are designed, constructed and maintained so as to meet the
standards and requirements established by this ordinance. If alternative
stormwater management measures are proposed, the Applicant shall
demonstrate that the selected measures will achieve the standards
established by this ordinance.
[1] Bioretention systems;
[2] Constructed stormwater wetlands;
[3] Extended detention basins;
[4] Infiltration basins;
[5] Vegetated filter strips;
[6] Infiltration basins and trenches;
[7] Wet ponds with suitable liners;
[8] Pervious paving systems; and
Article XIII
53
[9] Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the N.J.D.E.P.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into
account the existing site conditions, including environmentally critical
areas, wetlands, flood-prone areas, slopes, depth to seasonal high water
table, soil type, permeability and texture, and drainage area and drainage
patterns.
(d) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed and
constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant (measures that
are consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.8 shall be deemed
to meet this requirement); to minimize and facilitate maintenance and
repairs; and to ensure proper functioning.
(e) For all stormwater management measures at a development site, each
Applicant shall submit a detailed Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan
consistent with the requirements of Section J of this ordinance.
(f) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall design
structural stormwater management measures on the development site in a
manner that:
[1] Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater management
efficiencies, and maintains or improves aesthetic conditions;
[2] Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures, smaller in
size and distributed spatially throughout the land development site,
instead of a single larger structural stormwater management
measure;
[3] Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can extend the
functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability of a
structural stormwater management measure. Pretreatment
measures may be designed in accordance with the New Jersey
BMP Manual or other sources approved by the municipal engineer.
(g) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner that
complements and mimics the existing natural landscape, including but not
limited to the following design strategies:
[1] Use of natural, non-wetland wooded depressions for stormwater
runoff storage; and
[2] Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the basin
that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates native
Pinelands plants, including, but not limited to, the species listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 and 6.26.
(h) Stormwater management basins proposed as part of a subdivision or
residential use site plan shall be located entirely within a separate lot with
an easement dedicated to the Township and ownership to be consistent
with the State statutes and requirements of the Township Land Use and
Land Development Ordinance. Maintenance and repair shall be in
conformance with subsection J.
Article XIII
54
(i) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently sloping
sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1).
(j) Guidance on the design and construction of structural stormwater
management measures may be found in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
Other guidance sources may also be used upon approval by the municipal
engineer.
(k) After all construction activities and required field testing have been
completed on the development site, as-built plans depicting design and asbuilt
elevations of all stormwater management measures shall be prepared
by a Licensed Land Surveyor and submitted to the municipal engineer.
Based upon the municipal engineer's review of the as-built plans, all
corrections or remedial actions deemed by the municipal engineer to be
necessary due to the failure to comply with the standards established by
this ordinance and/or any reasons of public health or safety, shall be
completed by the Applicant.
(2) Design and Construction Standards for Stormwater Infiltration BMP’s.
(a) Stormwater infiltration BMP’s, such as bioretention systems with
infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving systems with
storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration, shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to completely drain the total runoff volume
generated by the basin’s maximum design storm within forty-eight (48)
hours after a storm event. Runoff storage for greater times can render the
BMP ineffective and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor and both
water quality and mosquito breeding problems.
(b) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least two (2’) feet
between the elevation of the lowest point of the bottom of the infiltration
BMP and the seasonal high water table.
(c) A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable soils verified by
field testing to have permeability rates between one (1”) inch and twenty
(20”) inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if the design
engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to site the stormwater infiltration BMP(s)
in such soils, then the stormwater infiltration BMP(s) may be sited in soils
verified by field testing to have permeability rates in excess of twenty
(20”) inches per hour, provided that a bioretention system, designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual,
is installed to meet one of the following conditions:
[1] The bioretention system is constructed as a separate measure
designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater and to convey the
pretreated stormwater into the infiltration BMP; or
[2] The bioretention system is integrated into and made part of the
infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an underdrain
system. If this option is selected, the infiltration BMP shall be
designed and constructed so that the maximum water depth in the
Article XIII
55
bioretention system portion of the BMP during treatment of the
stormwater quality design storm is twelve (12”) inches in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(d) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a BMP that
relies on infiltration shall be one-half (0.5) inch per hour. A factor of
safety of two (2) shall be applied to the soil’s field-tested permeability rate
to determine the soil’s design permeability rate. For example, if the fieldtested
permeability rate of the soil is four (4”) inches per hour, its design
permeability rate would be two (2”) inches per hour). The minimum
design permeability rate for the soil within a stormwater infiltration basin
shall also be sufficient to achieve the maximum forty-eight (48) hour drain
time described in (2)(a) above. The maximum design permeability shall
be ten (10”) inches per hour.
(e) A soil’s field tested permeability rate shall be determined in accordance
with the following:
[1] The pre-development field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in subsection
O(3)(c) of this ordinance;
[2] The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one (1”) inch per
hour;
[3] After all construction activities have been completed on the site
and the finished grade has been established in the infiltration BMP,
post-development field permeability tests shall also be conducted
according to the methodologies provided in subsection O(3)(c) of
this ordinance;
[4] If the results of the post-development field permeability tests fail to
achieve the minimum required design permeability rates in (e)
above utilizing a factor of safety of two (2), the stormwater
infiltration BMP shall be renovated and re-tested until such
minimum required design permeability rates are achieved; and
[5] The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified by a
Professional Engineer and transmitted to the municipal engineer.
(f) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate over time, a
six (6”) inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the bottom of a
stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall meet the textural and
permeability specifications of a K5 soil as provided at N.J.A.C. 7:9A,
Appendix A, Figure 6, and be certified to meet these specifications by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. The depth to
the seasonal high water table shall be measured from the bottom of the K5
sand layer.
(g) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater
table and design the project site and all stormwater infiltration basins so as
to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include,
but are not limited to: raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface
ponding; flooding of basements and other subsurface structures and areas;
Article XIII
56
preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from completely draining via
infiltration within forty-eight (48) hours of a design storm event; and
interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other surface and subsurface structures in the vicinity of the
stormwater infiltration basin.
(h) The design engineer shall conduct a groundwater mounding analysis, as
defined in subsection K, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs. The
mounding analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements
in subsection O(3)(c) Where the groundwater mounding analysis
identifies adverse impacts, the stormwater infiltration BMP shall be
redesigned or relocated, as appropriate.
(i) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in accordance with the
following:
[1] To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and reduce the
basin’s permeability rate, stormwater infiltration basins shall be
constructed according to the following:
[a] Unless the conditions in [b] below are met, a stormwater
infiltration basin shall not be placed into operation until its
drainage area is completely stabilized. Instead, upstream
runoff shall be diverted around the basin and into separate,
temporary stormwater management facilities and sediment
basins. Such temporary facilities and basins shall be
installed and utilized for stormwater management and
sediment control until stabilization is achieved in
accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated
herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
[b] If the design engineer determines that, for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons, temporary stormwater
management facilities and sediment basins cannot be
constructed on the site, the stormwater infiltration basin
may be placed into operation prior to the complete
stabilization of its drainage area provided that the basin’s
bottom during this period is constructed at a depth at least
two (2’) feet higher than its final design elevation. All
other infiltration BMP construction requirements in this
section shall be followed. When the drainage area is
completely stabilized, all accumulated sediment shall be
removed from the infiltration BMP, which shall then be
excavated to its final design elevation in accordance with
the construction requirements of this section and the
performance standards in subsection H.
[2] To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMP’s that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump trucks or
bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within the footprint of the
BMP. All excavation required to construct a stormwater
Article XIII
57
infiltration BMP shall be performed by equipment placed outside
the BMP. If this is not possible, the soils within the excavated area
shall be renovated and tilled after construction is completed to
reverse the effects of compaction. In addition, post-development
soil permeability testing shall be performed in accordance with
(2)(e) of this section.
[3] Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or filling, shall
not be performed when soil moisture content is above the lower
plastic limit.
(3) Safety Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures. This Section
sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
(a) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. Escape
provisions means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or
other features that provide readily accessible means of ingress and egress
from the outlet structure.
(b) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash and debris
that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in an outlet structure of
a structural stormwater management measure. Trash racks shall be
installed upstream of such outlet structure openings as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the structural stormwater management measure in
accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned in
the direction of flow with one (1”) inch spacing between the bars
to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations
higher than the water quality design storm, the bars shall be spaced
no greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the hydraulic opening it
is protecting or six inches, whichever is less. Transverse bars
aligned perpendicular to flow should be sized and spaced as
necessary for rack stability and strength.
[2] The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic performance
of either the outlet structure opening it is protecting or the overall
outlet structure.
[3] The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to a
maximum of two and one-half (2.5’) feet per second.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand
a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) pounds per
square foot.
(c) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the top of a
stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an outlet structure has an
overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements:
Article XIII
58
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance;
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two (2”) inches
across the smallest dimension; and
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand
a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) pounds per
square foot.
(d) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1).
(e) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new structural stormwater
management measures having a permanent pool of water deeper than two and
one-half feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall
be four (4’) feet to six (6’) feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
two and one-half (2½”) feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one (1’) foot to one and one-half (1½) feet above the
permanent water surface. See [1] below, for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
[1] Illustration of safety ledges.
Article XIII
59
J. Inspection, Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater Management Measures.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to subsection C of this
ordinance shall comply with the requirements of subsection J(2) and J(3) below.
(2) General Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare an Inspection, Maintenance and Repair
Plan for the stormwater management measures, including both structural
and nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of a major
development. This plan shall be submitted as part of the Checklist
Requirements established in subsection F(3). Inspection and maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey BMP Manual.
(b) The Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan shall contain the following:
[1] Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site’s stormwater
management measures;
[2] Specific locations of each stormwater management measure
identified by means of longitude and latitude as well as block and
lot number;
[3] Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks and
schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
[4] Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris or
trash removal; and
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Appendix A.
Article XIII
60
[5] The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for regular inspections and preventative and corrective
maintenance (including repair and replacement). If the responsible
person or persons is a corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this State, the
name and telephone number of an appropriate contact person shall
also be included.
(c) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair identified
under subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance performed for the site’s
stormwater management measures, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders in the Inspection,
Maintenance and Repair Plan. Said records and inspection reports shall be
retained for a minimum of five (5) years.
(d) If the Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan identifies a person other
than the developer (for example, a public agency or homeowners’
association) as having the responsibility for inspection and maintenance,
the plan shall include documentation of such person’s agreement to
assume this responsibility, or of the developer’s obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management measure to such person under an applicable
ordinance or regulation.
(e) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair identified
under subsection J(2)(c) above is not a public agency, the maintenance
plan and any future revisions based on subsection J(2)(f) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan shall be undertaken.
(f) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair identified
under subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan at least once per year and update
the plan and the deed as needed.
(g) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair identified
under subsection J(2)(b) above shall submit the updated Inspection,
Maintenance and Repair Plan and the documentation required by
subsection J(2)(b) and J(2)(c) above to Little Egg Harbor Township once
per year.
(h) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair identified
under subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site the Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan
and the documentation required by subsection J(2)(b) and J(2)(c) above.
(3) Township Acceptance of Stormwater Management System. An applicant shall be
required to dedicate proposed stormwater management systems to the Township
and shall enter into an agreement with the Township to that end. Such agreement
shall be a condition of final approval and shall be fully executed prior to release
of performance guarantees, and acceptance of the stormwater management
agreement shall require payment of the fee set forth in Paragraph J(11) in
Article XIII
61
consideration of the Township assuming all future maintenance of the stormwater
management facilities. The form of agreement shall be approved by the
Township Attorney. The agreement, upon execution, shall be recorded by the
applicant in the Office of the County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter file a
copy of the recorded agreement with the Township. Upon certification by the
Township Engineer that the performance guarantee for the project may be
released, acceptance of the stormwater management facilities by the Township
shall be specifically stated in the resolution authorizing the guarantee release.
The Township shall retain the cash portion of the guarantee a sum equal to the
maintenance fee approved as to amount by the Township Engineer in accordance
with the formula in this chapter. In the event that the cash portion of the
guarantee is less than the required maintenance fee, the developer shall post the
deficit in cash. Any interim performance guarantee reductions authorized by the
Township shall not be construed to mean that all or any part of the stormwater
management system has been accepted by the Township nor shall any such
interim reduction reduce the cash portion of the guarantee to an amount less than
the required maintenance fee. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to maintain
the stormwater management system during construction.
(4) Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire
residential development or project. Responsibility for operation and maintenance
of stormwater management facilities, including periodic removal and disposal of
accumulated particulate material and debris, shall remain with the owner or
owners of the property with permanent arrangements that it shall pass to any
successive owner, unless assumed by a government agency. If portions of the
land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic
responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each
project the property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established
entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the
function of the stormwater management measure, including, but not limited to:
repairs or replacement to any associated appurtenance of the measure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal;
fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or replacement of
linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
(6) Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by the property
owner as necessary for facility inspections and maintenance and preservation of
stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement.
(7) In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a public health
nuisance or danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the Little Egg Harbor Township shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person
shall have fourteen (14) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a
manner that is approved by the municipal engineer or the municipal engineer’s
Article XIII
62
designee. Little Egg Harbor Township, at its discretion, may extend the time
allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair within the
allowable time, Little Egg Harbor Township may immediately proceed to do so
with its own forces and equipment and/or through contractors. The costs and
expenses of such maintenance and repair by Little Egg Harbor Township shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with
any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the maintenance and repair
was performed.
(8) Requirements for Inspection, Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater BMP’s that
rely on Infiltration. If a stormwater infiltration BMP is incorporated into the
design of a major development, the Applicant shall include the following
requirements in its Inspection, Maintenance and Repair Plan:
(a) Once per month (if needed): Mow side slopes, remove litter and debris,
stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow structure(s);
(b) After every storm exceeding one (1”) inch of rainfall: Ensure that
infiltration BMPs drain completely within forty-eight (48) seventy-two
(72) hours after the storm event. If stored water fails to infiltrate fortyeight
(48) seventy-two (72) hours after the end of the storm, corrective
measures shall be taken. Raking or tilling by light equipment can assist in
maintaining infiltration capacity and break up clogged surfaces;
(c) Four times per year (quarterly): Inspect stormwater infiltration BMPs for
clogging and excessive debris and sediment accumulation within the
BMP, remove sediment (if needed) when completely dry;
(d) Two times per year: Inspect for signs of damage to structures, repair
eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum contamination and remediate;
(e) Once per year: Inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and remove if
necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of infiltration basin to a
minimum depth of six (6”) inches; and
(f) After every storm exceeding one (1”) inch of rainfall: inspect and, if
necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated sediment,
to restore original infiltration rate.
(g) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
(9) Stormwater Basin Access.
(a) The facility must be readily accessible from a street or other public rightof-
way. Inspection and maintenance easements, connected to the street or
right-of-way, should be provided around the entire facility. The exact
limits of the easements and right-of-ways should be specified on the
project plans and other appropriate documents.
(b) Access roads and gates shall be wide enough to allow passage of
necessary maintenance vehicles and equipment, including trucks,
backhoes, grass mowers, and mosquito control equipment. In general, a
minimum right-of-way width of fifteen (15’) feet and a minimum roadway
width of twelve (12’) feet is required.
Article XIII
63
(c) To facilitate entry, a curb cut shall be provided where an access road
meets a curbed roadway.
(d) To allow safe movement of maintenance vehicles, access ramps shall be
provided to the bottom of all detention facilities greater than three (3’) feet
in depth. Access ramps should not exceed ten percent in grade.
(e) Access roads and ramps shall be stable and suitably lined to prevent
rutting and other damage by maintenance vehicles and equipment.
(f) When backing up is difficult or dangerous, turning around areas should be
provided at the end of all access roads.
(g) All stormwater basins shall be perimeter fenced for safety purposes. The
minimum fence height shall be six feet.
(h) To allow safe movement of maintenance personnel and safe operation of
equipment, fences shall be located at least three (3’) feet beyond the top or
toe of any slope steeper than five horizontal to one vertical.
(i) Fences shall be constructed of durable, vandal-resistant materials. Fences
must meet all municipal code requirements.
(j) To minimize the amount of required trimming, fences in grassed areas
should be installed, whenever practical, with a bottom rail set high enough
above finished grade to allow mowing beneath it.
(k) Facility perimeters should be sized and stabilized to allow movement and
operation of maintenance and mosquito control equipment. A minimum
perimeter width of twenty-five (25’) feet between the facility and adjacent
structures is required along at least one side of the facility. This portion of
the perimeter shall be readily accessible from a street or other public or
private right-of- way. Gates shall be equipped with a double lock system
in cooperation with the Ocean County Mosquito Commission to permit
same access to the basins.
(l) The top of bank for facilities constructed in cut and the toe of slope for
facilities constructed in fill shall be located no closer than ten (10’) feet to
an existing or proposed property line.
(m) Detention basins shall be attractively buffered and landscaped, and
designed as to minimize propaganda of insects, particularly mosquitoes.
All landscaping and buffering shall be approved by the Board Engineer.
(n) For safe movement of personnel and safe operation of equipment, side
slopes greater than five (5’) feet in height shall not be steeper than four
horizontal to one cede three horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes
shall be constructed wherever possible.
(o) For safe movement of personnel and safe operation of equipment, side
slopes steeper than five to one and higher than I feet shall be terraced at
their midpoints. The terrace shall have a minimum width of three feet and
shall be graded at two (2%) percent towards the lower half of the slope.
(p) Suitable access to and along side slopes shall be provided for maintenance
personnel and equipment.
(10) Maintenance Guarantee. The Applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee to
ensure that all stormwater management measures required under the provisions of
this ordinance will be maintained in perpetuity according to the specifications
Article XIII
64
established herein. Conditioned upon Little Egg Harbor Township's approval,
this may be accomplished by various mechanisms, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) The Applicant may be required to post a bond or other financial assurance
mechanism in the amount Little Egg Harbor Township determines is
needed to provide maintenance in perpetuity of all stormwater
management measures;
(b) Little Egg Harbor Township may collect an up-front fee from the
Applicant in the amount Little Egg Harbor Township determines is needed
to provide maintenance in perpetuity of all stormwater management
measures. This up-front fee shall be expended by Little Egg Harbor
Township for the sole purpose of conducting maintenance activities
(including repair and renovation, if needed) for all stormwater
management measures required under the Applicant's major development
application approval;
(c) The Applicant may dedicate all stormwater management measures to the
Little Egg Harbor Township, subsequent to which the Township shall
assume all maintenance responsibilities; or
(d) The Applicant may be required to deposit funds in escrow in the amount
Little Egg Harbor Township determines is needed to provide maintenance
in perpetuity of all stormwater management measures.
(11) Stormwater Management Maintenance Fees. For purposes of this section, the
calculation of the maintenance fee will be based on the type of stormwater
management system, which is to serve the development, that is, a surface system,
such as a detention or retention basin and subsurface infiltration system or a
combination of the above. The fee shall be determined as follows:
(a) Surface stormwater management systems (detention or retention basins).
The amount of the maintenance fee shall be the annual maintenance cost
per acre multiplied. by the twenty-five (25) year maintenance period
multiplied by the maintenance area in acres. The maintenance area of the
stormwater management basin shall be defined to be the area included
within a line drawn around the top of the bank of the basin, plus an
additional twenty-five (25’) feet outward from the top of the bank. The
annual maintenance cost per acre shall be $1,281.25. The minimum
contribution regardless of the size of the basin, will be $12,500.00.
(b) Surface infiltration system. The amount of the maintenance fee shall be
determined as follows: $1.25 per linear foot of the infiltration system per
year for maintenance multiplied by a twenty-five (25) year period, plus
twice the cost of the subsurface infiltration system (not including
structures). The replacement cost shall be the amount of the performance
guaranties for the subsurface infiltration system, plus the amount of
$34.50 per linear foot for road repair for any portion of the roadway
disturbed by such replacement determined by the Township Engineer.
The minimum fee, regardless of the length of infiltration system, shall be
$12,500.00.
Article XIII
65
(c) Combination systems. The required fee shall be based on a combined
total of the above.
K. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this ordinance its most reasonable application. When used in this ordinance, the
following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
LITTLE EGG HARBOR TOWNSHIP – The Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or other board, agency or official of the Little Egg Harbor Township with
authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction permits, building
permits or other applications for development approval. For the purposes of reviewing
development applications and ensuring compliance with the requirements of this
ordinance, Little Egg Harbor Township may designate the municipal engineer or other
qualified designee to act on behalf of the Township.
AQUACULTURE – The propagation, rearing and subsequent harvesting of aquatic
organisms in controlled or selected environments, and their subsequent processing,
packaging and marketing, including but not limited to, activities to intervene in the
rearing process to increase production such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and
providing for protection from predators.
CERTIFICATION – Either a written statement signed and sealed by a licensed New
Jersey Professional Engineer attesting that a BMP design or stormwater management
system conforms to or meets a particular set of standards or to action taken by the
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3, Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context
in which the term is use, the terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed
accordingly.
COMPACTION – The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting soil to greaterthan-
normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil infiltration and permeability
rates.
CONSTRUCTION – The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
demolition, removal or equipping of buildings, structures or components of a stormwater
management system including but not limited to collection inlets, stormwater piping,
swales and all other conveyance systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY – An agency designated by the County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
(1) A county planning agency; or
(2) A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinances.
Article XIII
66
DESIGN ENGINEER – A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY – The tested permeability rate with a factor of safety of two
(2) applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the soils is four (4”) inches per
hour, the design rate would be two (2”) inches per hour).
DEVELOPMENT – The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any land,
the performance of any building or mining operation, the division of land into two or
more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian rights
including, but not limited to:
(1) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
(2) A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external
appearance of a structure or land;
(3) A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the
number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or dwelling units in
a structure or on land;
(4) Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or excavation on a parcel of
land;
(5) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(6) Commencement of forestry activities;
(7) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land;
(8) In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change in noise
levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste material; and
(9) Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank, or flood plain,
seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial body of water.
In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e. lands used for an agricultural use or
purse as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11, development means: any activity that requires a
State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR – Any division of land into five or more lots; any
construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more dwelling units;
any construction or expansion of any commercial or industrial use or structure on a site of
more than three acres; or any “development,” grading, clearing or disturbance of an area
in excess of five thousand square feet (5,000 ft2). Disturbance for the purpose of this
ordinance is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR – All development other than major development.
Article XIII
67
DRAINAGE AREA – A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater management system, a particular
receiving waterbody or a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA – An area or feature which is of significant
environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage
priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened animal species; threatened or
endangered plants of the Pinelands pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of
contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and
groundwater recharge areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat that is critical for the
survival of a local population of threatened and endangered species or habitat that is
identified using the Department’s Landscape Project as approved by the Department’s
Endangered and Nongame Species Program, whichever is more inclusive. Threatened
and endangered wildlife shall be protected in conformance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.33.
EXCEPTION – The approval by the approving authority of a variance or other material
departure from strict compliance with any section, part, phrase or provision of this
ordinance. An exception may be granted only under certain specific, narrowly-defined
conditions described herein and does not constitute a waiver of strict compliance with
any section, part, phrase or provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan
(N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.).
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN – A facility constructed through filling and/or
excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff. It has an outlet
structure that detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the settlement of
pollutants. An extended detention basin is normally designed as a multi-stage facility
that provides runoff storage and attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity
management. The term “stormwater detention basin” shall have the same meaning as
“extended detention basin.”
FINISHED GRADE – The elevation of the surface of the ground after completion of
final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination thereof.
GRADING – Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the native soil or redistribution
of the native soil which is present at the site.
GROUNDWATER – Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS – A test performed to demonstrate that the
groundwater below a stormwater infiltration basin will not “mound up,” encroach on the
unsaturated zone, break the surface of the ground at the infiltration area or downslope,
and create an overland flow situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT – Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert ground pressure
in excess of eight (8) pounds per square inch.
Article XIII
68
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA – An area in an industrial or commercial
development site: where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored,
or applied; where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than “reportable quantities” as defined by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; where recharge would
be inconsistent with N.J.D.E.P.-approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure
plan; and/or where a high risk exists for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities. The term “HPLA” shall have the same meaning as “High
Pollutant Loading Area.”
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE – A surface that has been covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION -- The process by which precipitation enters the soil through its surface.
IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION – A monetary fee collected by the Little Egg Harbor
Township in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater runoff quality standards established in this
ordinance.
INSTALL – To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components of a stormwater
management system.
MITIGATION – Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate for conditions
that may result from those cases where an Applicant has demonstrated the inability or
impracticality of strict compliance with the stormwater management requirements set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local
ordinance which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from strict compliance
is granted by Little Egg Harbor Township and the Pinelands Commission.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL –
Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, in
coordination with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, the New Jersey Department of Transportation, municipal
engineers, county engineers, consulting firms, contractors, and environmental
organizations to address the standards in the New Jersey Stormwater Management Rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:8. The BMP manual provides examples of ways to meet the standards
contained in the rule. An Applicant may demonstrate that other proposed management
practices will also achieve the standards established in the rules. The manual, and notices
regarding future versions of the manual, are available from the Division of Watershed
Management, N.J.D.E.P., P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the
N.J.D.E.P.’s website, www.N.J.stormwater.org. The term “New Jersey BMP Manual”
shall have the same meaning as “New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual.”
N.J.D.E.P. – The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
Article XIII
69
NJPDES – The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJPDES PERMIT – A permit issued by the N.J.D.E.P. pursuant to the authority of the
Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 7:14A for a
discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE --
(1) Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other than a
point source, from which pollutants are or may be discharged;
(2) Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other than a
point source, that may temporarily or permanently change any chemical, physical,
biological, or radiological characteristic of waters of the State from what was or is
the natural, pristine condition of such waters, or that may increase the degree of
such change; or
(3) Any activity, factor, or condition, other than a point source, that contributes or
may contribute to water pollution.
The term “NPS” shall have the same meaning as “nonpoint source.”
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP – A stormwater management measure, strategy or
combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater runoff impacts through sound
site planning and design. Nonstructural BMPs include such practices as minimizing site
disturbance, preserving important site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious
cover, flattening slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass lawns,
maintaining natural drainage features and characteristics and controlling stormwater
runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The term “Low Impact Development
technique” shall have the same meaning as “nonstructural BMP.”
NUTRIENT – A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus, which
is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
PERMEABILITY – The rate at which water moves through a saturated unit area of soil
or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one, determined as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-
6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test), N.J.A.C. 6.5 (Pit Bailing Test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (Piezometer
Test). Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by the approving
authority provided the test procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for
hydraulic head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units
expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source reference.
Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical, or engineering text and
design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
symposia, or peer-review journals. Neither a Soil Permeability Class Rating Test, as
described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a Percolation Test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-
6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing permeability values for the purpose of complying
with this ordinance.
Article XIII
70
PERMEABLE – Having a permeability of one (1”) inch per hour or faster. The terms
“permeable soil,” “permeable rock” and “permeable fill” shall be construed accordingly.
PERSON – Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PINELANDS COMMISSION OR COMMISSION – The Commission created pursuant
Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.
PINELANDS CMP – The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan
(N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq.).
POINT SOURCE – Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but
not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container,
rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system,
vessel, or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term
does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT – Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substances (except those regulated
under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue
discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State,
or to a domestic treatment works. “Pollutant” includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER – A person licensed to practice Professional Engineering
in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE – The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE – One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the same location
(within five feet of each other) and depth, within the same soil horizon or substratum. In
the case of fill material, replicate tests are tests performed on sub-samples of the same
bulk sample packed to the same bulk density.
SAND – A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which are between 0.05
and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter. Also, a soil textural class having 85
percent or more of sand and a content of silt and clay such that the percentage of silt plus
1.5 times the percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in subsection O(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
Article XIII
71
SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE – The upper limit of the shallowest zone of
saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT – Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product
of erosion.
SITE – The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
SOIL – All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin which is not a rock
substratum, including sediments below the biologically active and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL – Any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility,
that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
STORMWATER – Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs
off the land’s surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP – A basin or other facility constructed within
permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff. An infiltration
BMP does not normally have a structural outlet to discharge runoff from the stormwater
quality design storm. Instead, outflow from an infiltration BMP is through the
surrounding soil. The terms “infiltration measure” and “infiltration practice” shall have
the same meaning as “stormwater infiltration basin.”
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE – Any structural or nonstructural
strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or
reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration
or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances. This includes, but is not limited to, structural
and nonstructural stormwater Best Management Practices described in the New Jersey
BMP Manual and designed to meet the standards for stormwater control contained within
this ordinance. The terms “stormwater Best Management Practice” and “stormwater
BMP” shall have the same meaning as “stormwater management measure.”
STORMWATER RUNOFF – Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm
sewers, resulting from precipitation.
Article XIII
72
SUITABLE SOIL – Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high water table, which
contains less than fifty (50%) percent by volume of coarse fragments and which has a
tested permeability rate of between one (1”) inch and twenty (20”) inches per hour.
SURFACE WATER – Any waters of the State which are not groundwater.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION – The time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the point of interest within a
watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS – The insoluble solid matter suspended in water and
stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in accordance with the procedure
contained in the “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”
prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American
Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The term “TSS”
shall have the same meaning as “Total Suspended Solids.”
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA – A flood hazard area, which may be influenced by
stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic
Ocean.
WATERS OF THE STATE – The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies
of surface and groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE – The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL – A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends below the
seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is greater than its largest surface
dimension.
WETLANDS – Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water at a magnitude,
duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth of hydrophytes. Wetlands
include lands with poorly drained or very poorly drained soils as designated by the
National Cooperative Soils Survey of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture. Wetlands include coastal wetlands and inland wetlands,
including submerged lands. The “New Jersey Pinelands Commission Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands Supplement to the
Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands,” dated January,
1991, as amended, may be utilized in delineating the extent of wetlands based on the
definitions of wetlands and wetlands soils contained in this section, N.J.A.C. 7:50 2.11,
6.4 and 6.5. The term “wetland” shall have the same meaning as “wetlands.”
WET POND – A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/or excavation that
provides both permanent and temporary storage of stormwater runoff. It has an outlet
structure that creates a permanent pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and
Article XIII
73
promotes the settling of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be designed as
a multi-stage facility that also provides extended detention for enhanced stormwater
quality design storm treatment and runoff storage and attenuation for stormwater quantity
management. The term “stormwater retention basin” shall have the same meaning as
“wet pond.”
L. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($1,250.00), by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or by
community service of not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service as determined by the Municipal Court
Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
(2) The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to abatement
summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
O. Appendices.
(1) Methods for Calculating Groundwater Recharge.
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey. Available at
http://www.N.J.geology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(b) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS). Available
in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at http://www.N.J.stormwater.
org/bmp_manual2.htm.
(2) N.J.D.E.P. Nonstructural Strategies Point System. The New Jersey Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a), and subsection H(1) of this Ordinance,
require nonstructural stormwater management strategies to be incorporated into
the site design of a major development. A total of nine strategies are to be used to
the maximum extent practical to meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity requirements of the Rules prior to utilizing
structural stormwater management measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural
Stormwater Management Strategies Point System (NSPS) provides a tool to assist
planners, designers and regulators in determining that the strategies have been
used to the “maximum extent practical” at a major development as required by the
Rules. Refer online to http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
(3) Soils.
(a) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
Article XIII
74
Source: US Department of Agriculture.
(b) Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix, the following terms shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
A-HORIZON – The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil profile. The
upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by maximum accumulation of finely
divided, dark colored organic residues, known as humus, which are intimately
mixed with the mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION – A zone of saturation which exists
immediately below a hydraulically restrictive horizon, and which has an upper
surface which is at a pressure greater than atmospheric, either seasonally or
throughout the year.
CHROMA – The relative purity or strength of a color, a quantity which decreases
with increasing grayness. Chroma is one of the three (3) variables of soil color as
defined in the Munsell system of classification.
CLAY – A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which are smaller
than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter. Also, a soil textural class
having more than forty (40%) percent clay, less than forty-five (45%) percent
sand, and less than forty (40%) percent silt, as shown in subsection O(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
Article XIII
75
CLAY LOAM – A soil textural class having twenty-seven (27%) percent to forty
(40%) percent clay and twenty (20%) percent to forty-five (45%) percent sand, as
shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
COARSE FRAGMENT – A rock fragment contained within the soil which is
greater than two millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter or which is retained
on a two millimeter sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT – A report prepared by the US Department
of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service which includes maps
showing the distribution of soil mapping units throughout a particular county
together with narrative descriptions of the soil series shown and other information
relating to the uses and properties of the various soil series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION – Control over and direction of work carried out by
others with full knowledge of and responsibility for such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER OF A PARTICLE – The diameter of
a sphere which has a volume equal to the volume of the particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON – A horizon of limited thickness within
the soil profile which provides inadequate removal of pollutants from stormwater
due to a high coarse fragment content, excessively coarse texture and/or
excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM – A substratum below the soil
profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile pits and borings and which
provides inadequate removal of pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse
fragment content, excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid
permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE – A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes only under very strong pressure; cannot be crushed
between the thumb and forefinger and shall be broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE – A type of soil material whose moist aggregated mass
crushes under moderate pressure between the thumb and forefinger but resistance
is distinctly noticeable.
HARD CONSISTENCE – A type of soil material whose dry aggregated mass is
moderately resistant to pressure; can be broken in the hands without difficulty but
is barely breakable between the thumb and forefinger.
HUE – The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables of soil color
defined within the Munsell system of classification.
Article XIII
76
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON – A horizon within the soil
profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral movement of water and
which is underlain by permeable soil horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon
which has a saturated permeability less than one (1”) inch per hour is
hydraulically restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM – A substratum below the
soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral movement of water
and which extends beyond the depth of profile pits or borings or to a massive
substratum. A substratum which has a saturated permeability less than one (1”)
inch per hour is hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND – A soil textural class, as shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of eighty-five (85%) percent to
ninety (90%) percent sand with a percentage of silt plus one and a half (1.5) times
the percentage of clay not in excess of fifteen (15); or a minimum of seventy
(70%) percent to eighty-five (85%) percent sand with a percentage of silt plus one
and a half (1.5) times the percentage of clay not in excess of thirty (30).
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT – The moisture content corresponding to the transition
between the plastic and semi-solid states of soil consistency. This corresponds to
the lowest soil moisture content at which the soil can be molded in the fingers to
form a rod or wire, one-eighth (1/8”) inch in thickness, without crumbling.
MOTTLING – A color pattern observed in soil consisting of blotches or spots of
contrasting color. The term “mottle” refers to an individual blotch or spot. The
terms “color variegation,” “iron depletion” and “iron concentration” are
equivalent to the term “mottling.” Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an
indication of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
MUNSELL SYSTEM – A system of classifying soil color consisting of an alphanumeric
designation for hue, value and chroma, such as “7.5 YR 6/2,” together
with a descriptive color name, such as “strong brown.”
O-HORIZON – A surface horizon, occurring above the A-horizon in some soils,
which is composed primarily of undecomposed or partially decomposed plant
remains which have not been incorporated into the mineral soil.
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION – A zone of saturation which occurs
immediately above a hydraulically restrictive horizon and which is underlain by
permeable horizons or substrata which are not permanently or seasonally
saturated.
PIEZOMETER -- A device consisting of a length of metal or plastic pipe, open at
the bottom or perforated within a specified interval, and used for the
Article XIII
77
determination of depth to water, permeability or hydraulic head within a specific
soil horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE – Characterized by a soil aggregate which has one axis
distinctly shorter than the other two and are oriented with the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION – A zone of saturation which extends
vertically without interruption below the depth of soil borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY – A soil textural class having thirty-five (35%) percent or more
of clay and forty-five (45%) percent or more of sand, as shown in subsection
O(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SANDY LOAM – A soil textural class, as shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of twenty (20%) percent clay, and
the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage of clay exceeds 30, and contains
fifty-two (52%) percent or more sand; or less than seven (7%) percent clay, less
than fifty (50%) percent silt, and between forty-three (43%) percent and fifty-two
(52%) percent sand.
SILT – A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which are between
0.002 and 0.05 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter. It also means a soil
textural class having eighty (80%) percent or more of silt and twelve (12%)
percent or less of clay, as shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).
SILT LOAM – A soil textural class having fifty (50%) percent or more of silt and
twelve (12%) percent to twenty-seven (27%) percent of clay; or fifty (50) percent
to eighty (80%) percent of silt and less than twelve (12%) percent of clay, as
shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY – A soil textural class having forty (40%) percent or more of clay
and forty (40%) percent or more of silt, as shown in subsection O(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY LOAM – A soil textural class having twenty-seven (27%) to forty
(40%) percent of clay and less than twenty (20%) percent of sand, as shown in
subsection O(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SOIL AGGREGATE – A naturally occurring unit of soil structure consisting of
particles of sand, silt, clay, organic matter, and coarse fragments held together by
the natural cohesion of the soil.
SOIL COLOR – The soil color name and Munsell color designation determined
by comparison of the moist soil with color chips contained in a Munsell soil color
book.
Article XIII
78
SOIL CONSISTENCE – The resistance of a soil aggregate or clod to being
crushed between the fingers or broken by the hands. Terms for describing soil
consistence described are in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON – A layer within a soil profile differing from layers of soil
above and below it in one or more of the soil morphological characteristics
including color, texture, coarse fragment content, structure, consistence and
mottling.
SOIL LOG – A description of the soil profile which includes the depth, thickness,
color, texture, coarse fragment content, mottling, structure and consistence of
each soil horizon or substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT – An area outlined on a map in a County Soil Survey
Report and marked with a letter symbol designating a soil phase, a complex of
two or more soil phases, or some other descriptive term where no soil type has
been identified.
SOIL PHASE – A specific type of soil which is mapped by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service and which belongs to a soil series described within the
County Soil Survey Report.
SOIL PROFILE – A vertical cross-section of undisturbed soil showing the
characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the soil which have formed as a
result of the combined effects of parent material, topography, climate, biological
activity and time.
SOIL SERIES – A grouping of soil types possessing a specific range of soil
profile characteristics which are described within the County Soil Survey Report.
Each soil series may consist of several “soil phases” which may differ in slope,
texture of the surface horizon or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS – One of the shape classes of soil structure
described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE – The naturally occurring arrangement, within a soil horizon,
of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse fragments and organic matter, which are
held together in clusters or aggregates of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT – An excavation made for the purpose of exposing a soil profile
which is to be described.
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS – One of the classes of soil texture defined within the
USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey Manual, Agricultural Handbook No.
18, USDA Soil Conservation Service 1962.)
Article XIII
79
SOIL TEXTURE – The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay in that portion
of the soil which passes through a sieve with two millimeter openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL – The depth below the ground surface or the elevation
with respect to some reference level, of the water level observed within a soil
profile pit or boring, or within a piezometer, after this level has stabilized or
become relatively constant with the passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM – A layer of soil or rock material present below the soil profile
and extending beyond the depth of soil borings or profile pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL – All soil other than suitable soil.
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION – The system of classifying soil texture
used by the United States Department of Agriculture which defines 12 soil
textural classes based upon the weight percentages of sand, silt and clay in that
portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with two millimeter (2 mm)
openings. The soil textural classes are shown graphically on the USDA Soil
Textural Triangle, as shown in subsection O(3)(a).
VALUE – The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one of the three variables
of soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE – Characterized by a moist soil which crushes
under strong pressure; barely crushable between thumb and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE – Characterized by a dry soil which is resistant to
pressure, can be broken in the hands only with difficulty; not breakable between
the thumb and forefinger.
ZONE OF SATURATION – A layer within or below the soil profile which is
saturated with ground water either seasonally or throughout the year. This
includes both regional and perched zones.
(c) Methods for Assessing Soil Suitability for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall serve
as the basis for the site selection and design of stormwater infiltration
BMPs. The subsurface investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a
series of soil test pits and soil permeability tests conducted in accordance
with the following:
[1] All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be performed
under the direct supervision of a Professional Engineer. All soil
logs and permeability test data shall be accompanied by a
certification by a Professional Engineer. The results and location
(horizontal and vertical) of all soil test pits and soil permeability
Article XIII
80
tests, both passing and failing, shall be reported to Little Egg
Harbor Township.
[2] During all subsurface investigations and soil test procedures,
adequate safety measures shall be taken to prohibit unauthorized
access to the excavations at all times. It is the responsibility of
persons performing or witnessing subsurface investigations and
soil permeability tests to comply with all applicable Federal, State
and local laws and regulations governing occupational safety.
[3] A minimum of two (2) soil test pits shall be excavated within the
footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the site.
Placement of the test pits shall be within twenty (20’) feet of the
basin perimeter, located along the longest axis bisecting the BMP.
For BMPs larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, a
minimum of one (1) additional soil test pit shall be conducted
within each additional area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
The additional test pit(s) shall be placed approximately equidistant
to other test pits, so as to provide adequate characterization of the
subsurface material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be excavated
in order to accurately characterize the subsurface conditions below
the proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits shall extend to a
minimum depth of eight (8’) feet below the lowest elevation of the
basin bottom or to a depth that is at least two (2) times the
maximum potential water depth in the proposed infiltration BMP,
whichever is greater.
[4] A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit. The test
pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of the existing
ground surface, the depth and thickness (in inches) of each soil
horizon or substratum, the dominant matrix or background and
mottle colors using the Munsell system of classification for hue,
value and chroma, the appropriate textural class as shown on the
USDA textural triangle, the volume percentage of coarse
fragments (larger than two (2) millimeters in diameter), the
abundance, size, and contrast of mottles, the soil structure, soil
consistence, and soil moisture condition, using standard USDA
classification terminology for each of these soil properties. Soil test
pit logs shall identify the presence of any soil horizon, substratum
or other feature that exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than
one (1”) inch per hour.
[5] Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally high water
level, either perched or regional, and the static water level based
upon the presence of soil mottles or other redoximorphic features,
and observed seepage or saturation. Where redoxomorphic
features including soil mottles resulting from soil saturation are
present, they shall be interpreted to represent the depth to the
Article XIII
81
seasonal high water table unless soil saturation or seepage is
observed at a higher level. When the determination of the
seasonally high water table shall be made in ground previously
disturbed by excavation, direct observation of the static water table
during the months of January through April shall be the only
method permitted.
[6] Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately below a
perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to exhibit
unacceptable permeability (less than one (1”) inch per hour). The
perched zone of saturation may be observed directly, inferred
based upon soil morphology, or confirmed by performance of a
hydraulic head test as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
[7] Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils that
exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A permeability test shall
be conducted in all soils that immediately underlie a perched zone
of saturation. Any zone of saturation which is present below a soil
horizon which exhibits an in-place permeability of less than 0.2
inches per hour shall be considered an artesian zone of saturation
unless a minimum one foot thick zone of unsaturated soil, free of
mottling or other redoximorphic features and possessing a chroma
of four or higher, exists immediately below the unsuitable soil.
[8] A minimum of one (1) permeability test shall be performed at each
soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be determined
using test methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube
Permeameter Test), 6.5 (Pit Bailing Test) or 6.6 (Piezometer Test).
When the tube permeameter test is used, a minimum of two
replicate samples shall be taken and tested. Alternative
permeability test procedures may be accepted by the approving
authority provided the test procedure attains saturation of
surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head effects on
infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units expressed
in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source
reference. Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology,
geotechnical or engineering text and design manuals, proceedings
of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia,
or peer-review journals. Neither a Soil Permeability Class Rating
Test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a Percolation Test, as
described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for
establishing permeability values for the purpose of complying with
this ordinance.
[9] Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in place
below the basin as follows. Where no soil replacement is
proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum within four (4’) feet
of the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a depth equal to
Article XIII
82
two (2) times the maximum potential water depth within the basin,
whichever is greater. Where soil replacement is proposed, the
permeability tests shall be conducted within the soil immediately
below the depth of proposed soil replacement or within the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to a depth equal to
two (2) times the maximum potential water depth within the basin,
whichever is greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the
most hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at depths
greater than those identified above based upon the discretion of the
design or testing engineer. The tested infiltration rate should then
be divided by two (2) to establish the soil’s design permeability
rate. Such division will provide a 100% safety factor to the tested
rate.
[10] The minimum acceptable “tested permeability rate” of any soil
horizon or substratum shall be one (1”) inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower than one (1”)
inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for stormwater
infiltration. The maximum reportable “tested permeability rate” of
any soil horizon or substratum shall be no greater than twenty
(20”) inches per hour regardless of the rate attained in the test
procedure.
[11] After all construction activities have been completed on the
development site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, a minimum of one permeability test shall be
conducted within the most hydraulically restrictive soil horizon or
substratum below the as-built BMP to ensure the performance of
the infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools and manual
permeability test procedures shall be used for the purpose of
confirming BMP performance. In addition, the infiltration BMP
shall be flooded with water sufficient to demonstrate the
performance of the BMP. Test results shall be certified to the
municipal engineer.
[12] A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for each
stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding analysis
shall calculate the maximum height of the groundwater mound
based upon the volume of the maximum design storm. The
Professional Engineer conducting the analysis shall provide the
municipal engineer with the methodology and supporting
documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall certify to
Little Egg Harbor Township, based upon the analysis, that the
groundwater mound will not cause stormwater or groundwater to
breakout to the land surface or cause adverse impact to adjacent
surface water bodies, wetlands or subsurface structures including
but not limited to basements and septic systems. If there is more
than one infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and
how the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall be
Article XIII
83
calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that will remain in
place within the explored aquifer thickness unless alternative
analyses is authorized by the municipal engineer. The mounding
analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section of the infiltration
BMP and surrounding topography and the mound analysis shall
extend out to the point(s) at which the mound intersects with the
preexisting maximum water table elevation.
[13] The Applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater infiltration BMPs
meet the seventy-two (72) hour drain time requirement established
in subsection I(2)(a) of this ordinance.
(4) Pretreatment Measures for Infiltration BMPs. By reducing incoming velocities
and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment can extend the functional life and
increase the pollutant removal capability of infiltration measures. Therefore, the
installation of pretreatment measures is recommended for all development sites.
Pretreatment measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Vegetative filter strips;
(b) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention system, the
infiltration basin takes the place of the standard underdrain;
(c) Sand filters;
(d) Grassed swales; and
(e) Detention basins.
(5) Collection and Conveyance.
(a) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that incorporate site
design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris from
drainage systems shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, “solid and floatable materials” means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (N.J.D.O.T)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
N.J.D.O.T Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7) square inches, or is
no greater than one half (0.5) inch across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
Article XIII
84
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of
no more than seven (7) square inches, or be no greater than two
(2”) inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Section III are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 and
5/8”) inches long and one and one-half (1.5”) inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half (0.5”)
inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one (1”) inch spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in Section III of this ordinance; or
[d] Where the N.J.D.E.P. determines, pursuant to the New
Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-
7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy
the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(b) Catch Basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or without sumps.
Catch basins may provide pretreatment for other stormwater BMPs by
capturing large sediments. The sediment and pollutant removal efficiency
of catch basins depends on the size of the sump and the performance of
routine maintenance to retain the available sediment storage space in the
sump. Where catch basins with sumps are proposed, the minimum two
(2’) feet separation between the bottom of the sump and seasonally high
water table shall be provided.
(c) Open or Perforated Conveyance Piping. Where adequate separation to the
seasonal high water table exists, stormwater from the development site
may be conveyed to a stormwater basin via a system of perforated pipes.
These pipes may be made of PVC or corrugated metal and are available
with perforations of varying size and spacing. Perforated pipe
Article XIII
85
specifications shall be certified by a Professional Engineer. A
Professional Engineer shall certify that perforated conveyance piping will
not act to intercept the seasonal high water table and convey groundwater
to the stormwater basin. All open or perforated stormwater conveyance
systems shall be installed with a minimum separation of two (2’) feet from
the seasonal high water table
P. Additional Sources for Technical Guidance.
(1) N.J.D.E.P. Technical Guidance Sources.
(a) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O.
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; or online at
http://www.N.J.stormwater.org.
(b) N.J.D.E.P. Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual.
Available from the Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625; or online at http://N.J.edl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/1188.pdf .
(2) Additional Guidance Sources.
(a) New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O. Box 7, 15 Springfield Road,
New Lisbon, New Jersey 08064; Phone: 609-894-7300; Website:
http://www.state.N.J.us/pinelands.
(b) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey. Available from all State Soil
Conservation Districts, including Ocean County Soil Conservation
District, 714 Lacey Road, Forked River, New Jersey 08731; Phone: 609-
971-7002; Fax 609-267-3347; Website: http://ocscd.org.
(c) State Soil Conservation Districts.
(d) New Jersey Department of Transportation, P.O. Box 600, Trenton, N.J.
08625-0600; Phone: 609-530-3536; Website: http://www.state.N.J.us/
transportation.
Article XIV
1
ARTICLE XIV
Improvements and Assessments
§ 15-14.1. Off-site and off-tract improvements.
A. Final approval prerequisites. Prior to the granting of final approval of any subdivision or
cluster development and prior to the issuance of any building permits for any land use,
including land uses which require site plan approval pursuant to this chapter and any
residence or other use of property on an unimproved street or where any off-tract
improvements have not been installed, the developer shall pay their pro rata share of the
cost of providing any reasonable and necessary street improvements and water, sewerage
and drainage facilities, and easements therefore, located outside the property limits of the
development but necessitated or required by construction or improvements within the
development. All payments shall be in the manner provided in Subsection C., below, it
being the intent of this subsection that the developer bear that portion of the cost which
bears a rational basis to the needs created by the development and/or benefits conferred
upon such development.
B. Improvements required. Off-site and off-tract improvements shall include the following:
(1) All improvements of the types described in § 15-16.4. for on-site installation,
where the need for the providing of such improvements off site or off tract is, in
whole or in part, made necessary by the proposed development application of the
developer and where the making of such improvements will confer a benefit upon
the developer's lands which are the subject of the development application.
(2) Any improvement or facility, the installation of which is required in the public
interest and the public need for which would not arise but for the improvement of
the lands which are the subject of the development application and the installation
of which would confer a benefit upon the developer's lands which are the subject
of the development application. In addition to improvements of the type
described in this chapter and referred to in Subsection B.(1) above, improvements
required to maintain a safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic are specifically
declared to be necessary in the public interest.
(3) The installation of new or the extension or modification of existing improvements
made necessary in whole or in part by the development application which will be
benefited by the improvement.
C. Developer's share of cost for improvements not installed by them. In the event that the
developer shall not be required to install off-site or off-tract improvements by virtue of
the provisions of this chapter, then and in that event, there shall be paid to the Township
Treasurer the amount of the developer's share of the finally determined cost of the off-site
or off-tract improvement. All moneys received by the Township in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and such
funds shall be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same purpose. If the improvements are not initiated within a
period of ten (10) years from the date of payment or other mutually agreeable period of
Article XIV
2
time, all deposited funds shall be returned to the developer, together with accumulated
interest.
D. Cost allocation.
(1) Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated by the
proposed development and where no other property owner(s) receive(s) a special
benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, at their sole expense and as a
condition of approval, to provide and install such improvements.
(2) Proportionate allocation. Where it is determined that properties outside the
development will also be benefited by the off-tract improvement, the allocation
formulas shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of the cost of
such improvements to the developer.
(3) Predetermined allocation. In some cases, where the nature of the improvement
makes it difficult to determine the extent of cost of the improvement or its
allocation to a specific project, the Township Committee may enact by ordinance
specific predetermined assessments.
§ 15-14.2. Recreation.
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]; [Amended 9/11/2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-21]; [Amended 10/13/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-30]; [Amended
12/10/2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
“Reserved”
Article XV
1
ARTICLE XV
Specifications of Documents to Be Submitted
§ 15-15.1. Concept plan checklist.
The following information and documents must be submitted to the Planning Board for a concept
plan review:
A. The name and address of the owner and applicant.
B. The name, signature, license number and address of the Engineer, Land Surveyor,
Architect, Professional Planner and/or Landscape Architect, as applicable, involved in the
preparation of the plat.
C. A title block denoting the type of application, Tax Map sheet, County, name of
municipality, block and lot and street location.
D. A key map at a specified scale showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, etc., within five hundred (500) feet.
E. A schedule of required and provided zone district(s) requirements, including lot area,
width, depth, yard setbacks, building coverage, open space, parking, etc.
F. A North arrow and scale.
G. The general size and location of any existing or proposed structures.
H. The general location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets.
I. An existing copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
covenants.
J. Any existing or proposed easements or land reserved for or dedicated to public use.
K. Payment of the concept review fee.
L. All existing streets, watercourses and floodplains and the general location of wetlands or
other environmentally sensitive areas on and within two hundred (200) feet of the site.
M. Existing right-of-ways and/or easements on and within two hundred (200) feet of the
tract.
N. Topographical features of the subject property from the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey Map.
Article XV
2
O. The general boundary, limits, nature and extent of wooded areas, specimen trees and
other significant physical features.
P. The general vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
Q. The following shall be addressed before the application can be deemed complete:
(1) Appropriate fees from the fee schedule.
(2) One (1) copy of the development application checklist.
(3) Twelve (12) copies of the subdivision plans, including the plat detail criteria set
forth in:
(a) Section 15-15.2.A for minor subdivisions.
(b) Section 15-15.2.B. for preliminary approval for major subdivisions.
(c) Section 15-15.2.C. for final approval for major subdivisions.
(4) Twenty (20) copies of the development application [twelve (12) copies for Zoning
Board of Adjustment “C” Variances].
(5) One (1) copy of the tax certification.
(6) One (1) copy of the notice of fees and agreement to pay the same.
(7) One (1) copy of the affidavit of ownership.
(8) One (1) copy of the disclosure of ownership (if a partnership, corporation or joint
ownership).
(9) One (1) copy of the affidavit of noncollusion.
(10) Twelve (12) copies of the permit refusal from the Zoning Officer.
(11) Twelve (12) copies of the Tax Map resolution sheet (final only).
(12) Five (5) copies of the environmental assessment, if required.
(13) Five (5) copies of the traffic impact study, if required.
(14) Five (5) copies of the drainage calculations.
(15) Five (5) copies of the soils report.
(16) In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required under the
Township Code.
R. A minimum of four (4) days prior to a public hearing, the following additional items shall
be submitted:
(1) One (1) copy of the affidavit of proof of service.
(2) One (1) copy of the list of property owners within a two hundred-foot radius.
(3) One (1) copy of certified mail receipts from the post office.
(4) One (1) copy of the proof of publication from the newspaper.
§ 15-15.2. Subdivision plat details.
A. Minor subdivisions.
(1) General requirements. Minor subdivision shall be based on a land survey and
shall be drawn at a scale not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch for
subdivisions up to one hundred (100) acres in size and not more than two hundred
(200) feet to the inch for subdivisions over one hundred (100) acres in size and
shall show or be accompanied by the information specified below.
(2) Specific requirements shall be as follows:
Article XV
3
(a) Title block. The title block shall appear on all streets and include:
[1] The title of the minor subdivision.
[2] The name, if any.
[3] The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be
subdivided as shown on the latest Township Tax Map.
[4] The acreage of the tract to be subdivided.
[5] The date (original and all revisions).
[6] The names and addresses of the owner and the subdivider, so
designated.
[7] The name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
land surveyor who prepared the map. (The plat should bear the
embossed seal of the land surveyor.)
[8] A schedule should be placed on the map indicating the acreage of
the tract, the approximate number of lots, the zone, minimum
required lot areas, setbacks, yards and dimensions.
[9] In the Pinelands Area, the information required pursuant to the
Township Code.
(b) Detailed information:
[1] A key map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000)
feet, showing the location of the tract to be subdivided with
reference to surrounding areas, existing streets which intersect or
border the tract, the names of all such streets and the location of
any Township boundary which is within five hundred (500) feet of
the subdivision.
[2] The names of all owners of and property lines of parcels within
two hundred (200) feet of land to be subdivided, including
properties across the street, as shown by the most recent records of
the Township.
[3] All existing streets, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and flood
hazard areas within the proposed subdivision and within two
hundred (200) feet of the boundaries thereof.
[4] All existing structures and uses, with an indication of those which
are to be destroyed or removed, as well as the shortest distance
between any existing building and a proposed or existing lot line.
All front, side and rear yard setback lines shall be shown
conforming to the Zoning Ordinance.
[5] The boundaries, nature and extent of wooded area and the location
of any other significant physical features, including swamps, bogs
and ponds, within the proposed subdivision.
[6] Existing and proposed right-of-ways and easements within and
adjoining the tract, with dimensions, existing driveways, street
names and the purpose of any easement. Sight triangles shall be
shown. Copies of the text of any deed restrictions shall be
included.
[7] A North arrow and written graphic scales.
Article XV
4
[8] It shall be one (1) of four (4) standard sizes, namely thirty by fortytwo
(30 x 42) inches, twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches,
fifteen by twenty-one (15 x 21) inches or eight and one-half by
thirteen (8½ x 13) inches, as measured from cutting edges. If one
(1) sheet is not of sufficient size to contain the entire territory, the
map may be divided into sections, to be shown on separate sheets
of equal sizes, with references on each sheet to the adjoining
sheets.
[9] It shall show the dimensions, bearings and curve data, including
lengths of tangents, radii, arcs, chords and central angles, for all
center-line and right-of-way-line curves on streets sufficient to
enable the definite location of all lines and boundaries shown
thereon, including drainage easements, public easements and areas
dedicated for public use.
[10] Tangents, chord, arc, radius and central angle at all street corners.
[11] All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries
of the subdivision and all lots and all lands reserved or dedicated
for public use shall balance, and either description shall close
within a limit of error of not more than one (1) part in ten thousand
(10,000).
[12] Each block and each lot shall be numbered in accordance with a
scheme approved by the Tax Assessor.
[13] All municipal boundary lines crossing or adjacent to the territory
intended to be subdivided shall be shown and designated.
[14] The names of adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the file number of
the recording or the names of the owners of adjacent properties.
[15] The map shall clearly show all monumentation and property
markers as required, including monuments found, monuments set
and monuments to be set. An indication shall be made where
monumentation found has been reset. All monuments, as required,
shall be placed in compliance with the New Jersey Map Filing
Law, as amended.
[16] An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all the record
title owners of the lands proposed to be subdivided by the map and
the consent, in writing, of all such owners to the approval of such
map shall accompany the plat or be shown thereon.
[17] Such other information as the Board Engineer or Board may
require or request during the informal discussion of the
subdivision.
[18] The map must include certification blocks for the signatures of the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board, the Board Engineer and such
other certifications as required by law.
[19] In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required
under the Township Code.
[20] The location, size and type of existing trees, shrubs and any
significant natural features.
Article XV
5
(c) Required documentation:
[1] Ocean County Planning Board approval, where required.
[2] Proof of payment of real estate taxes.
[3] A Certificate of Title, which may be in letter form, signed by a
member of the New Jersey Bar or by a Title Officer or authorized
agency of a title insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of New Jersey, which certificate shall confirm that the owner
of the premises in question is the applicant as shown on the plat.
[4] Such other submittals as may be required by State or local law.
Unless other specific provisions are made in this chapter or by
statute, all approvals required of Federal, State, County and local
agencies or officials shall be obtained and evidence thereof filed
with the Planning Board prior to the signing of a plat.
(3) If the Board agrees, approval may be granted conditioned upon the receipt of any
necessary subsequent approval, but no approval signatures will be affixed to any
plat prior to obtaining any such required approvals. The Board may determine a
reasonable time for obtaining all such required approvals; and such time in no
case shall exceed one hundred ninety (190) days. In the event that such required
approvals are not obtained within such time, the conditional approval shall lapse,
and submission of a new application will be necessary.
B. Preliminary plats for major subdivisions shall include the following:
(1) The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of
not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, on sheets of equal size and a
maximum size of thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches. It shall be prepared and
sealed by a Land Surveyor licensed by the State of New Jersey, with design and
improvements prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed by New Jersey. The
preliminary plat shall be designed in compliance with the provision of § 15-10.5.
and shall contain the information required by this section.
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title of the preliminary plat.
(b) The name, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Township Tax Map.
(d) The acreage of the tract to be subdivided, to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(e) The date (of the original and all revisions).
(f) The names and addresses of the owner and the subdivider, so designated.
(g) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the tract,
the number of lots, the zone, minimum required lot areas, setbacks, yards
and dimensions.
(h) The name(s), signature(s), address(es), and license number(s) of the
Engineer and Land Surveyor who prepared the map. (The plat shall bear
the embossed seal of the Engineer and Land Surveyor.)
(3) A key map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet, showing
the location of the tract to be subdivided, with reference to surrounding areas,
Article XV
6
existing streets which intersect or border the tract, the names of all such streets
and any township boundary which is within five hundred (500) feet of the site.
(4) The names of all owners of and property lines of parcels within two hundred
(200) feet of the site, including properties across the street, as shown by the most
recent records of the Township.
(5) The plat shall be based on a current, certified boundary survey. The date of the
survey and the name of the person making the same shall be shown on the map.
(6) Existing one-foot interval contours based on United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum (MSL-O) shall be shown extending a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet beyond the boundary of the tract in question and shall be certified by a
New Jersey Licensed Surveyor or Professional Engineer as to accuracy, except
that where the slopes exceed five percent (5%), a two-foot interval may be used.
The source of elevation base datum shall be note.
(7) All existing streets, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and flood areas within
the proposed subdivision and within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries
thereof, both the width of the paving and the width of the right-of-way of each
street, existing public easements and township borders within two hundred (200)
feet of the subdivision.
(8) All existing structures, an indication of those which are to be destroyed or
removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions of those to remain.
(9) The boundaries, nature and extent of wooded areas and other important physical
features, including swamps, bogs and ponds, within the proposed subdivision.
(10) The layout of the proposed subdivision, drawn in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(11) All proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the purposes thereof and
proposed streets within the proposed subdivision. The proposed streets shall
show the right-of-way and proposed pavement width.
(12) The existing systems of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger tract of
which it is a part, together with information on how it is proposed to dispose of
surface drainage.
(13) The acreage of the drainage area (or areas) of each natural or man-made
watercourse traversing the subdivision, including the area within the subdivision
and the area upstream from the subdivision.
(14) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet.
(15) A North arrow and written and graphic scales.
(16) A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided, or certification that none exists.
(17) Preliminary utility layouts showing methods of connection and sources of service.
(18) The proposed location and area, in acres or square feet, of all required or proposed
open space areas.
(19) The preliminary plat shall indicate the zone and tract acreage and shall show the
required minimum lot area, front, side and rear yard setback lines and the lot line
dimensions and areas of each lot being created by the proposed subdivision.
(20) Preliminary construction, grading, drainage and utility plans and profiles, at a
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet horizontally and one (1) inch
Article XV
7
equals five (5) feet vertically, shall accompany the final plat and show the
following information:
(a) A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at
intervals of one (1) foot throughout the tract, except that if slopes exceed
five percent (5%), an interval of two (2) feet is permissible. Datum shall
be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the source of the datum
shall be noted.
(b) The proposed spot or finished elevations at all property corners, the curb
opposite property corners, corners of all proposed structures or dwellings,
the first-floor elevation of all proposed structures or dwellings and
drainage arrows designating direction of overland drainage flow on each
lot.
(c) Complete information for storm drainage and sanitary sewer systems,
including but not limited to invert, rim and top-of-casting elevation for all
drainage structures and the size, length, type and class of pipe and slope of
all pipe. The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with the standards set forth herein.
(d) The slope, direction of flow and typical section for all streams, swales and
ditches.
(e) Preliminary center-line profile grades, correct to one-hundredth (1/100)
foot, with full information concerning vertical curve elevation.
(f) All center-line elevations of each street at a maximum interval of one
hundred (100) feet.
(g) Complete construction details for all structures, including but not limited
to manholes, inlets, headwalls, yard drains, culverts, bridges and pumping
stations.
(h) Complete off-site information concerning final disposition of stormwater
runoff and sanitary sewer connections to existing or proposed facilities.
(i) Utility layouts and cross sections (sewers, water, gas, electric, telephone,
etc.) showing feasible connections to any existing or proposed utility
systems; provided, however, that layouts of gas, electric and telephone
lines are not required. An indication of these on a typical road cross
section shall be sufficient. Layouts shall include proposed locations of fire
hydrants. If private utilities are proposed, they shall comply with all local,
county and state regulations.
(j) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard
areas of all existing watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the
limits of alluvial soil where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard
areas have not been determined, and/or such other information as may
assist the Planning Board in the determination of floodway and flood
hazard area determination limits.
(k) The limits of all areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of excavations
for basements, shall be clearly designated.
(21) Sectionalization and staging plan. The plat may be accompanied by a preliminary
sectionalization and staging plan showing the following. If the subdivision is
proposed to be filed for final approval in sections, the plan shall show each such
Article XV
8
section. The staging of the various sections in the subdivision shall be such that,
if development of the subdivision were to be discontinued after the completion of
any section, the developed portion of the subdivision would be provided with
adequate street drainage and utility systems. The size and staging of the section
in a subdivision shall be established to promote orderly development and shall be
subject to the approval of the Board. In no instance shall any single section of a
subdivision include more than one hundred (100) lots. During construction of the
development, the developer shall fully comply with the sectionalization and
staging plan in accordance with the preliminary approval. If, for any reason, the
developer does not fully comply with the approved sectionalization and staging
plan, no building permits shall be issued until such time as the developer makes
application to and receives approval from the Board for a revised staging and
sectionalization plan. The Board may modify the plan and pose time restrictions
or require the developer to construct the development in accordance with an
approved staging and sectionalization plan.
(22) The map must include certification for the signatures of the Chairman, the
Secretary and the Board Engineer.
(23) Soil borings to a depth of ten (10) feet, indicating soil types and the seasonal highwater-
table elevations, along with percolation tests, shall be submitted [one (1) for
each five (5) acres] for all subdivisions where on-site sanitary sewer disposal
septic systems are proposed. The location of soil borings and percolation tests
shall be indicated on the plat.
(24) An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all record title owners of the
land proposed to be subdivided by the map and the consent, in writing, of all such
owners to the approval of such map shall accompany the plats or be shown.
(25) All municipal boundary lines crossing or adjacent to the territory intended to be
subdivided shall be shown and designated.
(26) The names of adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the file number of the recording
or the names of the owners of adjacent properties.
(27) The applicant shall be required to submit certification, in writing, from the Little
Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority indicating that the plans have been
reviewed and approved or conditionally approved at their preliminary stage by the
Municipal Utilities Authority.
(28) The preliminary plat shall indicate the limits of land clearing and land disturbance
of the proposed major subdivision.
(29) In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required under the
Township Code.
(30) The specific size and species of individual existing mature trees of a size of four
(4) inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) and masses of existing mature
woodland [predominantly trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter at breast
height (dbh)] and any other significant natural vegetation or natural features. The
plans must indicate all existing mature vegetation to be preserved, relocated
(including the proposed location of transplanted trees) or removed and appropriate
details and plans for tree protection fencing. The plans shall include an aerial
photograph or copy of an aerial photograph with the site boundaries clearly
indicated. This photograph or print must be of a scale of one (1) inch equals four
Article XV
9
hundred (400) feet or less, must have been taken within a five-year period of the
date of submission and must clearly indicate existing vegetation, structures and
surrounding land uses.
(31) A preliminary landscape plan, prepared by a certified Landscape Architect. The
plan shall be prepared on a halftone sheet of the Engineer's grading plan showing
existing and proposed grades and shall indicate the location and spacing of shade
trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, ground cover and lawn, utilizing
different graphic symbols for each which are representative of the size of the
plant, within a period of ten (10) years after installation, and shown to scale. The
plan shall include a planting schedule indicating the quantity, common name,
botanical name, installed size (including height and caliper for shade and
ornamental trees), root and quality for all proposed plantings. The plan shall
indicate the construction materials, location and size of any berms, walls, fences,
pavements or site amenities to be provided. When appropriate or required, a
graphic section illustration at a scale of one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet or larger
shall be provided to indicate the effectiveness of proposed or existing materials as
a buffer in relation to the height of the area being screened.
(32) Preliminary details of all proposed recreational areas, including details of both
active and passive areas, and the lot in which the recreation area, if required, is to
be located shall be included as an integral part of the preliminary plan submission.
(33) Such other information as the Board and/or Board Engineer may require or
request.
(34) Stormwater Control Ordinance Checklist [Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26]
(a) Topographic Base Map
(b) Vicinity Map
(c) Environmental Site Analysis
(d) Project Description and Site Plan
(e) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan
(f) Stormwater Management Facilities Map
(g) Calculations
(h) Maintenance Repair Plan
(i) Waiver from Submission Requirements
C. Final plats for major subdivisions. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
final form at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, in compliance with
the New Jersey Statutes, for purposes of recording. The final plat shall conform to the
preliminary plat as approved, shall not contain more than one hundred (100) lots and, at a
minimum, shall show and be accompanied by the following:
(1) Required documentation:
(a) Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority approval.
(b) Ocean County Planning Board approval, where required.
(c) State and/or Federal regulatory agencies approval, as required.
(d) A soil disturbance permit.
(e) Proof of payment of real estate taxes.
Article XV
10
(f) A Certificate of Title, which may be in letter form, signed by a member of
the New Jersey Bar or by a Title Officer or authorized agent of a title
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
which certificate shall confirm that the owner of the premises in question
is the applicant as shown on the plat.
(g) Such other submittals as may be required by Federal, State or local law.
Unless other specific provisions are made in this chapter or by statute, all
approvals required of Federal, State, County and local agencies or officials
shall be obtained and evidence thereof filed with the Board prior to the
signing of a final plat. If the Board agrees, final approval may be granted
conditioned upon the receipt of any necessary subsequent approvals, but
no approval signatures will be affixed to any plat prior to obtaining any
such required approvals. The Board may determine a reasonable time for
obtaining all such required approvals; and such time in no case shall
exceed one (1) year. In the event that such required approvals are not
obtained within such time, the conditional approval shall lapse, and
submission of a new application will be necessary.
(2) The final plat shall contain all general requirements, details and supporting data as
required for the preliminary plat as specified in § 15-10.5.
(3) It shall show the dimensions, bearings and curve data, including the lengths of
tangents, radii, arcs, chords and central angles, for all center-line and right-ofway-
line curves on streets sufficient to enable the definite location of all lines and
boundaries shown thereon, including drainage easements. public easements and
areas dedicated for public use.
(4) Tangents, chord, arc, radius and central angle at all street corners.
(5) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision and all lots and lands reserved or dedicated for public use shall
balance, and their description shall close within a limit of error of not more than
one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). Where feasible, the control points of the
subdivision shall be referenced to three (3) permanent coordinated monuments.
(6) Any easement or land reserved for or dedicated to the public use shall be
designated, and the proposed use of sites other than residential shall be noted.
(7) Each block and each lot shall be numbered in accordance with a scheme approved
by the Tax Assessor.
(8) The map shall clearly show all monumentation and property markers as required,
including monuments found, monuments set and monuments to be set. An
indication shall be made where monumentation found has been reset. All
monuments, if required, shall be placed in compliance with the Map Filing Law.
(9) Subdivision names and street names shown on the final plat shall not be the same
or similar to any name of an existing subdivision or street in the Township.
(10) In addition to the final plat scale requirements of this subsection, the final plans
shall include a Tax Map resolution sheet drawn to the scale of the appropriate Tax
Map of Little Egg Harbor Township depicting the subdivision on the Tax Map.
Article XV
11
§ 15-15.3. Site plan checklist.
A. The following shall be addressed before the application can be deemed complete:
(1) Appropriate fees from the fee schedule.
(2) One (1) copy of the development application checklist.
(3) Twelve (12) copies of the plans, including the plat detail criteria set forth in:
(a) Section 15-15.5. for minor site plans.
(b) Section 15-15.4.A. for preliminary approval.
(c) Section 15-15.4.B. for final approval.
(4) Twenty (20) copies of development application [twelve (12) copies for Zoning
Board of Adjustment “C” Variances].
(5) One (1) copy of the tax certification.
(6) One (1) copy of the notice of fees and agreement to pay the same.
(7) One (1) copy of the affidavit of ownership.
(8) One (1) copy of the disclosure of ownership (if a partnership, corporation or joint
ownership).
(9) One (1) copy of the affidavit of noncollusion.
(10) Twelve (12) copies of the permit refusal from the Zoning Officer.
(11) Twelve (12) copies of the Tax Map resolution sheet (final only).
(12) Five (5) copies of the environmental assessment, if required.
(13) Five (5) copies of the traffic impact study, if required.
(14) Five (5) copies of the drainage calculations.
(15) Five (5) copies of the soils report.
(16) In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required under Township
Code.
(17) Stormwater Control Ordinance Checklist [Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26]
(a) Topographic Base Map
(b) Vicinity Map
(c) Environmental Site Analysis
(d) Project Description and Site Plan
(e) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan
(f) Stormwater Management Facilities Map
(g) Calculations
(h) Maintenance Repair Plan
(i) Waiver from Submission Requirements
B. A minimum of four (4) days prior to a public hearing, the following additional items shall
be submitted:
(1) One (1) copy of the affidavit of proof of service.
(2) One (1) copy of the list of property owners within a two hundred-foot radius.
(3) One (1) copy of certified mail receipts from the post office.
(4) One (1) copy of proof of publication from the newspaper.
§ 15-15.4. Site plan details.
Article XV
12
A. Preliminary site plan details shall include the following:
(1) The site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced, at a scale of not
less than fifty (50) feet to the inch, on sheets of equal size and a maximum size of
thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches. It shall be drawn and sealed by a Land
Surveyor and/or Professional Engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey. The
site plan shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of this section and
shall contain the following information.
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title of the site plan.
(b) The name, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract as shown on the
latest Township Tax Map.
(d) The acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(e) The date (of the original and all revisions).
(f) The names and addresses of the owner and application, so designated.
(g) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the tract,
the zone, minimum required lot areas, setbacks, yards and dimensions.
(h) The name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
Engineer and Land Surveyor who prepared the map. (The plat shall bear
the embossed seal of the Engineer and Land Surveyor.)
(3) A key map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet, showing
the location of the tract with reference to surrounding areas, existing streets which
intersect or border the tract, the names of all such streets and any Township
boundary which is within five hundred (500) feet of the site.
(4) The names of all owners of and property lines of parcels within two hundred
(200) feet of the site, including properties across the street, as shown by the most
recent records of the Township.
(5) The plat shall be based on a current, certified boundary survey. The date of the
survey and the name of the person making the same shall be shown on the map.
(6) Existing one-foot interval contours based on United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum (MSL-O) shall be shown extending a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet beyond the boundary of the tract in question and shall be certified by a
New Jersey Licensed Surveyor or Professional Engineer as to accuracy, except
that where the slopes exceed five percent (5%), a two-foot interval may be used.
The source of elevation datum base shall be noted.
(7) All existing streets, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and flood areas within
the proposed site and within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries thereof,
both the width of the paving and the width of the right-of-way of each street and
existing public easements.
(8) All existing structures, an indication of those which are to be destroyed or
removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions of those to remain.
Structures to be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(9) The boundaries, nature and extent of wooded areas and other important physical
features, including swamps, bogs and ponds, within the proposed site and within
two hundred (200) feet thereof.
Article XV
13
(10) All proposed public easements or right-of-ways and the purposes thereof and
proposed streets within the proposed site. The proposed streets shall show the
right-of-way and proposed pavement width.
(11) The existing system of drainage of the site and of any larger tract of which it is a
part, together with information on how it is proposed to dispose of surface
drainage.
(12) The acreage of the drainage area (or areas) of each natural or man-made
watercourse traversing the site, including the area within the site and the area
upstream from the site.
(13) A North arrow and written and graphic scales.
(14) A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
site or certification that none exist.
(15) Utility layouts showing the methods of connection and the source of service.
(16) The proposed location and area, in acres or square feet, of all required or proposed
open space areas.
(17) Such other information or data as may be required by the Board in order to
determine that the details of the site plan are in accordance with the standards of
the ordinances of the Township and all other general laws.
(18) On-site grading and drainage plan.
(a) The plat shall show or be accompanied by a grading and drainage plan
which will show locations of all existing and proposed drainage swales
and channels, retention and recharge basins, the scheme of surface
drainage and other items pertinent to drainage, including the approximate
proposed grading contours at one-foot intervals, except that, if slopes
exceed five percent (5%), a two-foot interval may be used.
(b) The plan shall outline the approximate area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown, with pipe type and sizes, invert
elevations, grades and direction of flow. The direction of flow of all
surface waters and of all watercourses shall be shown.
(d) The grading and drainage plan shall be accompanied by drainage
calculations made in accordance with standards set forth herein.
(19) Off-site drainage plan. The plat shall also be accompanied by an off-site drainage
plan prepared in accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin in which
the property is located. The terminus of the basin and existing ground
contours or other basins for determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) Pertinent off-site existing drainage, which receives or discharges runoff
from or onto the site, shall be shown with elevations of inverts, pipe types
and sizes or other appropriate physical data for open or nonpipe conduits.
(20) Profiles showing all proposed drainage, all existing and proposed finished
roadway grades, channel section details, pipe sizes, type, inverts, road crowns and
slopes and all other proposed drainage structures and connections.
(a) Sectionalization and staging plan. The plat shall be accompanied by a
sectionalization and staging plan, if applicable, showing the following. If
the site plan is proposed to be constructed in sections, the plan shall show
each such section. The staging of the various sections shall be such that, if
Article XV
14
development were to be discontinued after the completion of any section,
the developed portion would be provided with adequate street drainage
and utility systems. The size and staging of each section shall be
established to promote orderly development and shall be subject to the
approval of the Board. During construction of the development, the
developer shall fully comply with the sectionalization and staging plan in
accordance with the preliminary approach. If, for any reason, the
developer does not fully comply with the approved sectionalization and
staging plan, no building permits shall be issued until such time as the
developer makes application to and receives approval from the Board for a
revised staging and sectionalization plan. The Board may modify the plan
and impose time restrictions or require the developer to construct the
development in accordance with an approved staging and sectionalization
plan.
(22) The map must include certification for the signatures of the Chairman, the
Secretary and the Board Engineer.
(23) The proposed spot or finished elevations at all property corners, curb, corners of
all proposed structures, first-floor elevation of all proposed structures and those to
remain, and drainage arrows designating the direction of overland drainage flow
and the proposed use or uses of land and all structures.
(24) Detailed utility layouts and cross sections (sewers, water, gas, electric,
telephone, etc.) showing feasible connections to any existing or proposed utility
systems; provided, however, that detailed layouts of gas, electric and telephone
lines are not required. Layouts shall include the proposed location of fire
hydrants. If private utilities are proposed, they shall comply with all local, county
and state regulations.
(25) The limits of all areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of excavations for
basements, shall be clearly designated.
(26) The method of sewage and solid waste disposal shall be described.
(27) The distances measured along the right-of-way lines of existing streets
abutting the property to the nearest intersections with other public streets.
(28) The vehicular circulation pattern on the site and the means of ingress to and
egress from the development, showing, in particular, the size and location of
driveways and curb cuts, walkways, the proposed traffic channels, acceleration
and deceleration lanes, if any, and any other means of controlling vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(29) The location and design of any on-site parking areas or loading areas, showing
the size and location of spaces, bays, aisles and barriers.
(30) The location, direction of illumination, height, intensity and hours of
operation of the existing or proposed outdoor lighting, to be expressed in average
horizontal footcandles.
(31) The location, size and type of directional, regulatory or advisory signs or
pavement markings.
(32) The location and use of existing structures within one hundred (100) feet of
the tract boundaries.
Article XV
15
(33) The specific, size and species of individual existing mature trees of a size of
four (4) inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) and masses of existing mature
woodland [predominantly trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter at breast
height (dbh)] and any other significant natural vegetation or natural features. The
plans must indicate all existing mature vegetation to be preserved, relocated
(including the proposed location of transplanted trees) or removed. The plans
shall include an aerial photograph or copy of an aerial photograph with the site
boundaries clearly indicated. This photograph or print must be of a scale of one
(1) inch equals four hundred (400) feet or less, must have been taken within a
five-year period of the date of submission and must clearly indicate existing
vegetation, structures and surrounding land uses.
(34) The location of driveways within one hundred (100) feet of the site
boundaries.
(35) The location and type of garbage and refuse disposal facilities.
(36) Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted.
(37) Preliminary architectural plans and elevations shall accompany the site plan
submission.
(38) The locations and type of the nearest and/or proposed fire hydrants.
(39) Sight triangles shall be provided and shown on the plat as required by this
chapter.
(40) The Board may waive any of the requirements of this section of details
specified to be shown on the site plan in any given application if the Board
determines that strict adherence to the requirements or details would be
superfluous or unduly burdensome to the applicant and not in the best interest of
the Township. The Board, in its discretion, may permit an applicant to use
alternative types of improvements where good cause is shown and where the
proposed type of improvement would at least be the equivalent of the
improvement standards in this chapter.
(41) A preliminary landscape plan. The plan shall be prepared on a halftone copy
of the Engineer's grading plan, showing existing and proposed grades, and shall
indicate the location and spacing of shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees,
shrubs, ground cover and lawn, utilizing different graphic symbols for each which
are representative of the size of the plant, within a period of ten (10) years after
installation, and shown to scale. The plan shall include a planting schedule
indicating the quantity, common name, botanical name, installed size (including
height and caliper for shade and ornamental trees), root and quality for all
proposed plantings. The plan shall indicate the construction materials, location
and size of any berms, walls, fences, pavements or site amenities to be provided.
When appropriate or required, a graphic section illustration at a scale of one (1)
inch equals ten (10) feet or larger shall be provided to indicate the effectiveness of
proposed or existing materials as a buffer in relation to the height of the area
being screened.
(42) The applicant shall detail what provisions are to be incorporated in the site
development with regard to access for emergency and firefighting equipment and
for fire safety.
Article XV
16
(43) An environmental impact assessment shall be required where the property for
which an approval is sought contains wetlands or is within two hundred (200) feet
of wetlands. In addition, the Board may require an environmental impact
assessment in regard to any application before the Board. Where an
environmental impact assessment is required, the applicant shall provide such a
submission in accordance with the requirements of § 15-15.6. and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. The environmental impact assessment
shall be required to be prepared and submitted with the preliminary application,
and the application may be deemed incomplete without it. In those cases where
an impact statement is required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or other outside agency, a copy of the same shall be submitted to the
Board for its review.
(44) In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required under the
Township Code.
B. Final site plan details. The final site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to the inch, on sheets of equal size
and a maximum size of thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches. It shall be drawn and sealed
by a Land Surveyor and/or Professional Engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey.
The final site plan shall conform to the preliminary site plan as approved, shall be
designed in compliance with the provisions of this section in addition to the following:
(1) Required documentation:
(a) Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority approval.
(b) Ocean County Planning Board approval, where required.
(c) State and/or Federal regulatory agency approval, as required.
(d) Ocean County Conservation District approval, where required.
(e) Proof of payment of real estate taxes.
(f) An affidavit setting forth the names and addresses of all record title
owners of the subject property included on the site plan and the consent, in
writing, of all such owners to the approval of such site plan shall
accompany the final plat or shall be shown thereon.
(g) Such other submittals as may be required by Federal, State or local law. If
the Board agrees, final approval may be granted conditioned upon the
receipt of any necessary subsequent approvals, but no approval signatures
will be affixed to any plat prior to obtaining any such required approvals.
The Board may determine a reasonable time for obtaining all such
required approvals; and such time in no case shall exceed one (1) year. In
the event that such required approvals are not obtained within such time,
the conditional approval shall lapse, and submission of a new application
will be necessary.
(h) A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to
indicate the efforts of those operations in producing traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards; in addition, a
description of the proposed number of shifts, if shiftwork operation is
contemplated, together with a projection of the maximum number of
Article XV
17
employees per shift or, where shiftwork is not contemplated, then a
projection of the proposed hours of operation for commercial use.
(i) In the Pinelands Area, such other information as may be required under
the Township Code.
(2) Planting details which conform with the standard details provided in § 15-11.8.,
details and plans for the protection of existing vegetation and plans, documents or
specifications for the irrigation and maintenance of all landscape areas.
(3) Complete construction details for all structures, including but not limited to
manholes, inlets, headwalls, yard drains, culverts, bridges and pumping stations.
(4) A complete signage package plan or document graphically indicating the
dimensions, area, height, location, copy and type for all existing and proposed
signage to be erected in conjunction with the proposed development.
§15-15.5. Minor site plan details.
A. Detail requirements.
(1) General. The minor site plan shall be drawn, signed and appropriately sealed by
an Architect, Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor and/or Professional Planner
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey. Site plans shall not be drawn at a
scale smaller than one inch equals 10 feet. The site plan shall be based on a
certified boundary survey.
B. Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall include:
(1) Title of “Minor Site Plan.”
(2) Name of the development, if any.
(3) Tax Map sheet, block and lot number of the site, as shown on the latest Township
Tax Map, the date of which should also be shown.
(4) The date of original and all revisions.
(5) Names and addresses of owner and developer, so designated.
(6) Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of Engineer, Architect,
Land Surveyor or Planner who prepared the plat and their embossed seal.
(7) If the site plan contains more than one sheet, each sheet shall be numbered and
titled.
C. A schedule shall be placed on the site plan indicating:
(1) The acreage of the tract and site (the portion of the tract involved in the site plan).
(2) The floor area of the existing and proposed building, listed separately.
(3) The proposed use or uses and the floor area devoted to each use.
(4) The zone in which the site is located.
(5) Proposed and required lot dimensions and front, rear and side setbacks.
(6) Proposed and required off-street parking spaces.
(7) Square footage and percentage of the site retained in unoccupied open space.
D. North arrow and written and graphic scales.
Article XV
18
E. Sufficient spot elevations (United States Coast and Geodetic Date) and/or contour lines to
indicate the proposed system of surface drainage and the relationship of proposed grading
to the land surrounding the site.
F. The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas of all
existing watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the limits of alluvial soils
where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have not been determined,
and/or such other information as may assist the Planning Board in the determination of
floodway and flood hazard area limits.
G. Paving and right-of-way widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the site.
H. The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds within the
site and within 200 feet thereof. Where required for a tree removal permit, on-site
specimen trees shall be located on the site plan.
I. All existing structures on the site and within 200 feet, including the use thereof,
indicating those to be.
J. Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor and basement elevations,
front, rear and side setbacks of all buildings and other pertinent improvements.
K. Existing and proposed public easements or right-of-ways and the purposes thereof.
L. Zone boundaries and Tax Map Sheet, lot and block numbers and names of owners of all
propertied within 200 feet of the site.
M. A key map adequately showing the location of the site with reference to surrounding
areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets and any zone boundary or Township
boundary which is within 500 feet of the subdivision.
N. The capacity of off-street parking areas and the location and dimensions of all access
drives, aisles and parking stalls.
O. The location and size of proposed loading docks.
P. Location of curbs and sidewalks.
Q. Cross section(s) showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs and sidewalks.
R. Exterior lighting plan, including the location and drawn details of all outdoor lighting
standards and fixtures.
S. Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type, spacing and number of each
type of tree or shrub and the location, type and amount of each type of ground cover to be
utilized.
Article XV
19
T. Location of signs and drawn details showing the size, nature of construction, height and
content of all signs.
U. Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage areas, outdoor
equipment and bulk storage areas.
V. Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure or structures, or
existing structures to be renovated.
W. Written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to indicate the effects
of the use in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety
hazards. The written description of the use, the number of shifts to be worked, the
number of employees in each shift, the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the
site and provisions to be made for site maintenance.
X. Such other information as the Planning Board and/or Planning Board Engineer may
request during site plan review.
Y. Stormwater Control Ordinance Checklist [Amended 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
(1) Topographic Base Map
(2) Vicinity Map
(3) Environmental Site Analysis
(4) Project Description and Site Plan
(5) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan
(6) Stormwater Management Facilities Map
(7) Calculations
(8) Maintenance Repair Plan
(9) Waiver from Submission Requirements
§ 15-15.6. Environmental impact statement.
An environmental impact assessment shall be required for major subdivisions and/or major or
minor site plans where the property for which an approval is sought contains wetlands or is
within two hundred (200) feet of wetlands. In addition, the Planning Board may require an
environmental impact assessment in regard to any application before the Board. Where an
environmental impact assessment is required, the applicant shall provide such a submission in
accordance with the requirements of this section, the Little Egg Harbor Township Environmental
Commission and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The environmental
impact assessment shall be required to be prepared and submitted with the preliminary
application, and the application may be deemed incomplete without it. In those cases where an
impact statement is required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or other
outside agency, a copy of the same shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its review.
Environmental impact assessments shall be certified by a Licensed Professional Engineer and
shall include the following:
Article XV
20
A. A composite environmental constraints map at the same scale as the preliminary plat or
site plan. The applicant shall, utilizing existing map sources, present a plan indicating:
(1) The features for preservation.
(2) Features which represent any constraints for development, generally indicating
the area most suitable for development, the areas least suitable for development
and various degrees of suitability between these two (2) extremes.
B. An environmental impact statement containing data reflecting:
(1) A statement describing and explaining the impact and effect of the proposed
subdivision or site plan upon the ecological systems and environment of Little
Egg Harbor Township’s land and waters, giving consideration to the applicable
natural processes and social values of:
(a) Geology.
(b) Aquifers.
(c) Hydrology.
(d) Depth of the seasonal high-water table.
(e) Stormwater runoff.
(f) Soils.
(g) Potential soil loss.
(h) Soil nutrient retention.
(i) Vegetation.
(j) Wetland and coastal vegetation.
(k) Recreation value of vegetation.
(l) Historic value.
(m) Scenic features.
(n) Wildlife: high-value areas.
(o) Wildlife: rare and beneficial species.
(p) Water quality.
(q) Air quality.
(2) When field investigations are performed to determine existing conditions,
methods used shall be addressed.
(3) Specific plans proposed by the subdivider or developer to alter, preserve or
enhance and mitigate or minimize adverse impacts on the natural resources and
natural features of the land within the proposed subdivision or site.
C. Borings.
(1) Test boring, percolation rates, water levels and groundwater samples shall be
submitted by a licensed engineer in accordance with the following standards:
(a) To a two-acre site: one (1) test hole.
(b) Two-acre site: three (3) test holes.
(c) Three-acre site: six (6) test holes.
(d) Five to ten-acre site: eight (8) test holes.
(e) Eleven to forty-acre site: ten (10) test holes.
(f) Forty-one to one-hundred-acre site: sixteen (16) test holes.
(g) Over one-hundred-acre site: ten (10) test holes.
Article XV
21
(2) These borings shall be distributed over the tract to adequately represent site
conditions and shall be to a minimum depth of ten (10) feet.
Article XVI
1
ARTICLE XVI
Development Review Fees
§ 15-16.1. Administrative fees for all development applications.
A. The developer shall pay, at the time of filing an application with the Little Egg Harbor
Township Planning and Zoning Boards, the following non-refundable administrative fees
to the Township of Little Egg Harbor:
(1) Proposals involving more than one (1) use shall pay a fee equaling the sum of the
fees for the component elements of the proposal. Proposals requiring a
combination of approvals such as subdivision, site plan and/or variance shall pay
a fee equal to the sum of the fee for each element. Administrative fees for
combined application for development shall not exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
(a) Concept plan for non-binding informal review no cost.
(b) Minor subdivision: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(c) Preliminary approval - major subdivision:
[1] Zero (0) to ten (10) lots: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
[2] Eleven (11) to twenty-four (24) lots: seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
[3] Twenty five (25) to one hundred (100) lots: one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
[4] One hundred one (101) or more lots: one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00).
(d) Final approval major subdivision: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(e) Plan revisions. For the revision of any subdivision plan or plans, which
have been, granted approval: fifty percent (50%) of the original
administrative fee for the stage of application (preliminary or final).
(f) Extension of subdivision:
[1] Extension of preliminary approval: two hundred dollars ($200.00)
[2] Extension of final approval: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
[3] Re-subdivision of final plat: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
[4] Extension of time to post bond or meet conditions: fifty dollars
($50.00).
(g) Site plans other than residential: [Amended 7/26/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-016]
[1] Preliminary: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
[2] Final approval: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
[3] Minor site plan: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(h) Site plans for residential uses (townhouses, condominiums, etc.):
[1] Preliminary: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per unit; minimum fee of
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
[2] Final: fifty percent (50%) of preliminary fee; minimum fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Article XVI
2
(i) Plan revisions. For the revision of any site plan or plans which have not
been granted approval; fifty percent (50%) of the original fee for the stage
of application (preliminary or final).
(j) Amendment to approved application for development, to include but not
be limited to major subdivision and site plans which do not fall within the
category of administrative approvals and must be reviewed by the
Planning or Zoning Board: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(k) Minor subdivision plat re-approval. For the re-approval of a minor
subdivision plat which has been granted a previous approval fifty percent
(50%) of the original fee.
(l) Administrative approvals: two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(m) Extension of preliminary or final site plan approval: two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
(n) Variances and design exceptions:
[1] Hear and decide appeals:
[a] Single or two-family uses: fifty dollars ($50.00).
[b] Multi-family uses: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
[c] Other: two hundred dollars ($200.00).
[2] Interpretation of the Zoning Regulations or Zoning Map: fifty
dollars ($50.00).
[3] Hardship or bulk variance: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
[4] Use variances: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
[5] Building permit in conflict with Official Map or building permit
for lot not related to a street: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
[6] Others, including signs and fences: fifty dollars ($50.00).
[7] Exception to design and performance standards: fifty dollars
($50.00).
(o) Conditional uses:
[1] Residential: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
[2] Other: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(p) Development permits and certificates of occupancy fees: each request for
a development permit and a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied
by a payment to the Township of Little Egg Harbor in the amount of
$25.00 for a development permit and $40.00 per dwelling unit for a
certificate of occupancy and $10.00 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area of a non-residential use for a certificate of occupancy.
(q) Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land: twenty dollars ($20.00).
(r) Certificate of zoning: twenty dollars ($20.00).
(s) Change of Zone request: fifty dollars ($50.00).
(t) Forestry permits. Please refer to Subsection 15-13.4.A.(5)(e). [Amended
5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
(u) Special meeting requested by applicant: one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
(v) Reproduction of records:
Article XVI
3
[1] Duplication of tape recordings: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
tape for the first two tapes, and ten dollars ($10.00) for each
additional tape.
[2] Use of tape recording for interested party to make transcript of
hearings (appellant to supply his or her own stenographer to make
transcript if he or she desires): twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
[3] Photocopy of any Township minutes or records: seventy-five cents
($0.75) for the first page to the tenth page; fifty cents ($0.50) per
page from the eleventh page to the twentieth page and twenty-five
cents ($0.25) per page for all pages over 20 in number.
(w) Zoning permits issued in accordance with the provision of this chapter for
conducting an accessory use, a home occupation, or a home professional
office shall pay an application fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
(x) Miscellaneous:
[1] Requests for letters of proof of payment of taxes at one dollar
($1.00) per line item.
[2] Service charge for all bounced checks in the municipality is
subject to current bank fees and a municipal administrative fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00).
(y) Tree Removal Permit: twenty-five dollars ($25.00). [Amended
12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
§ 15-16.2. Resolution preparation fee.
The following fees shall be paid by the applicant as an administrative fee at the time of filing the
application for development with the Planning and Zoning Office:
A. The cost for the preparation of a resolution for preliminary approval or denial with or
without final approval shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
B. The cost for the preparation of a resolution for final approval shall be one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
C. The cost for the preparation of any other resolution shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
§15-16.3. Escrow fees.
In addition to the above administrative fees, the developer shall, at the time of filing an
application for development, pay the following escrow fees to the Township of Little Egg
Harbor. Said escrow fees shall be used to pay any and all fees incurred by the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment for any time spent reviewing the application by the Board’s
Engineer, Planner, Attorney and any other professional hired by said Board. Proposals involving
more than one (1) use shall pay a fee equaling the sum of the fees for the component elements of
the proposal. Proposals requiring a combination of approvals such as subdivisions, site plan and
/or variances shall pay a fee equal to the sum of the fee for each element. The total amount of
Article XVI
4
escrow fees for combined applications for development shall be a minimum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
A. Concept plan for non-binding informal review: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
[Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10
B. Minor subdivision: one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), plus three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per lot for additional lots formed by the subdivision greater than two
(2). [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
C. Preliminary approval for major subdivision:
(1) Zero (0) to ten (10) lots: two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(2) Eleven (11) to twenty-four (24) lots: two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), plus sixty dollars ($60.00) per lot.
(3) Twenty-five (25) to one hundred (100) lots: four thousand dollars ($4,000.00),
plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot.
(4) One hundred one (101) or more lots: nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), plus
fifteen dollars ($15.00) per lot.
D. Final approval for major subdivision: fifty percent (50%) of the preliminary approval
major subdivision escrow fee account; minimum fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
[Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10
E. Site plans other than residential preliminary approval:
(1) Less than 2.0 acres: three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
(2) More than 2.0 acres: three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), plus two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per additional acre or portion thereof.
F. Final site plans other than residential use: fifty percent (50%) of the preliminary approval
application fee; minimum fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). [Amended 4/14/2005
by Ord. No. 2005-10
G. Minor site plan for other than residential use: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
H. Site plan for residential uses (townhouses, condominiums and apartments). Preliminary:
one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per dwelling unit, minimum fee of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
I. Final site plan approval for residential uses: fifty percent (50%) of the preliminary escrow
fee, minimum fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-10
J. Extension of subdivision or site plan:
(1) Extension of preliminary approval: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(2) Extension of final approval: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(3) Re-subdivision of final plat: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Article XVI
5
K. Administrative approvals: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
L. Amendment to approved application for development, to include but not be limited to
minor subdivision, major subdivision and site plans which do not fall within the category
of administrative approvals and must be reviewed by the Planning Board: two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00). [Amended 4/14/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10
M. Variances:
(1) Use variance and density variance:
(a) Single- or two-family uses: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) Multi-family uses: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Other: two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(2) Appeals: Interpretation of this chapter or Zoning Map (N.J.S.A. 40: 550-70a. and
b.: two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00).
(3) Hardship or bulk variance (N.J.S.A. 40:550-70c.): five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional variance of this category.
(4) Building permit in conflict with Official Map or building permit for lot not related
to a street: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(5) Others, including signs and fences: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(6) Exception to design and performance standards: two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for one category design or performance standard plus one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for each additional category.
N. Conditional uses: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
O. Certification as to approval of subdivision of land: fifty dollars ($50.00).
P. Change of Zone request: two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Q. Improvement plan (i.e. review of proposed streets, drainage, etc.; no major subdivision
approval required): two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
R. Stormwater Review Fee. Subdivisions and site plans requiring Preliminary or Final
Approval, and Road Improvement Plans, that all meet the latest definition of “Major
Development” per §15-12.11.E, Definitions, shall pay the following escrow fee:
[Amended on 12/13/2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
(1) Subdivision Fees
(a) Preliminary Approval, Major Subdivision
Number of Lots Fee
0-10 $1,500
11-24 $1,500 + $50/LOT
25-100 $2,500 + $25/LOT
101 + $3,500 + $15/LOT
(b) Final Approval, Major Subdivision
Article XVI
6
One-half (½) of the Preliminary Major Subdivision Stormwater Review
Fee, with a minimum fee of one thousand five hundred ($1,500.) for each
submission.
(c) Minor Subdivisions - $1,000.00
(2) Site Plan Fee Schedule
(a) Preliminary Site Plan Application
[i] New non-residential development including any alterations;
additions or changes of use
Acreage Fee
Up to 2 acres $2,000
Over 2.0 acres $2,000 + $250/acre or portion
thereof for each additional
acre
[ii] Public, quasi-public and nonprofit institutions and agencies not
subject to approval of other governmental agencies, churches and
other similar uses
Acreage Fee
Up to 2 acres $500.00
Over 2.0 acres $1,000.00
[iii] Residential dwelling units, such as multifamily development and
condominium development
$100.00 per dwelling unit; minimum fee of $1,500.00
(b) Final Site Plan Application
[i] New construction
Acreage Fee
Up to 2 acres $1,000.00
Over 2.0 acres $1,000 + $125/acre or portion
thereof for each additional
acre
[ii] Public and quasi-public
Acreage Fee
Up to 2 acres $250.00
Over 2.0 acres $500 + $125/acre or portion
thereof for each additional
acre
[iii] Residential dwelling units
$75.00 per unit; minimum fee of $1,500.00
(c) Minor Site Plan Application
[i] All uses and construction: $1,000.00
§ 15-16.4. Inspection fees for on-site and off-site improvements.
A. Escrow. At least one (1) week prior to the beginning of construction or installation of
any required improvements, the developer shall notify the Township Engineer, in writing,
of the developer’s intention to commence such work. All improvements and utility
installation shall be inspected during the time of the installation by the Township
Article XVI
7
Engineer or his designee to ensure satisfactory completion, and no underground
installation shall be covered until inspected by the Township Engineer or his designee.
The cost of all inspections shall be the responsibility of the developer, and he shall
deposit the necessary inspection fee with the Township of Little Egg Harbor prior to the
start of any construction or prior to signing the final plat, whichever shall first occur. The
inspection fee shall be in addition to the amount of any required performance or
maintenance guaranties and shall consist of a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the cost
of the required improvements as estimated by the Township Engineer. The minimum fee
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. This fee shall be held in reserve by the Township and shall be used to pay the cost of
inspecting the construction. It shall be the obligation of the developer to pay for the
actual cost of inspection for the construction. Any excess moneys shall be remitted to the
developer upon approval of all improvements as provided herein. Any additional
inspection costs shall be paid by the developer prior to the approval of the improvements
by the governing body as provided for herein.
C. Replenishment of escrow account. Whenever the escrow account in which fees have
been paid pursuant to this section have been depleted to twenty percent (20%) of the
original escrow account, the Township Financial Officer shall notify the applicant, and
the developer shall, immediately upon notification, replenish the account by depositing
fifty percent (50%) of the original escrow amount with the Township. The appropriate
Township Officials and professionals shall not take any further action on the
development, make no further inspections, no bonds shall be released, nor shall any
certificate of occupancy be issued until adequate additional fees have been deposited by
the developer with the Township.
D. In the event that final approval of development has been granted in stages or sections and
hence the construction of the required improvements is to be undertaken in stages or
sections, bonding and inspection of improvements shall also be in stages or sections.
§ 15-16.5. General escrow fee provisions.
A. Deposit of escrows with banking institution. Whenever the fees paid shall exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), it shall be deposited in a banking institution or savings and
loan association in this State, insured by an agency of the Federal government, or in any
other fund or depository approved for such deposits by the State of New Jersey in an
account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by the institution or
depository on time or savings deposits. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and address of the institution or
depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. If the amount of
interest earned on the deposit exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), that entire amount
shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to the applicant by the Township on an
annual basis or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose for which it was
deposited; provided, however, that the Township shall retain for administrative expenses
a sum equivalent to more that thirty-three and one third percent (33 1/3%) of the entire
Article XVI
8
amount, which shall be in addition of all other administrative expenses. In the event that
the interest paid on a deposit for a year does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00),
the same is to be retained by the Township.
B. Replenishment of escrow account. Whenever the escrow account in which fees have
been paid have been depleted to twenty percent (20%) of the original escrow amount, the
Township Engineer and the Township Treasurer shall notify the applicant, and the
applicant shall, immediately upon notification, replenish the account by depositing fifty
percent (50%) of the original escrow amount with the Township. The appropriate Board
and its professionals shall not take any further action on the application or make further
inspections and no bonds shall be released, nor shall any certificate of occupancy be
issued until adequate additional fees have been deposited by the applicant with the
Township.
C. Returning fees to the applicant. When the Township Engineer determines that there is no
longer any need to retain an escrow account in which to maintain funds, the applicant
shall be entitled to the return of any monies which remain in those accounts. The
applicant shall follow the procedures established by the Township Treasurer to obtain a
refund of said funds.
D. Any payments charged to the deposit for review of applications, review of preparation of
documents, and inspection of improvements, shall be pursuant to the procedures and
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c). The closeout for all deposits and
escrow accounts established pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(d). In the event the applicant disputes any
charges against the escrow account, the appeal procedure shall be followed as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2 (a).
§ 15-16.6. Tax Map maintenance fee.
A. Administrative fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing an application with
the Little Egg Harbor Township Planning and Zoning Boards.
(1) Minor subdivision: three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(2) Final major subdivision:
(a) Seven (7) to twelve (12) lots: six hundred dollars ($600.00).
(b) Thirteen (13) to nineteen (19) lots: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Twenty (20) lots or more: twelve hundred dollars ($1,200.00), plus ten
dollars ($10.00) per lot.
(3) Nonresidential site plan (final plat): four hundred dollars ($400.00).
(4) Residential site plan (final plat): five hundred dollars($500.00), plus ten dollars
($10.00) per unit.
B. In the event that any application for development is denied and the application is no
longer pending in any manner before the respective Board, then any portion of the
aforementioned fee, which has not been expended by the Township Engineer, shall be
refunded to the applicant.
Article XVI
9
§ 15-16.7. Exemption from fees.
The following organizations shall be exempt from any fees chargeable under this Ordinance.
A. Nonprofit volunteer fire companies, first aid squads, and veterans organizations provided
that such organizations hold tax-exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code
of 1954 [26 U.S.C. 501 (c) or (d)].
B. The Pinelands Regional School District.
C. The Little Egg Harbor Township School District
D. The Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
Article XVII
1
ARTICLE XVII
Bonding and Inspection Requirements
§ 15-17.1. Improvements to be considered.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site plan approval,
the developer shall furnish performance guaranties as required by §15-17.5. for the
ultimate installation of the following improvements: [Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No.
2001-035]; [Amended 6/27/2002 by Ord. No. 2002-017]; [Amended 12/12/2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-040]
(1) Streets, grading and streetlights.
(2) Street name signs at all street intersections within or abutting the subdivision.
(3) Curbs.
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Shade trees.
(6) Monuments. All monuments shall be of the size and shape required by Section 3q
of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11q) and placed in
accordance with the statute.
(7) Storm drains.
(8) Bulkheads.
(9) Landscaping, topsoil and seeding on all right-of-ways.
(10) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
All improvements shall be designed, constructed and placed in accordance with any
applicable standards and specifications of the Township or County, State or Federal
regulatory agencies. The developer may construct improvements prior to final approval
and filing of the final plat, provided that final construction drawings have been received
and approved by the Township Engineer as specified under §15-10.7, upon notification to
the Board forty-five (45) days prior to the start of construction, furnishing of performance
guarantees and receipt of any zoning permits required under Township Code, and
payment of inspection fees as specified in this chapter, seven (7) days prior to the start of
construction.
B. As a condition of final approval of a subdivision application or site plan application and
prior to any construction by the developer, there shall be executed by the developer and
the Township of Little Egg Harbor an agreement incorporating all terms and conditions
of approval imposed by the Board and the Township Ordinances. This agreement shall
be referred to as a “developer’s agreement.” The developer’s agreement shall be
prepared by the Attorney to the Planning Board. The Board, by resolution of approval of
the developer’s agreement, shall forward same to the Township Committee for its
execution. The Township Attorney shall review the developer’s agreement for
sufficiency of form and substance prior to execution by the proper Township Official. If
the developer’s agreement meets with the approval of the Township Attorney as to the
sufficiency of form and substance, the Township Attorney shall present the developer’s
agreement to the proper Township Official for execution within thirty (30) days of the
date of the submission of said developer’s agreement to the Township Attorney.
Article XVII
2
Coincident with the developer posting the bond, cash performance guarantee and deposits
required under this chapter, the developer’s agreement shall be executed. The developer
shall reimburse the municipality for all costs related to the preparation of said agreement.
[Amended 12/27/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-035]
§ 15-17.2. Improvement determination criteria.
To determine the required improvements, the Board will consider:
A. The probable development of various parts of the Township as reflected in the Master
Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
B. The necessity of safe, convenient and pleasant means for the movement of traffic.
C. The protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
D. The presentation of the ecology and natural environment to the extent that the provision
of necessary public services allows the preservation of such environment.
§ 15-17.3. Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use or building involving the installation of
utilities or street improvements, parking areas, buffer areas, storm drainage facilities, the
alteration of the existing grade on a lot or the utilization of a new on-site well or sanitary disposal
system unless the Township Engineer or other appropriate authority shall have, where applicable,
certified to the following:
A. Utilities and drainage. All utilities, including but not limited to storm drains and street
lighting, shall have been properly installed and serviced to the lot, building or use.
B. Grading of street right-of-ways. All street right-of-ways necessary to provide access to
the lot in question shall have been completely graded, and all slope-retaining devices or
slope plantings shall have been installed.
C. Sidewalks. All sidewalks necessary to provide access to the lot in question shall have
been properly installed.
D. Curbing, parking areas and streets. Curbing, driveways, complete parking areas and the
bituminous base course necessary to provide access to the proposed lot, building or use
shall have been properly installed.
E. Roadway obstructions. All exposed obstructions in bituminous concrete streets, such as
manhole frames, water boxes, gas boxes and the like, shall be protected by building to the
top of such exposures with bituminous concrete, as directed by the Township Engineer.
Article XVII
3
F. Buffer areas and grading of lots. The lot in question shall have been fully graded, and all
lot grading on adjacent areas affecting drainage on or across the lot in question shall be
complete, and all plantings and required buffer areas or fences shall have been provided
or bonded in accordance with the requirements of the approved final plat, if any, or as
required by the Township Engineer to permit proper surface drainage and prevent erosion
of the soils.
G. On-site wells. All on-site wells shall have been installed, tested and approved by the
Township Board of Health.
H. Public water supply. Where the proposed lot, building or use is served by a public water
supply, the supply shall have been installed and tested, and all required fire hydrants or
fire connections shall have been installed, tested and approved.
I. Street signs and traffic control devices. All street signs and/or traffic control devices
affecting the proposed lot, building or use and required under the terms of approval of a
final plat or by Federal, State, County or municipal rules, regulations or laws shall have
been installed.
J. Other. Any other conditions established for issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the
Board as a condition of final approval shall be complied with.
K. This subsection shall be applicable to all subdivisions, site plans and all individual
dwelling unit site disturbances.
L. Completion of or posting of a performance bond guaranteeing the completion of all
required recreational areas as required by the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
M. For nonresidential site plans, completion of and the posting of a maintenance bond for all
improvements or in the case that all improvements have not been installed, then the
posting of a performance bond guaranteeing the completion of all required on-site
improvements required as part of the approved site plan.
§ 15.17.4. Inspection requirements.
A. General requirements. All improvements, except as otherwise provided, shall be subject
to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer. No underground installation shall
be covered until inspected and approved by the Township Engineer or those agencies
having jurisdiction over the particular installation. If such installation is covered prior to
inspection, it shall be uncovered or other inspection means used, such as television or
other pipeline camera, as may be deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, and
charges for such work will be paid for by the developer. The appropriate Engineer shall
be notified by the developer at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the start of
construction.
Article XVII
4
B. Inspection not acceptance. Inspection of any work by the Township Engineer or his
authorized representative shall not be considered to be final approval or rejection of the
work but shall only be considered to be a determination of whether or not the specific
work involved was being done to Township specifications or other required standards at
the time of inspection. Any damage to such work or other unforeseen circumstances,
such as the effect of the weather, other construction, changing conditions, settlement, etc.,
between the time of installation and the time that the developer wishes to be released
from his performance guaranty shall be the full responsibility of the developer, and the
work shall not be considered accepted until release of the performance guarantee.
C. Payment to contractors. No developer shall enter into any contract requiring the
Township Committee, the Township Engineer or any of their agents, employees or other
representatives to make any declarations, written or otherwise, as a condition of payment
of the developer to a contractor as to the acceptance or rejection of the work. Neither the
Township Committee, the Township Engineer nor any of their agents, employees or
representatives shall make any such declaration.
§ 15-17.5. Performance guarantees.
A. No final subdivision or site plan shall be signed by the municipal agency or a zoning
permit issued for site improvements by the Zoning Officer, unless the developer has filed
with the Township (or with the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority, in the
case of water and sanitary and sewerage facilities) a guarantee assuring the installation
and maintenance of improvements and which meets the approval of the Township
Engineer and Attorney as to sufficiency, form and execution as follows:
(1) For subdivisions and residential site plans, all required off-tract and on-site
improvements.
(2) For nonresidential site plans, all required off-tract improvements and only those
on-site improvements which will be constructed in public right-of-ways or
easements. In the case of on-site improvements which are not in public right-ofways
or easements, only a maintenance guaranty is required at the time of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Such performance guarantee shall cover the cost of installation of the improvements as
set forth in § 15-17.1. deemed necessary and appropriate, including streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments as
shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing Law, culverts, storm sewers,
means of sewage disposal other than sanitary sewers, drainage structures, erosion and
sedimentation control devices and public improvements of open space; provided,
however, that where a subdivision lies in an area to be serviced by a public utility (i.e.,
water, sewer, electric, etc.), the performance bond shall inure to the benefit of said utility.
C. The cost of installation of improvements shall be estimated by the Township Engineer
based on documented costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
Township. The estimate prepared by the Township Engineer shall be appended to each
Article XVII
5
performance guarantee posted by the developer. The amount of this estimate may be
appealed by the developer pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
D. The total performance guarantee shall be an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent
(120%) of the performance guarantee cost estimate. Ten percent (10%) of the
performance guarantee shall be posted in cash, certified check or irrevocable letter of
credit as approved by the Planning Board attorney for compliance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5. The remainder of the performance guarantee shall be posted
entirely by either certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond, or any
combination of the three (3).
E. The amount of performance guarantee may be revised by the Township Committee from
time to time to update estimated costs and corresponding performance bond amounts for
all remaining work. This shall be done at the two-year anniversary date from final
application approval for each successive two (2) years thereafter. If the required
improvements have not been installed in accordance with the performance guarantee, the
obligor and surety shall be liable thereon, at the option of the municipality, for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not installed, and, upon receipt of the proceeds
thereof, the municipality shall install such improvements or provide for the completion of
all required improvements. The Township Engineer's certification that the developer has
satisfactorily installed or has defaulted in meeting the required standards of the
construction shall be the basis for the governing body's action which accepts or rejects
the improvements, withholds approval or may extend the time allowed for installation of
the improvements. All costs of installation of improvements shall be estimated by the
Township Engineer in accordance with Subsection C. above.
F. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance with the
performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the
Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected, and
the Township may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be subject to
the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law.
G. Notification of completion.
(1) When all the required improvements have been completed, or substantially
completed as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53(d), the developer may request the
Township Committee, in writing, by certified mail addressed to the Township
Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare a list and report of all uncompleted or
unsatisfactorily completed improvements. The request shall include the
following:
(a) A statement by the applicant indicating the construction has been
completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and
that reproducible as-built plans have been transmitted to the Township
Engineer.
(b) A statement by the applicant indicating which improvements remain
uncompleted.
Article XVII
6
(c) One (1) reproducible copy, on material acceptable to the Engineer, and
three (3) prints of the as-built plans marked with the approval of the
Engineer as follows:
RECORD PLANS.
Contractor __________________________________________
Accepted by Township Engineer
_________________________ _____________________
Date
(d) If appropriate, such legal documents as are necessary to convey the
interests in the facilities to the Township.
(e) If appropriate, such legal documents as are necessary to convey title to all
required lands or easements to the Township.
(f) Maintenance guarantee equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the performance
guaranty assuring the satisfactory performance of completed systems for a
period of two (2) years.
(g) Affidavit that all contractors, subcontractors and material men have been
paid.
(2) Inspection by Township Engineer; report and list.
(a) The Township Engineer shall then inspect the aforesaid improvements.
The Township Engineer shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with
the Township Committee, and shall simultaneously send a copy to the
developer not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the developer's
request.
(b) The list filed by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect
to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the
nature and the extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete
improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the
unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory,
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made
in the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by
the Township Engineer.
(3) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53e(1), the Township Committee, by
resolution, shall either approve the improvements determined to be complete and
satisfactory by the Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements
upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee
relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
Article XVII
7
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to § 15-.17.5. This resolution shall be adopted not later than
45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township Engineer.
Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Committee, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to
those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided
that 30% of the amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to
ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
(4) If the Township Engineer fails to provide the list and report requested by the
developer, the developer may apply to the court in a summary manner for relief.
(5) If the developer has made a cash deposit with the Township as part of the
performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the
original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance guarantee.
(6) If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
the Township Committee, the developer shall cause the same to be completed or
corrected and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure of notification
as outlined herein shall be followed.
(7) The developer and/or surety shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements.
(8) Nothing contained herein shall absolve the developer or surety from latent defects
in the construction or installation of the improvements should the same become
ascertainable subsequent to the inspection and procedures as outlined above.
(9) If the developer fails, neglects or refuses to correct deficiencies as may be
discovered by the procedures outlined or which may be found to exist as a result
of an inspection of the development, the municipality is hereby authorized and
empowered to correct the deficiencies after the expiration of a reasonable period
of time and/or upon the failure of the developer or surety to take affirmative steps
to correct such deficiencies; provided, however, that the municipality shall not be
deemed liable, responsible or compellable to proceed with the corrections or
installation.
(10) Nothing contained herein shall affect the obligations of any person relating to the
performance of the obligations hereunder to post a sufficient maintenance
guaranty relative to the required improvements.
(11) Nothing contained herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
developer to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Township
Committee or the Township Engineer.
H. Whenever the performance guarantee required under Subsection C. is deposited in cash
or by certified check, it shall continue to be the property of the applicant and be held in
trust by the Township until it is repaid or applied to the purposes for which it was
deposited. The money so received shall be held in escrow and deposited in a banking
institution or savings-and-loan association in this state, insured by an agency of the
federal government, or in any other fund or depository approved for such deposits by the
Article XVII
8
State of New Jersey, in an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by
the institution or depository on time or savings deposits. The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment Secretary shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and address of the
institution or depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. If
the amount of interest earned on the deposit exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), that
entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the Township
on an annual basis or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied for the purpose it was
deposited; provided, however, that the Township may retain for administrative expenses
a sum equivalent to no more than thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/3%) of the
entire amount, which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses.
§ 15-17.6. Certification of improvements; maintenance guarantee.
A. Upon certification and action by the Township Committee consistent with the procedures
as outlined in this chapter or prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a
nonresidential site plan, the developer may post a maintenance guarantee, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a(2), for a period not to exceed two (2) years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer. A four (4) year
maintenance guarantee is required in the Pinelands Area in accordance with Subsection
15-13.4.A.(8). Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, the cost of the installation of
improvements shall be estimated by the Township Engineer based on documented
construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
municipality. Amended 5/10/2001 by Ord. No. 2001-08]
B. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the developer to contest
by legal proceedings any determination of the Township Committee or the Township
Engineer.
C. The developer shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection fees paid to
the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements.
Article XVIII
1
ARTICLE XVIII
Master Plan
§ 15-18.1. Preparation; contents; modifications.
A. The Planning Board shall prepare and, after public hearing, adopt or amend a Master
Plan, or component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands within the Township in a
manner which protects public health and safety and promotes the general welfare.
B. The Master Plan must contain a land use plan element, specifically providing for
Subsection B.(1) through (4) set forth below; in addition, the plan may provide for
Subsection B.(5) through (13) as set forth below:
(1) The relationship to the statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies
and standards of a Master Plan element providing natural conditions, topography,
soil conditions, water supply, drainage, floodplain areas, marshes and woodlands.
(2) The existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of development to be
used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, educational and other public and private purposes.
(3) The existing and proposed location of any airports and airport hazard areas.
(4) A statement of the standards of population density and recommended
development intensity.
(5) A housing plan.
(6) A circulation plan element designed to effectuate the efficient movement of
people and goods.
(7) A utility service plan analyzing the need for the present and future general
location of water supply and distribution facilities, including a stormwater
management plan required pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et
seq.
(8) A community facilities plan element showing the existing and proposed location
and type of educational and cultural activities, historical sites, libraries, etc.
(9) A recreation plan.
(10) A conservation plan which, among other things, includes a systematic analysis of
the impact of each other component and element of the Master Plan on the present
and future preservation, conservation and utilization of the resources.
(11) An economic plan element considering all aspects of economic development and
sustained economic vitality.
(12) An historic preservation plan indicating the location, significance, proposed
utilization and means for preservation of historical sites.
(13) Appendixes or separate reports containing the technical foundation for the Master
Plan and its constituent elements.
C. The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and subplan
elements projected according to periods of time or staging sequences.
D. The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the relationship of
the proposed development of the Township as developed in the Master Plan to the Master
Article XVIII
2
Plan of contiguous municipalities, the Master Plan of Ocean County and any
comprehensive guide plan pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1961, c. 47.
E. The Planning Board may undertake and enact amendments, changes and revisions to its
Master Plan for the Pinelands Area, provided that changes to the certified Municipal
Master Plan and Land Development Ordinance are completed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-
3.45.
§15-18.2. Reexamination.
A. The Township Committee shall, at least every six (6) years, provide for a general
reexamination of the Master Plan and this chapter by the Planning Board, which shall
prepare a report on the findings of such reexamination, a copy of which shall be sent to
the County Planning Board and the Municipal Clerk of each adjoining municipality. The
six-year period shall commence with the adoption or termination of the last general
reexamination of such plan and regulations.
B. Such report shall state:
(1) The major problems and objectives relating to land development in the Township
at the time of such adoption, last revision or reexamination, if any.
(2) The extent to which such problems and objectives have been reduced or have
increased subsequent to such date.
(3) The extent to which there have been significant changes in the assumptions,
policies and objectives forming the basis for such plan or regulations, as last
revised, with particular regard to the density and distribution of population and
land uses, housing conditions, circulation, conservation of natural resources and
changes in State, County and Township policies and objectives.
(4) The specific changes recommended for such plan or regulations, if any, including
underlying objectives, policies and standards, or whether a new plan or
regulations should be prepared.
§15-18.3. Notice concerning Master Plan.
A. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan shall be
given by publication in the official newspaper of the Township at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an adjoining municipality of
all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of a Master Plan involving property
situated within two hundred (200) feet of such adjoining municipality shall be given at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of any hearing.
C. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning Board
and, in the Pinelands Area, to the Pinelands Commission of:
Article XVIII
3
(1) All hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of the Township Master Plan at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall include a
copy of any proposed Master Plan or any revision or amendment thereto.
(2) The adoption, revision or amendment of the Township Master Plan not more than
thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment. Such
notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or revision or amendment thereto.
Article XIX
1
ARTICLE XIX
Enforcement
§ 15-19.1. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed ninety (90) days or by community service of not more than ninety (90)
days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as determined by
the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to abatement summarily by
a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Article XX
1
ARTICLE XX
Mandatory Development Fees
§ 15-20. Mandatory Development Fees
[Amended 2/26/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-003]; [Amended 4/8/2004 by Ord. No.
2004-05]; [Amended 11/22/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-27]
A. Purpose – The purpose of the mandatory development fee is to provide funding for the
Township’s Housing Element and Fair Share Plan approved by the governing body of the
Township.
B. Definitions – The following words used in this subsection are intended to have the same
meaning as given to them by the New Jersey Supreme Court in the Mount Laurel II
decision and as clarified or otherwise modified by subsequent decisions, if any, by a
Court of competent jurisdiction, and N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, if applicable:
(1) “Affordable” means a sales price or rent within the means of a low or moderate
income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
(2) “Council” or “COAH” means the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
(3) “Development fees” means money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as permitted
in COAH’s rules.
(4) “Equalized Assessed Valuation” means the value of property determined by the
Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all property in
the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios as required by
law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building permit may be obtained by
the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value will be determined at project completion by the Municipal Tax
Assessor.
(5) “Inclusionary Development” means a residential development in which a
substantial percentage of the housing units is provided for a reasonable range of
low and moderate income households.
(6) “Judgment of response” means a judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality’s plan to satisfy its fair share obligation.
(7) “Substantive Certification” means a determination by COAH approving a
municipality’s housing element and fair share plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and criteria as set forth herein. A
grant of substantive certification shall be valid for a period of six years in
accordance with the terms and conditions therein.
(8) “Mandatory Development Fee” means a fee paid pursuant to a Mandatory Fee
Ordinance.
(9) “Mandatory Fee Ordinance” means an ordinance which prohibits development
pursuant to an existing permitted use in the zoning ordinance without compelling
the affected developer to contribute monies to the municipality’s affordable
housing trust fund.
(10) All other terms contained herein shall be as set forth in the Municipal Land Use
Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and Chapter 15, “Land Use and Development.”
Article XX
2
C. Residential Development Fees: Amount – All developers of residential major
subdivisions shall pay a mandatory development fee equal to (1%) of the equalized
assessed valuation for each residential unit constructed. This mandatory fee shall be
calculated as follows: 0.01% x equalized assessed valuation x number of units.
[Amended 12/22/2005 by Ord. No. 2005-35]
If a “d” variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), then additional
residential units realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing zoning) will
incur a bonus development fee of six (6%) percent rather than the development fee of one
(1%) percent. However, if the zoning on the site is changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of a “d” variance application, the density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two (2) years preceding the filing of the “d” variance application with the
Little Egg Harbor Township Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 12/22/2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-35]
D. Non-Residential Development Fees: Amount – All non-residential developers shall pay a
mandatory development fee equal to one percent (1.0%) for new construction of less than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area or two percent (2.0%) for new construction greater
than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area of the total equalized assessed valuation of the
non-residential development, provided however, no development fee shall be required
where the total equalized assessed value of the development is less than $15,000 as
established by the Tax Assessor. This mandatory fee shall be calculated as follows:
1.0% (or 2.0%) x total equalized assessed valuation. [Amended 5/8/2008 by Ord. No.
2008-06]
If a “d” variance is granted pursuant to N.J.SA. 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor
area realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing zoning) will incur a
bonus development fee of 6 percent rather than the development fee of one percent
(1.0%) or two percent (2.0%). However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding filing of the “d” variance application, the density for the
purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted
by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the “d” variance application.
[Amended 5/8/2008 by Ord. No. 2008-06]
E. Collection of Fees.
(1) Fifty percent (50%) of the total mandatory development fee owed by Little Egg
Harbor Township, whether for residential or non-residential development, shall be
paid prior to the issuance of any building permit required in connection with the
development, and shall be calculated as follows:
(a) For residential developments, the fifty percent (50%) payment required
prior to the issuance of any building permit shall be calculated using an
estimated equalized valuation of each residential unit as determined by the
Little Egg Harbor Township Tax Assessor.
Article XX
3
(b) For non-residential developments, the fifty percent (50%) payment
required prior to the issuance of any building permit shall be calculated
using an estimated total equalized assessed valuation of the non-residential
development as determined by the Little Egg Harbor Township Tax
Assessor.
(2) The remaining portion of the development fee shall be paid prior to the issuance
of any Certificate of Occupancy for any development or any part thereof, whether
residential or non-residential, and shall be calculated using the actual assessed
valuation of the development as determined by the Little Egg Harbor Township
Tax Assessor.
(3) Because the initial payment required prior to the issuance of a building permit is
calculated using an estimated assessed valuation based on estimates for
construction costs, the following adjustments are permitted to compensate for
differences between the estimated assessed valuation and the actual assessed
valuation:
If the estimated assessed valuation used to calculate the initial fifty percent (50%)
payment was over-estimated or under-estimated, causing the actual assessed
valuation to be less than or greater than the estimated assessed valuation used to
calculate the initial fifty percent (50%) payment, the developer’s Certificate of
Occupancy payment shall be equal to the difference between the actual assessed
valuation and the initial fifty percent (50%) payment as determined by the Little
Egg Harbor Township Tax Assessor.
F. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions.
(1) Inclusionary developments, as defined herein, are exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval, prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, are exempt from development fees during the
effective period of said approval, unless the developer seeks a substantial change
in the approvals granted.
(3) Low and moderate income dwelling units shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
(4) Development that expands an existing structure shall pay a development fee. The
development fee shall be calculated based on the increase in the equalized
assessed value of the improved structure.
(5) Houses of worship, including but not limited to churches, temples, synagogues
and other religious organizations which are exempt under 26 U.S.C.A. 501(c)(3),
are exempt from development fees.
G. Housing Trust Fund.
(1) All mandatory development fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be
deposited in the interest bearing escrow account entitled the “Affordable Housing
Trust Fund:” Mandatory Fee Account. No money shall be expended from the
housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved
by COAH.
Article XX
4
(2) If COAH determines that Little Egg Harbor Township’s spending is not in
conformance with COAH’s rules on development fees, COAH is authorized to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be expended.
H. Use of Funds.
(1) Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved
for addressing the Township’s low and moderate income housing obligation.
Such activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to: housing
rehabilitation; new construction; regional contribution agreements; the purchase
of land for low and moderate income housing; extensions and/or improvements of
roads and infrastructures to low and moderate income housing sites; assistance
designed to render units to be more affordable to low and moderate income
households; and administrative costs necessary to implement the Township’s
housing element. The expenditure of all money shall conform to the spending
plan approved by COAH.
(2) At least thirty percent (30%) of the revenues collected from development fees
collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be devoted to rendering existing units
more affordable to low and moderate income households unless exempt as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16(c). Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to,
down payment and closing cost assistance, low interest loans and rental
assistance.
(3) Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the revenues collected from development
fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be expended on administrative
expenses necessary to develop, revise or implement the housing element.
Examples of eligible administrative activities include personnel, consultant
services, space costs, consumable supplies and rental or purchase of equipment
directly associated with plan development or plan implementation.
Article XXI
1
ARTICLE XXI
Affordable Housing
§15-21. Intent. [Amended 10/21/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
This section of the Township of Little Egg Harbor Code sets forth regulations regarding low and
moderate income housing units in Little Egg Harbor Township that are consistent with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq. as effective on June 6, 1994. These rules are pursuant to
the Fair Housing Act of 1985 and Little Egg Harbor Township’s constitutional obligation to
provide for its fair share of low and moderate income housing.
A. Definitions.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR (AH ADMINISTRATOR) – The
Township Administrator or other Municipal Official(s) and/or designee(s) appointed or
contracted by the Township Council of the Township of Little Egg Harbor to administer
the compliance and/or implementation of the Township’s Affordable Housing Plan.
DEVELOPER’S AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN – A plan submitted by the developer
and approved by the Affordable Housing Administrator which shall identify the manner
in which the developer plans to develop, price, market and restrict the low and moderate
income dwelling units in accordance with this Article.
EXEMPT SALES – Includes the transfer of ownership between husband and wife and
transfers of ownership between former spouses as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or a judicial separation but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of ownership
between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an
executors deed to a Class A beneficiary and a transfer of ownership by court order.
FAIR MARKET VALUE – The unrestricted price of a low or moderate income housing
unit if sold at current real estate market rate.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT – A residential housing development in which a
percentage of the housing units are reserved for low and moderate income households.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING – Housing affordable according to Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development standards and Council on Affordable Housing (COAH)
standards for homeownership and rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to 50 percent or less of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing region in which the
dwelling is located in and subject to affordability controls promulgated by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING – Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development and COAH standards for
homeownership and rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households
with a gross household income of more than 50 percent but less than 80 percent of the
Article XXI
2
median gross household income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the house is located and subject to COAH affordability controls.
PRICE DIFFERENTIAL – The difference between the controlled unit sale price and the
fair market value as determined at the date of the proposed contract of sale after
reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid.
REPAYMENT CLAUSE – Obligation of a seller exercising a repayment option to pay
95 percent of the price differential to a municipality at closing for use within the
municipal housing plan.
REPAYMENT OPTION – The option of a seller of a low or moderate income unit to sell
a unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-12.7 [sic per N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3] at a fair market value
subject to compliance with the terms of a repayment clause.
SET ASIDE – The percentage of housing units devoted to low and moderate income
households within an inclusionary development.
UNIT COMPLETION – The receipt of any temporary or final certificate of occupancy.
A. Little Egg Harbor Township’s fair share obligation will be divided equally between low
and moderate income households as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.20.
B. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to low income tax credit
regulations, the following shall apply:
(1) At least half of all units within each inclusionary development will be affordable
to low income households; and
(2) At least half of all rental units will be affordable to low income households; and
(3) At least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low income households.
C. Inclusionary developments that are not age-restricted will be constructed in conjunction
with realistic market demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at least 10 percent and no
greater than 20 percent of the total low and moderate income units; and
(2) At least 30 percent of all low and moderate income units are two bedroom units;
and
(3) Low and moderate income units that are age-restricted may utilize a modified
bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of bedrooms will equal the
number of age-restricted low and moderate income units within the inclusionary
development.
(4) At least 20 percent of all low and moderate income units shall be 3-bedroom
units.
D. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria will be used in
determining maximum rents and sale prices:
Article XXI
3
(1) Efficiency units will be affordable to a one person household; and
(2) One bedroom units will be affordable to 1.5 person households; and
(3) Two bedroom units will be affordable to three person households; and
(4) Three bedroom units will be affordable to 4.5 person households; and
(5) Median income by household size will be established by a regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b); and
(6) The maximum sales prices of low and moderate income units within each
inclusionary development will be affordable to households earning no more than
70 percent of median income. In averaging an affordability range of 55 percent
for sales units, the municipal ordinance will require moderate income sales units
to be available for at least two different prices and low income sales units to be
available for at least two different prices.
(7) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low and moderate income units will
utilize the same heating source as market units within an inclusionary
development; and
(8) Low income units will be reserved for households with a gross household income
less than or equal to 50 percent of the median income approved by COAH;
moderate income units will be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80 percent of the median income approved by COAH as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(i); and
(9) The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 9.16 will be applicable for
purchased and rental units.
E. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
(1) Establish one rent for a low income unit and one for a moderate income unit for
each bedroom distribution; and
(2) Gross rents, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, will be established so
as not to exceed 30 percent of the gross monthly income of the appropriate
household size as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(h). The tenant-paid utility allowance will
be consistent with the utility allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
(3) The maximum rents of low and moderate income units within each inclusionary
development will be affordable to households earning no more than 60 percent of
median income. In averaging an affordability range of 52 percent for rental units,
developers and/or municipal sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for a
low income unit and one rent for a moderate income unit for each bedroom
distribution.
F. For sale units:
(1) The initial price of a low and moderate income owner-occupied for-sale housing
unit will be established to that after a downpayment of five percent, the monthly
principal, interest, homeowner and private mortgage insurance, property taxes
(based on the restricted value of the low and moderate income unit) and
condominium or homeowner fee do not exceed 28 percent of eligible gross
monthly income; and
Article XXI
4
(2) Master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate condominium or
homeowner association fees or special assessments of low and moderate income
purchasers at current state percentage of those paid by market purchasers. This
state percentage is consistent with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(g).
Once established within the master deed, the (state percentage) percentage will
not be amended without prior approval from COAH; and
(3) Little Egg Harbor Township will follow the general provisions concerning
uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through certificates of occupancy
or reoccupancy on sale units as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3; and
(4) Little Egg Harbor Township will require a certificate of reoccupancy for any
occupancy of a low or moderate income sales unit resulting from a resale as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c); and
(5) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units will be
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 to -9.8. Municipal rejection of repayment
options for sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9; and
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain low and
moderate income sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10; and
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on sale units will
be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11; and
(8) The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12 to -9.14 will be applicable to low
and moderate income units that are for sale units.
G. In zoning for inclusionary developments, the following is required:
(1) Low and moderate income units will be built in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-
5.6(d):
Minimum % of Low/Moderate Income Units Completed % of Market Housing Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
100
(2) A design of inclusionary development that integrates low and moderate income
units with market units is encouraged per N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(f).
H. A development fee ordinance was approved by COAH and adopted by Little Egg Harbor
Township.
I. To provide assurances that low and moderate income units are created with controls on
affordability over time and that low and moderate income households occupy these units,
Little Egg Harbor Township will designate an AH Administrator with the responsibility
of ensuring the affordability of sales and rental units over time. The AH Administrator
will be responsible for those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
(1) In addition, the AH Administrator will be responsible for utilizing the verification
and certification procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in placing
households in low and moderate income units; and
Article XXI
5
(2) Newly constructed low and moderate income sales units will remain affordable to
low and moderate income households for at least 30 years.
(3) Newly constructed low and moderate income sales units will remain affordable to
low and moderate income households for at least 30 years.
The AH Administrator will require all conveyances of newly constructed units to
contain the deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred to
as Technical Appendix E as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(4) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential structure will be
considered a new housing unit and will be subject to 30-year controls on
affordability. The AH Administrator will require COAH’s appropriate deed
restrictions and mortgage lien.
J. Regarding rehabilitated units:
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units that are improved to
code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least six years; and
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code standard
will be subject to affordability controls for at least 10 years; and
K. Regarding rental units:
(1) Newly constructed low and moderate income rental units will remain affordable
to low and moderate income households for at least 30 years. The AH
Administrator will require the deed restriction and lien and deed of easement
referred to as Technical Appendix H as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(2) Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period of at least 10
years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental bonus credit pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15, then the controls on affordability will extend for 30 years
(N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9); and
(3) Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner suitable to COAH,
that provides assurances that such a facility will house low and moderate income
households for at least 10 years except if the alternative living arrangement is to
receive a rental bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.15, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years (N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8).
L. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., incorporates the need
to eliminate unnecessary cost generating features from Little Egg Harbor Township’s
land use ordinances. Accordingly, Little Egg Harbor Township will eliminate
development standards that are not essential to protect the public welfare and to expedite
or fast track municipal approvals/denials on certain affordable housing developments.
Little Egg Harbor Township will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1 to -
10.3.
Article XXI
6
M. Little Egg Harbor Township has a fair share obligation of 225 units of which 195 is new
construction. This ordinance will apply to all developments that contain proposed low
and moderate income units that are listed below and any future developments that may
occur.
Article XXII
1
ARTICLE XXII
§15-22. Reserved [Amended 10/22/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
Article XXIII
1
ARTICLE XXIII
Affirmative Marketing
§15-23. Affirmative Marketing [Amended 10/22/2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
A. The AH Administrator shall develop and implement an affirmative marketing program
for affordable housing units that shall apply to all new developments that contain low and
moderate income housing units.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract
income eligible households of all majority and minority groups, regardless of sex, age or
number of children, to housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan
shall address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan prohibits
discrimination in the sale, rental, financity or other services related to housing on the
basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial status/size or national origin.
The Township of Little Egg harbor is in the housing region consisting of Monmouth,
Mercer and Ocean Counties. The affirmative marketing plan is a continuing program and
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applicants for low and
moderate income housing shall appear in the following regional newspaper(s):
• The Asbury Park Press
• Atlantic City Press
• Tuckerton Beacon
(2) The initial advertising of affordable housing shall take the form of at least one
press release and one paid display advertisement in the above newspaper(s).
Additional advertising and publicity will be on an “as needed” basis. At a
minimum, the paid display advertisement shall include the following
(a) Street address of units
(b) Directors to housing units
(c) Number of bedrooms per unit
(d) Size of units
(e) Prices or rents of units
(f) Income range for qualifying households
(g) Location of applications including business house and where/how
applications may be obtained.
(3) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for application for low and
moderate income housing will appear in the following neighborhood-oriented
newspapers, religious publications and organization newsletters within the region:
• The Tuckerton Leader
(4) The following is the location of applications, brochure(s), sign(s), and/or poster(s)
used as part of the affirmative marketing program including specific employment
centers within the region:
(a) Municipal Building
(b) Ocean County Library, Little Egg Harbor Branch
(c) Developer’s sales/rental office on-site
Article XXIII
2
(d) Senior center
(e) Ocean County Planning Board/CDBG Program
(5) The following is a listing of community contact person(s) and/or organization(s)
in Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean Counties that will aid n the affirmative
marketing program with particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to
groups that are least likely to apply for affordable housing within the region:
(a) Ocean County
(6) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
(7) Additionally, applications will be sent to the chief administrative employees of
each of the following agencies in the counties of Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean:
(a) Monmouth County Library
(b) Mercer County Library
(c) Ocean County Library
(d) Monmouth County Office on Aging
(e) Mercer County Office on Aging
(f) Ocean County Office on Aging
(8) Applicants for re-rentals or re-sale of affordable housing will be considered on a
first-come, first-served basis. A list of interested persons will be maintained by
the AH Administrator. Tenant or owner selection for new units will on a random
basis in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.1.
Little Egg Harbor Township is ultimately responsible for administering the
affirmative marketing program. Little Egg Harbor Township has delegated this
responsibility to Ocean County with regard to the rehabilitation obligation. Ocean
County will income qualify low and moderate income households; place income
eligible households in low and moderate income units upon initial occupancy;
provide for the initial occupancy of low and moderate income units with income
qualified households; continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as
they become vacant during the period of affordability controls; assist with
advertising and outreach to low and moderate income households if in contract;
and enforce the terms of the deed restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.3. The Affordable Housing Administrator within Little Egg Harbor
Township is the designated housing officer to act as liaison to Ocean County.
Ocean County will provide counseling services to low and moderate income
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification,
responsibilities of homeownership, rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant
law.
(9) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing region may be
given preference for sales and rental units constructed within that housing region.
Applicants living outside the housing region will have an equal opportunity for
units after regional applicants have been initially serviced. Little Egg Harbor
Township intends to comply the N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(10) Developers/builders/sponsors of low and moderate income housing units may
assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their respective development if so
designated by Little Egg Harbor Township.
Article XXIII
3
(11) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the issuance of
either temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy. The marketing program
will continue until all low and moderate income housing units are initially
occupied and for as long as affordable units are deed restricted and occupancy or
reoccupancy of units continues to be necessary.
(12) Little Egg Harbor Township will comply with monitoring and reporting
requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 12.1.
Article XXIV
1
ARTICLE XXIV
Small Wind Energy Systems and Solar Energy Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of Little Egg Harbor
3/14/2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
§15-24.1 Purpose
A. Facilitate the permitting of small wind energy systems and solar energy systems; and,
B. Preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare without significantly increasing the
cost or decreasing the efficiency of a small wind energy system or solar energy system.
§15-24.2 Definitions
A. ADMINISTRATOR – means the Little Egg Harbor Township Zoning Officer.
B. BOARD – means the Little Egg Harbor Zoning Board or other authority having
jurisdiction.
C. ENERGY SYSTEM – means small wind energy system or solar energy system, as
defined herein.
D. OWNER – shall mean the individual or entity that intends to own and operate the small
wind energy system in accordance with this ordinance.
E. ROTOR DIAMETER – means the cross sectional dimension of the circle swept by the
rotating blades of a wind-powered energy generator.
F. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM – means a wind energy system, as defined in this
section, that:
1) is used to generate electricity; and,
2) has a nameplate capacity of 100 kilowatts or less.
G. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM – means a system and all associated equipment that
converts solar energy into a usable electrical energy, heats water or produces hot air or
other similar function through the use of solar panels, solar tubes, or some other device or
structure that captures solar energy.
H. SOLAR PANELS – means an elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof, that
captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes flat plate, focusing
solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or foundation of the
panel, plate, canopy, or array.
I. TOTAL SYSTEM HEIGHT – means, in relation to a small wind energy system, the
vertical distance from the ground to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its
highest point.
Article XXIV
2
J. TOWER – means a monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind
generator.
K. WIND ENERGY SYSTEM – means a wind generator and all associated equipment,
including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire,
inverter, batteries or other component necessary to fully utilize the wind generator.
L. WIND GENERATOR – means equipment that converts energy from the wind into
electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components necessary to generate, store and/or transfer energy.
§15-24.3 Standards for Small Wind Energy Systems
A small wind energy system shall be a permitted use in all industrial zones subject to the
following requirements:
A. Lot Size. Small wind energy systems are permitted on tax parcels, or tracts of land that
are under common ownership, that have a total area of at least twenty (20) acres.
B. Setbacks. A tower for a small wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal to
150 percent of the total system height. No portion of the wind generator shall extend
beyond the setback line, nor into the following:
1) the right-of-way of any public or private roadway;
2) any overhead utility lines.
C. Placement. The following regulations apply:
1) small wind energy systems shall not be located within a front yard area;
2) small wind energy systems shall not be permitted as a rooftop installation;
3) all parts of small wind energy systems, including guy wires, shall be located on
the same property.
D. Access.
1) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured
to prevent unauthorized access. At a minimum, security shall include locking
equipment cabinets and perimeter fencing.
2) The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts, a ladder,
or other publicly accessible means of climbing the tower, for a minimum height of
ten (10) feet above the ground.
E. Lighting. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lighted unless the Federal
Aviation Administration requires such lighting.
F. Safety. The following regulations apply:
1) Wind generators shall be designed with an automatic brake or other similar device
to prevent over-speeding and excessive pressure on the tower.
2) All moving parts of the small wind energy system shall be a minimum of twelve
Article XXIV
3
(12) feet above ground level.
3) The blades on the small wind energy system shall be constructed of a corrosionresistant
material
G. Noise. Small wind energy systems shall operate at no greater than fifty-five (55) decibels,
as measured at the boundary of the tax parcel, or tract of land under common ownership,
on which it is located.
1) Limit overages during short-term events such as utility outages and severe
windstorms are permitted.
H. Appearance. The design of small wind energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the
facility into the natural setting and existing environment.
I. Trees. An applicant shall locate a wind or solar energy system so that tree removal is not
required to the extent practical. Any tree removal shall be subject to the requirements of
§15-12.7, the Township’s Tree and Natural Habitat Protection ordinance.
J. Signs. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road posted on a small
wind generator system or any associated building, except for the manufacturer’s or
installer’s identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification.
K. Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy systems that connect to the
electric utility shall comply with the New Jersey’s Net Metering and Interconnection
Standards for Class I Renewable Energy Systems at N.J.A.C. 14:4-9.
L. Electrical and structural design. Electrical and structural design shall be governed by the
State Uniform Construction Code promulgated pursuant to the "State Uniform
Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) and technical bulletins
issued pursuant to Section 2 of P.L.2009, c.244 (C.40:55D-66.13).
§15-24.4 Standards for Solar Energy Systems
Solar energy systems shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any zoning district. The solar
energy system shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) inches from the rooftop, except on flat
roofs where one end of the solar collection device used in the solar energy system may be
separated from the roofline by up to five (5) feet. In no event shall the placement of a solar
energy system on a rooftop result in a total height, including building and solar energy system,
than what is permitted for the principle building in the zoning district where they are located.
Solar energy systems that include an elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof, and are
installed over the ground, shall be a permitted use in all industrial zone districts. A solar energy
system that is installed over the ground shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Lot Size. Solar energy systems that are installed over the ground are permitted on tax
parcels, or tracts of land that are under common ownership, that have a total area of at
Article XXIV
4
least twenty (20) acres.
B. Setbacks. Solar energy systems that are installed over the ground shall be set back in
accordance with the prevailing zone district standard for accessory buildings or twentyfive
(25) feet, whichever is greater.
C. Placement. Solar energy systems that are installed over the ground shall not be located
within a front yard area.
D. Height. Solar energy systems that are installed over the ground shall not exceed a height
of fifteen (15) feet.
E. Cover. Solar panels shall not be considered to be part of a site’s impervious cover or
surface. Solar panels shall be excluded from all impervious cover or surface calculations.
F. Appearance. The design of solar energy systems that are installed over the ground shall,
to the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural setting and existing environment.
The following requirements apply to all solar energy systems:
A. Cadmium telluride prohibited. Devices including cadmium telluride are prohibited due to
the highly carcinogenic nature of cadmium and the possible detrimental effects on
children, wildlife, water supplies, and the environment.
B. Glare. Solar energy systems shall be located so that any glare is directed away from
adjacent properties.
C. Access. All ground-mounted and exterior electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. At a minimum, security shall include
locking equipment cabinets and perimeter fencing.
D. Trees. An applicant shall locate solar energy systems so that tree removal is not required
to the extent practical. Any tree removal shall be subject to the requirements of §15-12.7,
the Township’s Tree and Natural Habitat Protection ordinance.
E. Signs. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road posted on a solar
energy system or any associated building, except for the manufacturer’s or installer’s
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification.
F. Noise. Solar energy systems shall operate at no greater than forty (40) decibels, as
measured at the boundary of the tax parcel, or tract of land under common ownership, on
which it is located.
G. Utility notification and interconnection. Solar energy systems that connect to the electric
utility shall comply with the New Jersey’s Net Metering and Interconnection Standards
for Class I Renewable Energy Systems at N.J.A.C. 14:4-9.
Article XXIV
5
H. Electrical and structural design. Electrical and structural design shall be governed by the
State Uniform Construction Code promulgated pursuant to the "State Uniform
Construction Code Act," P.L.1975, c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) and technical bulletins
issued pursuant to Section 2 of P.L.2009, c.244 (C.40:55D-66.13).
§15-24.5 Approval Required
All applications for small wind energy systems and solar energy systems shall be presented to
the planning or zoning board for administrative approval.
§15-24.6 Permit Requirements
A. Permit. A zoning permit and construction permit shall be required for the installation of
each energy system.
B. Documents. The zoning and building permit applications shall be accompanied by a plot
plan which includes the following:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
(2) Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property;
(3) The right-of-way of any public or private road that is contiguous with the
property;
(4) The location of any overhead utility lines;
(5) Energy system operating and maintenance plan;
(6) Decommissioning plan to be implemented upon abandonment, or cessation of
activity, or in conjunction of removal of system;
(7) For small wind energy systems:
(a) Location of the proposed small wind energy system;
(b) Small wind energy system specifications, including, at a minimum:
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type
(freestanding or guyed), safety equipment, and any other information
determined by the Administrator to be necessary for the complete review
of the application;
(8) For solar energy systems:
(a) Location of the proposed solar energy system;
(b) Solar energy system specifications, including, at a minimum:
manufacturer and model, solar collection device type, size and quantity,
safety equipment, and any other information determined by the
Administrator to be necessary for the complete review of the application.
C. Fees. The required application fee must be remitted with each application for a zoning or
building permit.
D. Expiration. A zoning permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire if:
(1) The energy system is not installed and functioning within twenty-four (24)
months from the date the permit is issued; or
(2) The energy system is out of service or otherwise unused for a continuous period
Article XXIV
6
of twelve (12) months.
§15-24.7 Abandonment
A. An energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be deemed abandoned.
B. The Administrator may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the Owner of an energy system
that is deemed abandoned. One copy of the notice shall be sent via regular mail without
signature confirmation (i.e., return receipt), and one copy of the notice shall be sent via
certified mail with signature confirmation (i.e., return receipt).
C. The Owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment within thirty
(30) days from the date of Notice receipt.
D. If the Owner provides information that demonstrates that the energy system in question
has not been abandoned, the Administrator shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment
and notify the Owner that the Notice has been withdrawn.
E. If the Administrator determines that the energy system has been abandoned, the Owner of
the energy system shall remove said energy system within ninety (90) days after the
Owner receives the Notice of Abandonment.
F. The removal of an energy system shall require a demolition permit.
G. Upon removal of an energy system, the site shall be cleaned, restored and vegetated to
blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of abandonment.
H. When an owner of an energy system has been notified to remove same and has not done
so within ninety (90) days after receiving said notice, then the Township may remove the
energy system and place a lien upon the property for the cost of the removal.
I. Removal will be in accordance with the decommissioning plan submitted at the time of
application.
§15-24.8 Zoning Permit Procedure
A. An Owner shall submit an application to the Administrator for a zoning permit for an
energy system.
B. The Administrator shall issue a permit or deny the application within one (1) month as
consistent with Municipal Land Use Law of the date on which the application is received.
C. If the application is approved, the Administrator will return one (1) signed copy of the
application with the zoning permit and retain the other copy with the application.
D. If the application is rejected, the Administrator will notify the applicant in writing and
Article XXIV
7
provide a written statement of the reason why the application was rejected. The applicant
may appeal the Administrator’s decision pursuant to the appropriate appeals authority.
The applicant may reapply if the deficiencies specified by the Administrator are resolved.
§15-24.9 Violations
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate an energy system that is not
in compliance with this ordinance.
B. Energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this ordinance are exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance, except for provisions regarding abandonment.
§15-24.10 Administration and Enforcement
A. This ordinance shall be administered by the Administrator or another official designated
by the Administrator.
B. At any time, the Administrator may enter any property for which a permit has been issued
under this ordinance to conduct an inspection to determine whether the conditions stated
in the permit are met.
C. The Administrator may issue orders to abate any violation of this ordinance.
D. The Administrator may issue a citation for any violation of this ordinance.
E. The Administrator may refer any violation of this ordinance to legal counsel for
enforcement.
§15-24.11 Penalties
A. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to
enforcement and penalties as stipulated in the Code of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Governing Body of Little Egg
Harbor Township from using any other lawful means to enforce this ordinance.

Chapter 217
LICENSING
§ 205-4 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 205-4
212:395

ARTICLE I
General Procedures and Regulations
§ 217-1. Purpose; license required. [Amended 4-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-06]
§ 217-2. Application requirements; fees.
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to or through the Township Clerk upon forms provided by
the Township Clerk. Applications shall contain the information specified by
resolution of the Township Committee and may include the following, along
with any other information deemed necessary or specifically called for by
ordinance:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses
issued by the Township, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog
licenses and taxicab licenses, and except as may be specified or
otherwise provided elsewhere in this article.
B. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall engage
in, conduct or operate any business within the limits of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor unless a license as herein provided for shall have first
been obtained.
A. The name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
B. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number.
D. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
E. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
F. A description of the nature of the business, and the goods, property, or
services to be sold or supplied.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty imposed.
H. Appropriate evidence as to the good character business responsibility
of the applicant so that an investigator may properly evaluate his or her
character and responsibility.
§ 217-1 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 217-2
212:397
§ 217-3. Investigation of applicants.
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, or other designated
police officer, who shall immediately institute an investigation of the
applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to properly
conduct the licensed activity considered necessary for the protection of
the public. The Chief's findings shall be communicated in writing to the
Township Clerk within a reasonable time after the application has been
filed. If the investigator finds that the applicant's character, ability or
business responsibility is unsatisfactory or that the products, services or
activities are not free from fraud, the Chief shall disapprove the application
and the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license and so notify the applicant.
Otherwise, the Township Clerk shall issue the license immediately, provided
that the required license fees have been paid, except in cases where
approval of the Township Committee is required. In the case of an
application for a solicitor's, peddler's, or canvasser's license, the license
may be issued immediately, subject to investigation. In the event of the
refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may appeal to the
Committee for a hearing. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the
Township Clerk within 14 days after notification of the refusal. The
Committee shall hold its hearing within 10 days thereafter, and its decision
shall be final.
I. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners, general or
limited, with the information required by this section supplied in detail
as to each partner. Applications of corporations shall have attached
individual statements containing all of the information required by this
section relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the
licensed activity and shall be signed by each employee or agent, as well
as a copy of the certificate of incorporation.
J. The name and address of the insurance company providing applicant
with public liability insurance, policy number, expiration date, and the
amount of coverage in an amount not less than $500,000 combined
single limit.
K. All license fees shall be due and payable to the Township of Little Egg
Harbor at the Office of the Municipal Clerk, 665 Radio Road, Little Egg
Harbor, New Jersey.
L. License fees to be paid to the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be as
follows:
(1) The license fee shall be $50 for a new mercantile license and $30
for renewal. Renewal fees shall be paid on or before March 15 of
each year. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
(2) For the purposes of this section, a change of ownership in a
business shall require the purchase of a new mercantile license.
§ 217-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 217-4
212:398
§ 217-4. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Township Committee prescribes by
resolution and shall contain the following information:
§ 217-5. Record of licenses.
The Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this article.
The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the Township
Committee and shall contain the same information as is required by § 217-4
to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of the fee
paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the date
of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license or a
renewal, and any other information which the Township Committee may
require by resolution.
§ 217-6. Display of licenses.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases, the license shall be in the licensee's possession at all
times and shall be displayed upon the request of any police officer or any
person with whom the licensee is doing business.
§ 217-7. Transferability; fee.
Except as otherwise provided, a license shall apply only to the person
to whom it was issued and shall not be transferable to another person.
Licenses may be transferred from place to place in cases where the licensed
activity is conducted at a fixed location, but only with the approval of the
Township Committee, by resolution. The fee for the transfer of a license
from place to place shall be $5.
§ 217-8. Expiration and renewal.
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Committee
may require by resolution.
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
March 14 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for the
§ 217-4 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 217-8
212:399
§ 217-9. Revocation of license.
Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Committee, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 217-10. Notice of hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. The notice shall also indicate that the hearing will be
held before a hearing officer designated by the Mayor and Committee. The
notice shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee's last known address
by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
§ 217-11. Hearing; determination.
At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses on the licensee's behalf,
to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record made
of the proceedings at the licensee's expense. No later than five days after
the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written order
setting forth the findings of the hearing. If the hearing officer determines
renewal of licenses shall be made not later than March 1 of the year of
issue. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than 1/2 of a month shall be considered as a full
month for this purpose.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
C. A violation of any provision or condition of the license.
D. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee, or the
licensee's agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner
that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
F. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this article, such
license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation is
such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 217-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 217-11
212:400
by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts
charged, the Township Committee shall then revoke or suspend the license.
§ 217-12. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
The Township Committee may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied as provided in this article if, after
a hearing, the members of the Committee are satisfied by clear and
convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation or denial will
not occur again; otherwise, a person whose license has been revoked or
denied, or any person acting on behalf of the person whose license has been
revoked or denied, either directly or indirectly, shall not be issued another
license to carry on the same activity.
§ 217-13. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may, by resolution, make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this article or for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this article or making them more effective.
No regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision
of this article, and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is
in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this article.
§ 217-11 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 217-13
212:401

ARTICLE II
Conditional Renewals
§ 217-14. Proof of paid taxes and assessments required.
Every person applying for the issuance or the renewal of any license or
permit issued by or requiring the approval of the municipality shall provide
proof that there are no delinquent property taxes or assessments due on
the property wherein or upon which the business or activity for which the
license or permit is conducted.
§ 217-15. Payment of unpaid taxes and assessments required.
If the applicant is the owner of the property where the business or activity
for which the license or permit is sought or where the business or activity is
to be conducted, then the municipality or the municipal officer or Township
officer charged with issuing or renewing the license or permit shall
condition the issuance or renewal of said license or permit upon the
payment by the applicant of any delinquent property taxes or assessments
on the subject property.
§ 217-16. Failure to pay; suspension of licenses or permits.
In the event that any permit holder or licensee is the owner of the property
upon which the licensed activity or business is conducted and fails to pay
property taxes on the property for at least three consecutive quarters, a
notice shall be sent by the Township to the property owner advising that
said taxes must be brought current within 90 days or any and all licenses
or permits issued by the municipality shall immediately be suspended.
Said suspension shall become effective immediately and automatically upon
failure of the property owner to bring said property taxes current within 90
days from the issuance of the notice by the Township as set forth herein.
§ 217-17. Restoration of license or permit upon payment.
Upon payment by the licensee or permit holder of all delinquent taxes or
assessments on the property on which the licensed activity or business is
conducted, said license or permit shall automatically be restored.
§ 217-18. Applicability.
The provisions of § 217-16 shall only apply in the event that the licensee
or permit holder is also the owner of the property upon which the licensed
business or activity is conducted.
§ 217-19. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to nor include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.35
§ 217-14 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 217-19
212:403
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 130, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 217-19 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 217-19
212:404
ARTICLE III
Inspections, Violations and Penalties, Enforcement
[Added 9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
§ 217-20. Unlicensed business unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or entity to manage or conduct
any business or to use for any business purpose any vehicle, room, building,
home or other place of thing herein required to be licensed or to aid or
assist or act as employee, clerk or otherwise in the carrying on of such
business unless such license fee has been paid and such certificate obtained
as required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The purpose of
this chapter is to require the licensing of any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity engaging in, conducting or operating any
business within the limits of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 217-21. Enforcing officer.
The Township Code Enforcement Officer and/or his designee and/or a
Township law enforcement officer shall be responsible for the enforcement
of this chapter.
§ 217-22. Periodic inspections.
To ensure the continued health, safety and welfare of this community, the
Township may make periodic inspections of the premises of any business
conducted within the Township. The business owner or its agent shall admit
the inspector to the premises to be inspected at any reasonable time that
admission is requested.
§ 217-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates one or more of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense and/
or confinement in the Ocean County jail for a period of not more than 90
days. In the case of a continuing violation or violations, a fine of not more
than $1,000 may be assessed for each day that said violation or violations
are not corrected. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 217-20 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 217-23
212:405
Chapter 222
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 293. Solid waste collection — See Ch. 374.
§ 217-23 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 217-23
212:406
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
§ 222-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as an "Anti-Litter Article" and may be so cited.
§ 222-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their
use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
Which advertises any merchandise, product, commodity or thing
for sale; or
(1)
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
or
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of gain or profit. The
terms of this definition shall not apply where an admission fee is
charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying
the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, when it is held, is given or takes
place in connection with the dissemination of information which
does not violate the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public
peace, safety and good order, provided that nothing contained in
this definition shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or
taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or
event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may
be required by a law of this state or ordinance of the Township; or
(3)
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
(4)
§ 222-1 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 222-2
212:407
HANDBILL — Includes both commercial handbills and noncommercial
handbills, as such terms are defined in this section.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top,
cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, rubbish, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic
or paper containers or other packaging or construction material, but
does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
office as provided by general law. In addition thereto, "newspaper"
means and includes any periodical or magazine regularly published
with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, circular, dodger, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public areas in the Township owned or used by any public
agency and devoted to recreation purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walks, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibules or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house or building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public walkways and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks,
grounds and buildings.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 222-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 222-3
212:408
§ 222-3. Litter in public places.
§ 222-4. Placement of litter in receptacles.
§ 222-5. Littering from vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit litter from any vehicle or boat upon any
public or private property, including vacant land. Whenever any litter is
thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat in violation of
this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or boat
shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 222-6. Litter caused by commercial vehicles.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other commercial vehicle
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any litter from
being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public or private
property. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck if the wheels
or tires carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place
A. No person shall sweep, throw, drop, discard, deposit or otherwise place
any litter of any nature upon any public property other than in a litter
receptacle.
B. Litter receptacles suitable for the depositing of litter and their servicing
are required at the following public places which exist in the Township
of Little Egg Harbor: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail
commercially zoned areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no
single linear 1/4 mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by
the public, including schools, government buildings, and railroad and
bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor locations;
self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline service
station islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds and
trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations; boat
launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such
that adequate containerization is available.
A. Litter shall be placed in litter receptacles, either public or private, in
such manner as to prevent it from being scattered, carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public property or
private property.
B. Branches, clippings, shrubs and the like in excess of 24 inches in length
but not greater than six feet in length and not in excess of 75 pounds in
weight may be placed at the curb for pickup if securely tied in bundles
so as to prevent their being scattered, carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public or private property.
§ 222-3 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 222-6
212:409
mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind from any other
place other than the traveled portion of a public street or alley. Whenever
any litter is thrown, discarded or allowed to fall from such truck or other
commercial vehicle in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or
both, of the truck or other commercial vehicle shall also be deemed to have
violated this chapter.
§ 222-7. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, lake, pond, stream,
bay or any other body of water.
§ 222-8. Litter on private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property,
whether owned by him or not, except that the owner or person in control
of private property shall maintain private litter receptacles for collection in
such a manner that litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any other public place or upon any private property.
§ 222-9. Responsibility of owner.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the storage of litter in private litter receptacles for collection.
§ 222-10. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
§ 222-11. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to hand out
or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof in any public place a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it.
§ 222-12. Depositing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place.
B. No person shall hand out, distribute or sell commercial handbills in any
public place; provided, however, that it shall not be deemed unlawful
for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, in any sidewalk, street or other public place any
noncommercial handbill to any person who is willing to accept it.
§ 222-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 222-13
212:410
§ 222-13. Unlawful to distribute handbills on private premises
where occupant refuses or where sign posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon any
private premises:
§ 222-14. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises;
exception for mail and newspapers.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present,
except as hereinafter provided. A person, unless requested by anyone upon
the premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or
upon inhabited private premises, if the premises is not posted as provided
under § 222-13 above and the handbill is placed or deposited so as to secure
or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places or private premises. Mailboxes may not be so
used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United
States, nor to newspapers as defined in this chapter; provided, however,
that newspapers shall be placed on private premises in such a manner as to
prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or any other public place or upon private property.
§ 222-15. Posting notices prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any public lamp post,
public utility pole, shade tree or upon any public structure or building, or
upon any official traffic control devices except as may be authorized or
required by law.
§ 222-16. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property whether owned by such person or not.
§ 222-17. Notice to clear litter from private property; removal by
Township upon noncompliance; costs.
A. If requested by anyone in or upon such premises not to do so; or
B. If there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Handbills," "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any
similar notice indicating that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have
any such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 222-13 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 222-17
212:411
A. Notice to remove. The Code Enforcement Officer or his duly designated
agent is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private
premises or vacant land or the tenant or agent of such owner to dispose
properly of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous
to public health, safety or welfare. Notice shall be by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to said property
owner or his agent or tenant at his last known address or served
personally upon said owner, tenant or agent.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner, tenant or agent so notified to dispose properly of the litter within
10 days after receipt of written notice specified in Subsection A of this
section, or within 10 days after the date of such notice in the event it is
returned to the Township by the post office department because of
inability to make delivery thereof, provided the notice was properly
addressed to the last known address of the owner, tenant or agent, the
Code Enforcement Officer or his duly designated agent is authorized
and empowered to pay for disposing of such litter or to order its
disposal by the Township.
C. When the Township has effected the removal of dangerous litter or has
paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall, unless paid by the
owner prior thereto, be charged to the owner of the property on the
next regular tax bill forwarded to the owner by the Township. The
charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time set for
payment of the tax bill.
D. Where the full amount due the Township is not paid by the owner within
30 days after the disposal of such litter as specified in Subsections A
and B of this section, then, and in that case, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Township Committee which
shall examine the certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. The amount so
charged shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full
force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs
of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Said
costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the
collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the
same rate as in the case of taxes in the event they are not paid in full on
or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes
delinquent. The certification of the Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has
been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
§ 222-17 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 222-17
212:412
ARTICLE II
Do Not Deliver Registry
[Adopted 5-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 222-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in
which unsolicited handbills are distributed within the Township of Little Egg
Harbor to insure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Furthermore, this article is designed to improve the overall clean
appearance of the Township and to reduce litter.
§ 222-19. Registration required for handbill distribution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute unsolicited handbills within
the Township of Little Egg Harbor without first having registered with the
Township Clerk of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 222-20. Registration form.
The registration shall be free of charge. The registration form shall be filed
with the Township Clerk and contain the following information:
§ 222-21. Submission of information for Do Not Deliver Registry.
Any resident, business or property owner who wishes to discontinue the
delivery of such unsolicited handbills must submit his, her or its name and
home address to the Township Clerk on forms provided by the Township
Clerk.
§ 222-22. Notification of updated registry.
On the first Monday of every month, the Township Clerk shall cause to
be transmitted to the person in charge of the distribution of unsolicited
handbills an updated list of addresses of the Do Not Deliver Registry, if such
list had been updated during the previous month.
§ 222-23. Violations and penalties.
A. The name and address of the business or organization distributing
handbills.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of the distribution of
handbills.
C. The e-mail address and/or facsimile number of the person in charge of
the distribution of handbills.
A. Within 10 calendar days following notification of the updated Do Not
Deliver Registry, any person, firm, corporation or association delivering
an unsolicited handbill circular to a residence on the Do Not Deliver
§ 222-18 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 222-23
212:413
Registry shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250 for the first violation, a fine not to exceed $1,000 for the
second violation and a fine not to exceed $2,000 for a third and all
subsequent violations.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or association distributing handbills or
commercial circulars after the effective date of this article that has not
registered with the Township Clerk shall be subject to the penalties as
provided in Subsection A above.
§ 222-23 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 222-23
212:414
Chapter 234
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 234-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MASSAGE — The administration by any person or method of exerting or
applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human body, or the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human body by any
physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or operation wherein
a massage is administered or is permitted to be administered, when such
massage is administered for any form of consideration.
§ 234-2. License required for establishments.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Township of Little Egg Harbor in the County of Ocean as
or for a massage establishment unless or until there first has been obtained
a license for such establishment or premises from the Township Clerk of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, in accordance with the terms and provisions
of this chapter.
§ 234-3. License required for masseur or masseuses. [Amended
9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
No person shall render or perform services as a masseur or masseuse or
engage in the business of or be employed as a masseur or masseuse unless
and until he or she has obtained a masseur’s or masseuse’s license from the
State of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:11-73 et seq.
§ 234-4. Application requirements. [Amended 9-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-11]
Each and every applicant for a license for a massage establishment or
premises shall set forth the following information in writing on forms
provided by the Township Clerk.
A. The name and residence address of the applicant and all former
addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application.
B. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage
business and a physical description of the property and facilities if the
applicant desires a license for said establishment or premises.
C. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any officer or
director thereof, if a corporation, has ever been convicted of a crime in
this or any other state.
§ 222-23 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 234-5
212:415
§ 234-5. Fees. [Amended 9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises shall
pay an annual license fee of $100, which license fee shall become due on
the first of January in each year.
§ 234-6. Public hearing; notice.
When an application is filed for a massage establishment license under this
chapter, the Township Committee shall fix a time and a place for a public
hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question of his
or her application. Not less than 10 days before the date of such hearing,
the Township Clerk shall cause a notice of said hearing to be published in
an official newspaper of the Township.
§ 234-7. Issuance of establishment license; exceptions.
§ 234-8. (Reserved)36
A. The Township Committee may issue a massage establishment license
within 14 days following a hearing if all requirements for a massage
establishment described in this chapter are met, unless it is found:
(1) That the operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted would
not have complied with all applicable laws including, but not
limited to, the Building, Health, Housing, Zoning and Fire Codes of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
(2) That the applicant and any other person who will be directly
engaged in the management and operation of a massage
establishment has been convicted of:
(a) A felony.
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children.
(c) Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame,
solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
(3) Based on the past criminal record of the applicant, or the principal
thereof, or based on other evidence of bad character or morals, it is
found that the granting or renewal of the license would tend to
encourage or permit criminal or immoral activities within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. The Township Committee in its discretion may issue a license to any
person convicted of any of the crimes in Subsection A(2)(a), (b) and (c)
if it is found that such conviction occurred at least three years prior to
the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent
convictions.
36.Editor’s Note: Former § 234-8, Issuance of masseur’s or masseuse’s license; exceptions,
was repealed 9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11.
§ 234-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 234-9
212:416
§ 234-9. Suspension or revocation of establishment license.
§ 234-10. (Reserved)37
§ 234-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy
treatments given:
§ 234-12. Signs.
A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any
building, or to the portion of a building used as a massage establishment,
identifying the premises as a massage establishment, and recognizable and
legible signs shall be posted at all exits identifying each such exit. All such
signs shall be posted in accordance with all existing municipal ordinances.
§ 234-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $2,000 and/or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of
the Municipal Court.
A. Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Township Committee, after public hearing before the
Township Committee, where it is found that any of the provisions of this
chapter are violated and where the licensee has actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation or, in any case, where the licensee refuses to
permit any duly authorized police officer or Health Inspector of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor to inspect the premises or the operations
therein. [Amended 9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
B. The Township Committee, before revoking or suspending any license,
shall give the licensee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges
against the licensee and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Township Committee, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific
and in writing.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists.
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his patient.
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 234-10, Suspension or revocation of masseur’s or masseuse’s
license, was repealed 9-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11.
§ 234-9 LAND DEVELOPMENT § 234-13
212:417
Chapter 236
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 185. Land development — See Ch. 212.
§ 236-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — Any unit, whether licensed or not, used for living,
sleeping or business purposes by one or more persons, built on a chassis,
designed without a permanent foundation, and shall include a dwelling,
sleeping, or business unit of vehicular design used, or intended or
constructed for use, as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways,
whether licensed or not, and shall further include self-propelled and nonself-
propelled vehicles and other structures so designed, constructed and
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such a manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling, sleeping place, or for business
purposes for one or more persons and having no foundation other than
wheels, jacks, piers or skirting so arranged as to be integral with, or
portable by, the mobile home and shall further include the type of dwelling
known as a "trailer" or "camp car."
TRAILER PARK or MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot or ground upon which
two or more mobile homes or mobile units used for dwelling or sleeping
purposes are located.
§ 236-2. Parking and storage restrictions.
§ 236-3. Parks to be licensed; number of licensed parks limited.
A. Except in a duly licensed mobile home park, or as otherwise provided
for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, keep,
house, maintain, dwell in, or otherwise occupy any mobile home
anywhere within the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. A camper or other recreational vehicle with dwelling or sleeping
facilities, which would otherwise be the definition of a mobile home, but
which is clearly a recreational vehicle intended for temporary
residential use during camping or touring or similar use, shall be
permitted to be stored within the Township on the lands of the owner of
said vehicle; provided, however, that said vehicle shall be maintained on
the lands solely for the purpose of storing the vehicle and no one shall
dwell in or otherwise occupy or use such vehicle for any purpose
whatsoever.
§ 234-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-3
236:418
§ 236-4. Application information and procedures.
A. Within the boundaries of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, no person
shall construct, alter, maintain, or operate a mobile home park, nor
shall any person expand an existing mobile home park, nor shall any
person or persons work in, occupy, or directly or indirectly in any
manner whatsoever, utilize any place or premises constructed,
maintained, or operated as a mobile home park until, and unless, there
is a valid and current license or renewal of license therefor duly issued
by the Township Committee in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any and all construction to a mobile home park shall be done in
compliance with Chapter 212, Land Development. Licenses or permits
to maintain and operate a mobile home park shall be issued for a period
of one year or, where appropriate, part of one year, and shall expire
annually on the first day of each calendar year. The number of licenses
or permits to be issued in the Township to maintain and operate a
mobile home park shall not exceed three.
A. Every application for a license to construct, maintain, or operate a
mobile home park shall contain the following information:
(1) A legal description, by metes and bounds, of the area to be used for
mobile home park purposes, with deed book and page references
and lot and block references from the current Township Tax Map.
(2) A plat plan of the overall area showing dimensions by feet and
inches, total acreage, location and width of all roadways, driveways
and walkways, location of all mobile home spaces with identifying
lot numbers, parking areas, fences, and all improvements and a
plan of landscaping, including finished grading, grass areas and the
location and identification of all shrubbery, trees and similar items.
(3) A plan of electrical lighting, including the location of poles and
overhead electrical wires, receptacles for mobile homes, road and
walkway lighting and public area lighting.
(4) A detailed plan and the method of sewerage disposal.
(5) A detailed plan and the method of garbage and trash disposal.
(6) A detailed plan and the method of water supply.
(7) A detailed plan for the maintenance and upkeep of roadways and
walks within the mobile home park and snow removal therefrom.
(8) The name and address of the owner or owners. If one or more
owners are a corporation, then the names and addresses of all
persons holding 10% or more of the shares of stock of the
corporation.
§ 236-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-4
236:419
B. Each application for alteration of a mobile home park, whether by
expansion, contraction, modification, or change of approved plan, shall
be accompanied by all of the information required by § 236-4A; except,
however, that if only minor changes are to be made to the prior
approved plan, then in such event, the applicant may submit a copy of
the prior approved plan with the changes clearly indicated thereon.
C. If the applicant for an annual license to maintain and operate a mobile
home park is the holder of a current annual license to maintain and
operate that mobile home park, or the transferee thereof so that the
application can properly be construed as an application for renewal of
an annual license to maintain and operate a mobile home park, then
said applicant may, in lieu of resubmitting each of the items set forth in
Subsection A of this section, file an affidavit certifying as to each such
item that there has been no change or, as to those items in which
changes have been affected, and the details thereof. Each such affidavit
shall further certify that there has been no change of ownership of the
mobile home park and no alteration of the mobile home park from the
approved plan, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Said affidavit shall further set forth the total number of mobile home
spaces authorized and the total number occupied as of the date of the
affidavit. Each such application for renewal of license shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk in writing at least 35 days prior to the
expiration date of the then-current license.
D. Application procedure. Every application, whether for a license to
construct, maintain, alter or operate, or for renewal of an annual
license to operate, shall be made in writing in triplicate addressed to
the Clerk of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, and shall be
accompanied by a certified check in the amount of the license fee
provided for in this chapter. If the application is to construct or alter a
mobile home park, a copy shall be sent forthwith to the Township
Planning Board for site plan review recommendations. If the application
is to operate, or for the renewal of, a license to operate an existing
mobile home park, the Township Clerk shall forward copies of the
application to the Township's Zoning Officer and Construction Code
Official, who shall each thereafter inspect said premises for compliance
with Township ordinances and shall report thereon to the Township
Committee. If noncompliance with a Township ordinance is found by
any of the said officials, then the appropriate official shall give notice to
the applicant of discrepancies found and the applicant shall, within 10
days thereafter, supplement the application in writing addressed to the
Township Clerk, with a statement as to the corrective action taken or to
be taken, setting forth the action, method of correction and date the
corrections will be completed. The applicant may appeal the finding of
any discrepancy in said supplement to the application by requesting a
hearing before the Township Committee.
§ 236-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-5
236:420
§ 236-5. Compliance with zoning regulations.
Every application to construct a mobile home park, or to alter an existing
mobile home park in such manner that the alteration will extend the mobile
home park beyond its prior approved boundaries, shall be accompanied by
a certification by the Zoning Officer that the area to be utilized for the
construction of a mobile home park, or for the expansion thereof, meets the
requirements of the Township's Zoning Ordinance, including proposed use
of the land for mobile home park purposes, and whether that usage of land
is approved usage under the Zoning Ordinance, or a variance was obtained
from the Zoning Board of Adjustment for that use.
§ 236-6. Suspension, revocation or denial of license.
Any license or permit required by this chapter, or any renewal of any such
license or permit, may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the Township
Committee for failure to comply with this chapter, or any Township of Little
Egg Harbor ordinance, state law or regulation, ordinance of the Ocean
County Board of Health, or any other lawful authority. Before a permit has
been denied, suspended, or revoked, the Township Committee shall afford
the applicant or licensee an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing.
§ 236-7. Temporary extension of license.
The Township Committee shall have the authority to grant the temporary
extension of a license to operate a mobile home park solely for the purposes
of granting a hearing to ascertain the findings of the Zoning Officer or
Construction Code Official as to discrepancies of a mobile home park with
Township ordinances, or to permit the owner of said mobile home park to
complete corrective action; provided, however, that no temporary extension
shall be for more than 30 days and not more than three temporary
extensions shall be granted to any annual license. No such temporary
extension, or extensions, shall have the effect of extending for renewal
purposes the annual expiration date, and every renewal license shall be
dated as of the anniversary date of original issuance regardless of such
extension.
§ 236-8. License fees.
A. An annual administration fee shall be charged for said license in the
amount of $100, which fee is hereby expressly declared to be imposed
for revenue payable in advance for each year, commencing on the first
day of each calendar year.
B. The following shall apply to annual and municipal service fees with the
Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-1.6:
(1) An annual service fee shall be imposed on all manufactured homes
installed in a mobile home park within the boundaries of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor. In setting this fee, the governing
body shall take into account the extent to which the taxes are
§ 236-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-8
236:421
§ 236-9. Temporary housing permit.
Temporary housing permits may be issued by the Township Committee for
temporary use of a mobile home or trailer within the Township for any one
of the following purposes:
assessed and levied against the land improvements thereto which
together constitute the mobile home park in which the homes are
installed, to defray the costs of services provided or paid for by the
municipality, or provided by any other appropriate taxing authority,
for lessees of sites in the park. The fee shall be prorated in order to
account for vacancies in the mobile home park.
(2) The municipal service fee shall be collected from each owner of a
manufactured home on a monthly basis by the owner of the mobile
home park in which the home is installed. The park owner shall
issue a receipt to the homeowner upon each collection.
(3) The amount of the annual service fee shall be determined and set
by resolution adopted at the beginning of each calendar year by the
governing body of the Township.
C. Payment of the application fee shall be made with each application for
annual license. Payment of the monthly fees shall be made by the park
owner to the Tax Collector of the Township on a quarterly basis. In
addition to the quarterly payment, the park owner shall transmit
therewith a copy of each receipt issued pursuant to § 236-8B(2).
Payment shall be made no later than the first day of the next ensuing
month following the preceding quarter. A resolution may be adopted at
the beginning of each calendar year by the governing body of the
Township allowing for a grace period of up to 10 calendar days
following the date upon which the same became payable. An official of
the Township, as designated by the Mayor, shall, upon the request of
the Township Committee, furnish such Township Committee with a
report of the number of trailer spaces occupied in such mobile home
park.
D. Any amounts due which are not paid within the time required shall bear
interest thereon at the lawful rate covering the period of delinquency.
The individual homeowner shall bear the burden of paying the late
payment interest charge for failure to pay the municipal service fee
when due and payable, and the park owner shall be charged for failure
to transmit fees actually collected when so required.
A. Emergency residential use. Use for residential purposes by any
Township resident whose regular residence within the Township has
been destroyed or damaged by fire or other catastrophe as to be
unsuitable for dwelling purposes, but is being rebuilt or repaired to
restore it to habitable condition; provided, however, that no temporary
housing permit shall be issued for this purpose for a period exceeding
§ 236-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-9
236:422
§ 236-10. Inspection for temporary permit.
No temporary housing permit shall be issued unless the mobile home or
other trailer has first been duly inspected by the Housing Officer and
found to be fit for habitation, either for dwelling purposes or for office use,
including an adequate supply of fresh, potable running water for drinking
purposes, washing and bathing facilities, and adequate toilet facilities with
sanitary disposal method.
§ 236-11. Restrictions on temporary permit.
Each temporary housing permit shall be for only one mobile home unit or
trailer, and no more than one temporary housing permit shall be issued
for each parcel of land. Each temporary housing permit shall be valid only
as long as the particular use permits, and upon the expiration thereof, the
trailer shall be removed from the premises forthwith.
§ 236-12. Fee for temporary permit.
Prior to the issuance of a temporary housing permit, the licensee shall pay
to the Township Chief Financial Officer the sum of $25 for the permit, plus
$5 for each month of occupancy permitted.
§ 236-13. Design standards and improvements.
either the time necessary to restore the damaged or destroyed
residence or three months, whichever first occurs.
B. Construction site office use. Use only on the site of new construction
and only for office purposes in connection with construction, provided
that the trailer shall in no way be used for residential purposes, and
that the permit shall be only for the period of time of the construction
on said site.
C. Industrial watchman use. Use only as an office for a watchman on lands
actually used for industrial purposes, provided that the trailer shall in
no way be used for residential purposes and may be occupied by only a
bona fide watchman employed by the industry and on the payroll of the
industry in the capacity of watchman and provided, further, that said
watchman must have a permanent residence other than the place of the
trailer or industrial premises. Such trailers must not have any sleeping
facilities contained within the trailer. Permits shall be for no longer than
six months at a time.
A. Lot layout and occupancy.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be clearly identified by number.
(2) Each mobile home lot shall be adequate to accommodate the
mobile home occupying the same.
§ 236-9 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-13
236:423
(3) The number of mobile homes permitted in a mobile home park shall
not exceed the number of mobile home lots.
(4) Nothing contained in this regulation shall be construed as
prohibiting the maintenance of a retail mobile home sales agency in
a mobile home park or the sale of a mobile home, whether occupied
or unoccupied, which is located on a mobile home lot and
connected to pertinent utilities.
B. Separation and setback requirements. Except for mobile homes in
storage or for sale, each mobile home shall be located on a mobile home
lot so as to comply with the following minimum proximity limits. It shall
be:
(1) Twenty-five feet from the right-of-way of any public street or
highway.
(2) Fifteen feet from any building or structure, except metal or
masonry storage sheds, awnings, carports or porches.
(3) Fifteen feet from the side(s) of any other mobile home(s).
(4) Ten feet, end to end, between homes and/or any adjoining property
lines.
C. Mobile home stands. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a
mobile home stand of sufficient size to accommodate the mobile home
to be placed thereon. Every mobile home stand shall be provided with
approved devices for anchoring the mobile home to prevent overturning
or uplift. Such devices shall be adequate to withstand winds of
hurricane force.
D. Road layout; road width; road construction; walks.
(1) Roadways in all mobile home parks shall be provided as private
roads, and located where necessary to furnish principal traffic ways
for convenient access to all mobile home sites and other facilities
located in any mobile home park. All such roadways shall be
continuous wherever possible. Where dead-end roads are
necessitated, culs-de-sac or turnarounds shall be provided to meet
the same standards as required for subdivisions, as established by
the Subdivision Ordinance of Little Egg Harbor Township.38 All
such roadways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet and shall
have unobstructed access to a public street or public highway. All
streets shall be private ways and not dedicated to the public. The
road width should be measured from the back of the curb to the
back of the curb.
(2) All roads shall be provided with a smooth, hard, dense and dustfree
surface which shall be durable and well-drained under normal
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Land Development.
§ 236-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-13
236:424
use and weather conditions. Road surfaces shall be maintained free
of holes.
(3) Public walks, where provided, shall afford safe, stable footing.
Stepping stones may be used from main walks to mobile homes. All
walks shall be maintained in good repair and in safe condition.
E. Parking. Car space shall be provided without interfering with normal
movement of all traffic, with at least two car parking spaces for each
mobile home. Parking spaces shall be provided either in convenient
parking bays, or in such mobile home space. Parking spaces may be
provided for not more than two cars end to end.
F. Water supply system. An adequate supply of potable water, complying
with the Potable Water Standards established by the State Department
of Health of the State of New Jersey, shall be provided in each mobile
home park.
G. Water distribution and fire hydrants.
(1) A water distribution system shall be provided to transmit the
potable water supply throughout the mobile home park. The supply
shall be made available to each mobile home lot, building, or other
facility requiring water via a separate water service pipe, at
minimum pressure of 30 pounds per square inch.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with
recommendations of the Township Engineer, who shall, in making
such recommendations, follow the standards established by
appropriate insurance underwriting agencies to provide the
minimum insurance premium cost for the occupants of the mobile
home park.
H. Individual water risers and connections.
(1) An individual water riser shall be located within the confined area
of each mobile home. The riser outlet shall be designed so that a
watertight connection can be made between the outlet and the
mobile home piping system.
(2) The water riser shall extend at least four inches above ground
elevation. The outlet shall be plugged or capped when not in use.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent the freezing of risers,
valves and water service pipes and to protect risers from the
heaving and thawing actions of the ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the
riser.
(4) Each riser shall be provided with a shutoff valve conveniently
available to the tenant in the event of an emergency.
§ 236-13 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-13
236:425
(5) Physical connections. No physical connection shall be made
between an approved public potable water supply and an
unapproved water supply.
(6) Construction.
(a) Mobile home lots shall be provided with water risers and water
service pipes of at least 3/4 inch nominal inside diameter.
(b) A shutoff valve shall be provided for each water service pipe.
(c) Underground combination stop and waste valves shall not be
installed.
I. Sewerage and storm drainage facilities.
(1) Adequate facilities for the collection and disposal of sanitary
sewage shall be provided at every mobile home park.
(2) Building sewer outlet and connections.
(a) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a building sewer.
The building sewer shall be at least four inches in diameter and
shall be equipped with a riser of the same diameter
terminating above the ground. A trap and/or vent shall not be
installed on the building sewer.
(b) The riser shall be firmly imbedded in the ground and be
protected against heaving, shifting and surface water. When
not in use, the riser shall be capped or plugged so as to render
it watertight.
(c) The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings to
effect watertight junctions. The connections shall be selfdraining
and shall be effected by durable, noncollapsible,
corrosion- and weather-resistant semirigid or rigid pipe. Such
pipe shall be plastic, copper, or iron of suitable diameter (at
least three inches) to fit the drain outlet of the mobile home
and the riser.
(d) The park management shall maintain spare connectors and
appropriate fittings in good repair, to be used when privately
owned connectors do not meet the requirements of this
regulation.
(3) Sewer line and appurtenances. Sewer lines and appurtenances in a
mobile home park shall be laid in accordance with the following
requirements.
(a) Minimum size: six inches, except a building sewer.
(b) Pipe sizes and grades shall conform to the following:
§ 236-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-13
236:426
Grade Pipe Size
(inches)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
6 0.65%
8 0.40%
10 0.29%
12 0.22%
(c) Construction. All sewer line joints, sewer connections and
manholes shall be watertight and shall comply with all state
and local laws and regulations.
(d) Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at the upper end of each
sewer line; at intersections; at changes in grade, size or
alignment; and at intervals of not more than 400 feet.
(e) Protection of water supplies. Water mains and sewers shall
generally be separated by a horizontal distance of 10 feet. If
such lateral separation is not possible, the water and sewer
pipes shall be in separate trenches, with the sewer at least 18
inches below the bottom of the water main, or with such other
separation as is approved by the New Jersey State Department
of Health. At crossings of sewers and water mains, the sewer
shall be at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main.
(4) Approval of sewerage facilities. The plans for the proposed
sewerage facilities of a mobile home park, including the sewer and
appurtenances and sewage treatment and disposal facilities, shall
be approved by the State Department of Health and the Township
Engineer prior to installation of said facilities.
(5) Storm drainage. Sanitary sewers shall be separate and apart from
any stormwater drainage system. All streets shall be provided with
sufficient catch basins, storm sewers, culverts and other drainage
appurtenances for the proper drainage of the area, in light of
existing and future conditions, with final disposition to an existing
natural watercourse of adequate capacity for said purpose. Storm
drainage features shall be based on a ten-year-frequency curve,
and said drainage facilities shall in all respects be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
J. Refuse: storage, collection and disposal. The storage and collection of
refuse shall be so managed as to prevent health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding, accident hazards or air pollution. All refuse
shall be stored in durable, flytight, watertight and rodent-proof
containers. Refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly.
K. Electricity.
§ 236-13 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-13
236:427
(1) Every mobile home park shall be equipped with electrical power.
All wiring shall be underground.
(2) Electrical systems and equipment installed in mobile home parks
shall be approved by the Township Construction Code Official.
(3) All metal parts of a mobile home shall be adequately grounded.
L. Storage and handling of fuel, oil and flammable liquids. The handling
and storage of gasoline, fuel oil, or other flammable liquids shall be in
compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the New Jersey
State Department of Law and Public Safety, Division of State Police.
M. All mobile home spaces shall have an unobstructed access to a public
street, road, or highway and shall be well marked in the daytime and
shall be lighted so as to permit safe movement of vehicles and
pedestrians at night. The following minimum levels of illumination shall
be provided:
(1) All parts of the park road system: 0.1 footcandle.
(2) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps: 0.3 footcandle.
N. Insect, rodent and weed control.
(1) Mobile home parks and mobile home lots shall be kept free from
articles which may hold water and provide temporary breeding
places for mosquitoes. Permanent mosquito control measures such
as draining and filling depressions in which water may collect shall
be taken by the park management, together with such
supplemental larvicidal measures as need indicates.
(2) Fly breeding shall be controlled by eliminating the unsanitary
practices which provide breeding places. Refuse containers shall
be repaired or replaced when damaged so that they leak, or their
lids do not fit in a flytight manner. The area surrounding the refuse
container shall not be permitted to become littered with garbage
nor saturated with water or liquid from garbage. All containers
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) Insecticidal measures shall be applied if necessary.
(4) All buildings within the mobile home park shall be ratproofed, with
special emphasis on those in which food is stored or served.
(5) Items in storage shall be maintained in such a manner as to
eliminate the possibility of rodent harborage.
(6) The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled as a
means toward elimination of ticks and chiggers.
O. Construction code. All mobile home parks, and the area immediately
surrounding all mobile homes or trailers for which temporary permits
§ 236-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 236-13
236:428
§ 236-14. Existing mobile home parks.
§ 236-15. Violations and penalties.
have been issued, shall be subject to all construction and building codes
adopted by, or in lawful effect in the Township, and all buildings located
in all trailer parks, other than the mobile home or trailer itself, shall be
subject to all construction and building codes adopted by the Township.
P. Certificate of occupancy. No person shall occupy or reside in or lease to
another person for the purpose of occupying or residing in nor permit
any other person to occupy or reside in any mobile home within the
Township unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained therefor
from the Township in accordance with Township ordinances.
Q. Inspection. Every mobile home park and every building located on any
trailer park and every mobile home or trailer, whether located in a
mobile park or for which a temporary permit has been issued by the
Township shall, at all times, be subject to examination and inspection
within reasonable hours by any officer or agent of the Township making
the inspection in the regular course of his or her duties and
responsibilities.
R. Park registry. Every holder of a license to maintain or operate a mobile
home park shall establish and maintain a park registry which shall list
in numerical sequence each trailer occupying a trailer space and the
name of the owner of the trailer and, if the owner of the trailer is not an
occupant thereof, the name of the lessee of each trailer. The park
register shall be kept in an office located in the mobile home park, shall
be current at all times, and shall be available at all reasonable hours for
inspection by officials of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
A. No existing mobile home park in the Township of Little Egg Harbor
shall hereafter in any way expand the perimeter of said mobile home
park, nor shall it add any additional mobile home spaces, nor shall it
permit the occupancy of any mobile home spaces beyond the number of
mobile homes presently located in said mobile home park except in
strict compliance with this chapter.
B. Any addition of mobile home spaces, or of mobile homes to existing
spaces in any existing mobile home park, shall be construed as an
alteration or expansion for which application must be made.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or by community service of not more than 90
days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service
as determined by the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of
§ 236-13 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 236-15
236:429
Chapter 242
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and burglar alarms — See Ch. 128. Vehicular sound reproduction — See Ch. 326.
§ 242-1. Findings; policy.
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Whereas, excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and
welfare and the quality of life; and a substantial body of science and
technology exists by which excessive noise may be substantially abated;
and the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment
free from noise that may jeopardize their health or welfare or degrade
the quality of life; and the necessity in the public interest for the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is
declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy; and
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are
in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the peace and
quiet of the inhabitants of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. Now, therefore, it is the policy of the Township of Little Egg Harbor to
prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare or
safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life. This chapter shall
apply to the control of sound originating from sources within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 236-15 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 242-2
242:430
telephone, sewer facilities or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gases on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including but not limited to apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
activities; or a Little Egg Harbor Township police officer and/or code
enforcement officer who has received noise enforcement training and is
currently certified in noise enforcement. The officer must be acting within
his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions or health and
recreational facilities or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 242-2 NOISE § 242-2
242:431
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKEND — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the following
Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 242-3. Applicability.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the distance between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the "real property line" would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities.
(2) Commercial facilities.
(3) Public service facilities.
(4) Community service facilities.
(5) Residential properties.
(6) Multi-use properties.
(7) Public and private rights-of-way.
(8) Public spaces.
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities.
(2) Public service facilities.
(3) Community service facilities.
§ 242-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 242-3
242:432
§ 242-4. Noise control officers.
(4) Residential properties.
(5) Multi-use properties.
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of a properly certified Little
Egg Harbor Township police officer or code enforcement officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. A person shall be qualified to be a
noise control officer if the person meets the criteria set forth in the
definition above and completes, at a frequency specified by the
Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, a noise certification and
recertification course which are offered by the Department of
Environmental Sciences of Cook College, Rutgers, The State University
of New Jersey or any other noise certification or recertification course
which is offered by an accredited university and approved by the
Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform to the procedures set forth in
§ 242-5C and D of this chapter and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Township of Little Egg Harbor and cooperate with all other public
bodies and agencies to the extent practicable.
(2) Review the actions of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and advise
of the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control.
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter.
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II,39 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 242-7 below.
39.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 242-5D, and Table II is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 242-3 NOISE § 242-4
242:433
§ 242-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 242-3A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multidwelling building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling-
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
(1) Table I, Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of
any source of sound on any source property listed in § 242-3A
above in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals
or exceeds the sound levels listed below:
[1] Outdoors.
§ 242-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 242-5
242:434
§ 242-6. Restricted uses and activities.
Receiving Property Category
Residential Property
or Residential
Portion of a Multi-
Use Property
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Property or
Community
Service
Facility
7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m. 24 Hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard
(dB)
65 50 65
[2] Indoors.
Receiving Property Category
Residential Property
or Residential
Portion of a Multi-
Use Property
Commercial
Facility,* or
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Facility
7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m. 24 Hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard
(dB)
55 40 55
* NOTE: In those instances when a commercial facility
shares a common wall/ceiling/floor with another facility
that is producing the sound.
(2) Table II.40
40.Editor's Note: Table II, Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound-Pressure Levels in
Decibels, can be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 242-5 NOISE § 242-6
242:435
A. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
B. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II,41 except as provided for in Subsection
C below.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment.
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snow blowers, snow throwers and lawn equipment with
attached snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler. At
all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply.
41.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 242-5D, and Table II is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 242-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 242-6
242:436
§ 242-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(5) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply.
(6) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(7) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(8) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator.
(9) Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I and Table II
shall be prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling-
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
§ 242-5B and C.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in a
Municipal Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $2,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 242-6 NOISE § 242-7
242:437
Chapter 261
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 130.
Curfew — See Ch. 162.
Use of docks — See Ch. 165.
Littering — See Ch. 222.
Noise — See Ch. 242.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 265.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
Vehicular sound reproduction — See Ch. 326.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 338.
§ 261-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of parks and park property
owned and maintained by the Township in order that all persons may enjoy
and make use of such parks and park property and to protect the rights of
those owning property adjacent to such parks.
§ 261-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed to travel over any
terrain, of a type possessing between three and six rubber tires and
powered by a gasoline engine not exceeding 600 cubic centimeters, but
shall not include golf carts.
AMPLIFIED SOUND — Music or speech projected or transmitted by
artificial means, including but not limited to amplifiers, loudspeakers,
or any similar device.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Recreation.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Recreation.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any member of the Police
Department authorized to enforce all criminal and traffic laws and
ordinances within the Township.
PARK — Any public park, beach, or recreation or playground area, or
building or facility thereon, within the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
§ 242-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-2
242:438
§ 261-3. Vehicle and traffic laws.
All applicable state and local vehicle and traffic laws and ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect in any park, and shall be enforced by any
law enforcement officer or park guard.
owned and maintained by the Township as a public park, beach, or
recreation or playground area, whether or not such areas have been
formally dedicated to such purpose.
PARK GUARD — Any employee of the Township who is authorized
to enforce all criminal and traffic laws and ordinances within park
boundaries.
PARKING AREA — Any designated park or any park road, drive or
special area contiguous thereto that is set apart for the standing or
stationing of vehicles and is marked accordingly.
PERMIT — The written permission that must be obtained from the
Township Clerk, or designated agent, to carry out a given activity in a
park.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — Any powered watercraft that is designed
to be operated by a person or persons sitting, standing, or kneeling.
POLLUTION — The contamination or other alteration of the physical,
chemical, or biological properties of park waters, including changes
in the temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the water, or
such discharge of any liquid, gas, solid, radioactive or other substance
into any park waters that will or is likely to create a public nuisance
or render such water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public
health, safety, or welfare or to the domestic, recreational, or other
beneficial uses, or to wild animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic life.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motor vehicle, designed primarily to travel over
ice or snow, of a type which uses sled-type runners, skis, an endless
belt tread, cleats, or any combination of these or other similar means
of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does not
include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment, or
any military vehicle.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Little Egg Harbor.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled device for conveyance, whether propelled by
motor, animal, or human power. The term shall include any trailer in
tow of any kind, size, or description. Baby carriages and vehicles in the
service of the Township are excluded from this definition.
VESSEL — Includes any device for conveyance on the water, whether
propelled by motor, wind, or human power. The term includes, but is
not limited to, any boat, yacht, cruiser, canoe, raft, or other watercraft.
§ 261-2 NOISE § 261-4
242:439
§ 261-4. Direction of traffic.
All law enforcement officers and park guards shall direct traffic whenever
needed in a park, or on highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent
to a park, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other
applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 261-5. Operation of vehicles within parks.
§ 261-6. Bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles, scooters and minibikes.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle in a park except upon designated
paved or improved park roads or driveways or in and upon designated
areas or trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed by a
law enforcement officer or park guard to do so, or by official signs or
markings.
B. Where a public road, street or highway crosses a park, such road, street
or highway shall be open to all through traffic normally permitted on
any road, street or highway, but such traffic shall conform to park traffic
regulations, and vehicles not otherwise permitted to operate within a
park shall not stop along such road, street or highway except in an
emergency.
C. No person shall operate a vehicle in a park in such a way that traffic is
obstructed. In the event that a vehicle must be stopped or parked along
a park road or driveway because of an emergency for more than 30
minutes, the operator shall notify a law enforcement officer or park
guard of the location of the vehicle and of its description.
D. No person shall operate a vehicle within the park in excess of five miles
per hour, except upon those roads or driveways where official signs or
markings designate a different speed limit.
E. No person shall operate any vehicle on any recreational fields.
A. The Township may, in its reasonable discretion, set aside or designate
areas, paths, trails or roads in a park where operating bicycles,
tricycles, motorcycles, scooters and minibikes shall be allowed.
B. Bicycles and tricycles shall be operated on the right-hand side of a
roadway, as close to the edge of the paving as conditions permit. When
two or more such vehicles are operated in a group, they shall keep in a
single file.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a person who is
physically challenged from operating a motorized wheelchair in the
roads and driveways in a park or recreation area.
D. No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within any
park or recreation area, including any roads, driveways, or trails,
whether the road, driveway, or trail is improved or unimproved.
§ 261-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-6
242:440
§ 261-7. Parking.
§ 261-8. Buildings and other property.
No person shall, in any Township park, do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining a permit from the Township:
§ 261-9. Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
No person shall, in any Township park, do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining a permit from the Township:
E. No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on any
recreation fields.
A. No person shall park a vehicle on park property other than in areas
designated for parking that type of vehicle, unless there is an
emergency or unless directed to do otherwise by a law enforcement
officer or a park guard. Parking shall conform to officially posted signs
or markings unless other instructions are given by a law enforcement
officer or a park guard.
B. No vehicle shall be left standing or parked at night within a park
without lights clearly visible, front and rear, for at least 200 feet, except
in designated parking areas.
C. No vehicle shall be left parked on park property after park closing
hours without obtaining a permit from the Director.
D. No park employee shall accept any gratuity for any service concerning
the parking of a vehicle.
A. Willfully mark, deface or injure in any manner, or displace, remove or
tamper with, any park building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing,
paving or paving materials, water line or other public utility or parts
thereof, park sign or marking, whether temporary or permanent,
monument, stake, post, or other structure or equipment, facility, or park
property of any kind.
B. Willfully dig, cut, move or remove from any park or park area any sand,
wood, turf, grass, gravel, shrub or other material, or make any
excavation by hand, tool, equipment, blasting or any other means.
C. Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether
permanently or temporarily, or run or string any public utility into,
upon, or across a park.
A. Willfully pick, saw, chop, cut, carve, remove or injure any flowers,
seeds, blooms, bark, branches, twigs or leaves of any tree, plant, shrub,
vine, bush, or any other vegetation.
§ 261-6 NOISE § 261-9
242:441
§ 261-10. Protection of wild animals.
No person shall, in any Township park, do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining a permit from the Township:
§ 261-11. Pollution; garbage or trash.
No person shall, in any Township park, do or cause to be done any of the
following without first obtaining a permit from the Township:
§ 261-12. Swimming.
B. Willfully drive any nail, staple or attach or fasten any wire, rope or other
device to any tree or plant, or tie or hitch any animal to any tree or
plant.
C. Willfully dig in or disturb any grass areas, or in any way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area.
D. Willfully climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon any monument, vase,
fountain, railing, fence or any other park property not designated or
normally used for such purposes.
A. Willfully capture, attempt to capture, hunt, molest, injure, trap or
administer or set out any bait or harmful substance for any wild or
domestic animal, reptile or bird, or remove or have in his or her
possession the young, eggs, or nest of any animal, reptile or bird.
B. Willfully give or offer, or attempt to give or offer, to any wild or domestic
animal, reptile, bird, or fish any tobacco, alcohol or other potentially
harmful substance.
A. Willfully throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in,
or adjacent to, any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Willfully bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or
other trash, but shall place same in the proper receptacles when these
are provided; when receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. No person in a park shall:
(1) Swim, bathe, dive, or wade in any water or waterway in or adjacent
to any park, except in such water or waterway as the Township may
designate, and in accordance with the terms of this chapter and any
other regulations that the Township may promulgate.
§ 261-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-12
242:442
(2) Frequent any water or places where swimming, bathing, or wading
is permitted, except during those hours that the Township has
established for such activities.
(3) Change into bathing clothes from street clothes, or from bathing
clothes into street clothes, except in a bathhouse or other structure
designated for such use.
(4) Fail to wear bathing clothes that cover the genitals and buttocks
and, in the case of females, that also cover the areolae and nipples.
B. The Township shall not designate any water or waterway for swimming,
bathing, or wading where such use of the water would be dangerous to
the public health, safety or welfare.
C. In regard to Parkertown Road, the following regulations shall apply in
addition to the regulations set forth above:
(1) The beach shall be open for use only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. each day during the season.
(2) The Superintendent, with the approval of the Township
Administrator, shall determine the season or period of each year
when the beach shall be opened and closed.
(3) No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in the designated swimming
area except when a municipal lifeguard is present and on duty.
(4) No person shall engage in the following activities upon or in the
immediate vicinity of the beach:
(a) Dress or undress or sleep in a motor vehicle.
(b) Discard any paper, bottle, container, food, drink, garbage or
other refuse upon the beach or in the water adjacent thereto.
(c) Litter, damage, destroy, or disfigure any part of said beach, or
any public or private property thereon.
(d) Fish at or from the designated swimming area.
(e) Use loud, profane or indecent language; make or utter any loud
noise, sound or music; play ball or any game or engage in any
activity which may endanger any other person or interfere with
the quiet use and enjoyment of the beach by any other person.
(f) Possess, consume, or bring on the beach or in the water
adjacent thereto any alcoholic beverage. Food may be
consumed in the designated picnic area.
(g) Take or permit an animal to be upon any beach or in the water
adjacent thereto.
§ 261-12 NOISE § 261-12
242:443
§ 261-13. Boating.
(h) Go into or remain in the water of the beach when directed by a
police officer or some other authorized person to leave the
same, or when in an intoxicated condition.
(i) Molest or disturb any person in the peaceful enjoyment of any
of the beach or bathing facilities or do anything which might
endanger the life or safety of him- or herself or any other
person.
(j) Go beyond the water limits designated or authorized for
swimming, bathing and wading purposes.
(k) Refuse or neglect to obey the orders and directions of any
police officer or other authorized person as to the time, place
or areas for swimming, bathing and wading.
(l) Use or permit the use of water skis, boats, or powered
watercraft in any designated swimming area except for
lifesaving or emergency purposes.
(m) Eat, drink, or picnic in any area except those designated for
such purposes.
(n) Peddle, vend, purvey, sell, distribute or otherwise dispose of
any food, drink, goods, wares and/or merchandise on the beach
or in the beach area, except in accordance with a permit issued
by the Township Committee.
(o) Bathe with or otherwise use any soap, detergent or shampoo.
A. No person shall bring into or operate any vessel upon any park waters,
except at places designated for boating activities by the Township.
Boating shall be carried on in accordance with the terms of this chapter
and other regulations that the Township may promulgate.
B. Vessels shall be operated in a manner that does not endanger the
occupants of other vessels or persons in the water or on shore. Where
motor-propelled vessels are allowed, they shall yield to unmotorized
vessels, and all vessels shall yield to sailboats under sail.
C. No person shall operate a vessel on designated park waters during park
closing hours, nor shall any person remain on a vessel in designated
park waters during designated park closing hours, unless a permit is
obtained from the Township.
D. The following regulations shall also apply to the operation of vessels on
park waters:
(1) Motor-powered vessels shall not be operated without a competent
person at the vessel's controls.
§ 261-12 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-13
242:444
(2) Operators of any vessel shall be responsible for any damage caused
by their vessel's wake.
(3) Overtaking vessels shall pass to the left side of the overtaken
vessel.
(4) Vessels on opposite and parallel courses shall pass to the right of
one another by keeping the other vessel to the left side.
(5) Whenever two vessels approach each other at an oblique or right
angle and in such a manner that a risk of a collision is created, then
the vessel which has the other vessel on its left side has the rightof-
way and shall hold its course and speed. The vessel which has
the other vessel on its right side shall yield to the other vessel and
shall not cross ahead of the other vessel.
(6) Vessels under way shall keep clear of vessels at rest or at anchor.
(7) Motor-powered vessels shall be fitted with an effective muffler,
unless preparing to engage in or engaging in an approved
competition.
(8) Every vessel shall have on board a minimum of one life preserver
for each person on board.
(9) Gasoline tanks on vessels having inboard motors shall be vented
overboard, and carburetors on inboard motors shall be fitted with
flame arrestors.
(10) Airboats shall not be operated on park waters without a permit
from the Director.
E. No person or persons shall launch any vessel or personal watercraft
from Township-owned bay, river, or lagoon property, except from areas
designated as approved launching areas or sites by the Township
Committee by resolution. Any such approved launching ramp shall be
designated by signs erected at the site by the Department of Public
Works.
F. No person or persons shall place, locate, store, or beach, whether
temporarily or permanently, any vessel or personal watercraft on
Township-owned bay, river or lagoon property, except at areas
designated by the Township Committee by resolution. Any such
approved sites shall be designated by signs erected at the site by the
Department of Public Works.
G. No person or persons shall operate a vessel or personal watercraft
within 50 feet of a bathing beach that has its boundaries marked by
buoys or signs.
H. No person or persons shall operate a personal watercraft above idle
speed within 50 feet of a shoreline or 50 feet from a person or persons
in the water.
§ 261-13 NOISE § 261-14
242:445
§ 261-14. Fishing.
No person shall engage in fishing in any area of any beach and/or park
located in the Township of Little Egg Harbor that is specifically set aside
and marked for swimming, wading or bathing.
§ 261-15. Waterskiing.
§ 261-16. Firearms and dangerous instruments.
§ 261-17. Picnic areas and use.
A. No person shall water-ski in park waters except at the locations and
landings designated by the Township.
B. No person shall water-ski in a way that endangers swimmers, other
skiers, or occupants of any vessel.
A. No person, except an authorized Township employee, park guard, or
law enforcement officer, shall bring onto park property or have in his or
her possession on park property any firearm or ammunition, explosive,
dynamite cap, fireworks, air gun, pellet gun, spring gun, slingshot,
crossbow, bow and arrow, any device by means of which a projectile can
be propelled, any device which can be loaded with blank cartridges, any
trapping device, any incendiary bomb or material, any smoke or stink
bomb, any tear gas or other disabling chemical or agent, any acid or
caustic substance, or any flammable liquid except fuel contained in the
fuel tank of a motor vehicle, vessel, lantern, camp stove or camp heater,
and not more than one gallon of liquid fuel in a closed metal container.
B. No person shall discharge any of the weapons or instruments listed in
Subsection A into any park from outside the park.
C. The Township may designate areas within a park where bows and
arrows can be used or where firearms can be used. In such cases, the
Township shall promulgate regulations for the safe use of such devices,
and no person shall fail to abide by such regulations.
D. The Township may designate times and places where fireworks may be
used within a park. The Township shall promulgate regulations to
assure that, at the time and place in which fireworks may be used
within a park, the fireworks are used in a safe manner.
A. The Township shall designate those areas of a park where picnicking is
permitted. No person shall picnic other than in a designated area.
B. Individual fireplaces and tables in picnic areas shall be available on a
first-come-first-served basis, except that a group of 25 or more persons
must obtain a permit in advance for the use of picnic facilities.
Applications for a permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance to
the Township Clerk.
§ 261-14 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-17
242:446
§ 261-18. Camping.
§ 261-19. Fires.
§ 261-20. Animals and pets.
C. Picnickers shall not leave a picnic area before all trash, including, but
not limited to, boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse, is
placed in the proper trash or recycling disposal receptacles, where
provided. If no trash or recycling receptacles are available, then refuse
and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to
be properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. No person shall camp in a park except in areas that have been
designated for camping by the Township, if any. Camping shall be
limited to tent camping, trailer camping, or camping with other
equipment designed specifically for camping, and written approval
from the Township Committee must be obtained.
B. No person shall camp in a park without first obtaining a camping permit
from the Township or its designated agent.
A. No person shall start or maintain, in any park, any outdoor fire except
in designated picnic or camping areas. Fires shall be limited to cooking
fires or fires in camp lanterns or heaters.
B. Cooking fires shall be started and maintained only in a stove, fireplace,
or barbecue pit maintained by the Township, or in a portable camp
stove. Fuels which produce any noxious fumes or smoke shall not be
used in such cooking fires.
C. No person starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the area
where the fire is located without first completely extinguishing the fire.
A. No person in a park shall:
(1) Ride a horse, mule, donkey, or pony except on designated paths or
trails. Where riding is permitted, the animals used shall be
thoroughly broken and properly restrained and ridden with due
care, and shall not be allowed to go unattended, nor shall they be
hitched to any rock, tree, or shrub. The Township may designate
which trails or paths in a park, if any, can be used for riding.
(2) Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas other than automobile parking concourses and walks
immediately adjacent thereto and in such other areas as may be
clearly marked by signs bearing the words "domestic animals
permitted in this area." Dogs shall not be allowed to run loose, but
shall at all times be restrained or kept on a leash not more than six
feet in length.
§ 261-17 NOISE § 261-20
242:447
§ 261-21. Games.
No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones,
arrows, javelins, kites, or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for
such forms of recreation. The playing of organized games, such as football,
baseball and the like, is prohibited except on fields, courts, or areas
designated for such use.
§ 261-22. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall bring into, consume, or sell alcoholic beverages in a park,
except that:
§ 261-23. Arrest or ejection from the park.
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall either be
arrested or ejected from the park.
(3) Allow any horse, mule, donkey, pony, dog, or other domestic animal
onto any recreational field.
(4) Abandon any animal in the park.
B. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Horses or dogs employed by a law enforcement officer or park
guard in the performance of his duties.
(2) Dogs used as guides for handicapped persons and commonly
known as "Seeing Eye," "Hearing Ear" or "Service" dogs, provided
that the dog is at all times kept under control.
(3) Animals or fowl kept by the Department or under its direction.
A. Alcoholic beverages may be sold by persons operating under a
concession from the Township, subject to the regulation and control of
the Township. Sale of alcoholic beverages shall be by the individual
drink only, and drinks shall only be consumed on the premises of the
concession. Sale of beer and wine in unopened containers shall not be
permitted.
B. Alcoholic beverages can be consumed at picnics or functions of families
or groups of 25 or more, provided that a permit for such consumption is
obtained. The Township may require that one or more law enforcement
officers or park guards be present at such picnics or functions. In such
cases, the expense shall be paid by the group having the picnic or
function. For purposes of this section, a group picnic must consist of 25
or more persons.
C. Owners of vessels docked or moored at or in a park marina, if any, shall
be permitted to transport alcoholic beverages across park property for
use on board their vessels.
§ 261-20 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-24
242:448
§ 261-24. Gambling.
No person shall conduct raffles or card games for money or drawings for
prizes or participate in any other form of gambling within a park.
§ 261-25. Solicitation of contributions.
No person shall solicit contributions in a park for any purpose, except upon
obtaining written permission from the Township Committee.
§ 261-26. Noise.42
No person having the control of any device producing amplified sound shall
operate or permit such device to be operated in any park so that the sound
produced exceeds 105 decibels (dBa's) at a point 50 feet in front of the
center point of the distance between the loudspeaker installations.
§ 261-27. Display of permit upon request.
No person in a park shall refuse or fail to produce and exhibit any permit he
or she claims to have upon the request of any law enforcement officer, park
guard, or other authorized park employee who wishes to inspect the permit
for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with.
§ 261-28. Merchandising, advertising and signs.
No person in a park shall:
§ 261-29. Permits required. [Amended 4-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-07]
In addition to any other provision of this chapter that requires the obtaining
of a permit prior to engaging in a given activity, no person in a park shall
conduct, operate, present, manage, or take part in any of the following
activities unless a permit is obtained prior to the start of the activity.
A. Expose or offer for sale or hire any article, thing, service, or station or
place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
any article, thing, or service, unless a permit has been obtained from
the Township.
B. Announce, advertise, or call the public's attention in any way to any
article, thing, or service for sale or hire, unless done pursuant to
regulations promulgated by the Township.
C. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise place any sign, placard, advertisement,
or inscription in a park; or erect or cause to be erected any sign on any
public lands, highways, or roads adjacent to a park, unless done
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Township.
42.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 242, Noise.
§ 261-24 NOISE § 261-29
242:449
Permits shall be obtained in accordance with the procedures and standards
delineated within Chapter 294, Special Event Permits.
§ 261-30. through § 261-31. (Reserved)43
§ 261-32. Hours.
As a general rule, parks shall be open to the public in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter every day of the year between the hours posted
for each park, as set by the Township Committee. However, the Township
may, in its reasonable discretion, extend or contract these hours for any
park or a portion of any park. No person shall enter, be, or remain in
any park after park closing hours unless a permit has been obtained. Park
closing shall be posted at park entrances.
§ 261-33. Closed areas.
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Township at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or
at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or
merely to certain uses, as the Township shall find reasonably necessary.
§ 261-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000, by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days and/or by a term of community service not to
exceed 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Any picnic, outing or gathering sponsored by any person or family
composed of 25 or more persons.
B. Any contest, exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio
or television broadcast, fair, circus, musical event, or any similar event.
C. Any public meeting, assembly, or parade, including, but not limited to,
drills, maneuvers, ceremonies, addresses, speeches, or political
meetings.
D. Any use of any park facility by a certain person or group of persons to
the exclusion of others.
43.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 261-30, Application procedure; fee, and 261-31, Standards for
issuance of permit, were repealed 4-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07.
§ 261-29 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 261-34
242:450
Chapter 265
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 162.
Parks — See Ch. 261.
Sale of tobacco — See Ch. 307.
§ 265-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but
does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern, or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, or parks.
§ 265-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain conduct which is not
subject to regulation within the New Jersey Criminal Code, Title 2C. Certain
conduct and behavior, including but not limited to disorderly conduct and
lewd behavior, which are not specifically included within this chapter, are
subject to prosecution under N.J.S.A. 2C:33-2 and/or other state law as
applicable.
§ 265-3. Nude bathing.
No person within the limits of the Township shall swim, bathe, or be found
in a state of nudity while bathing in the tidal waters of the Atlantic Ocean,
Barnegat Bay, Manahawkin Bay, Little Egg Harbor or waters adjacent
thereto, and no person shall appear in a state of nudity or make any
indecent exposure of his or her person on any boat or other craft within the
limits of the Township.
§ 265-4. Disrobing in motor vehicle.
No person shall undress or disrobe, or dress or robe, for the purpose of
uncovering a bathing suit in any motor vehicle while the same is parked on
any road, street, avenue, beach or other public place. This section shall not
apply to outer clothing or to children under the age of five years.
§ 261-34 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 265-5
265:451
§ 265-5. Disrobing in public.
No person shall undress or disrobe, or dress or robe, in any public place,
excepting such place as may be provided for such use. This section shall not
apply to outer clothing or to children under the age of five years.
§ 265-6. Lodging in parked automobiles.
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, lodge in any automobile,
truck, camping or recreational vehicle, or similar vehicle in any public
street, parking lot, or other public property. This prohibition shall not apply
to Township public property which has been specifically designated as an
area in which camping is permitted.
§ 265-7. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No person shall park any motor vehicle so that the same shall obstruct any
public sidewalk in the Township.
§ 265-8. Urinating and defecating in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place
except in such places as may be provided for such use.
§ 265-9. Firearms prohibited.
No person, other than a law enforcement officer as permitted by applicable
law, shall bring a firearm, as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, into any public
building within the Township.
§ 265-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 265-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 265-10
265:452
Chapter 269
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage and other casual sales — See Ch. 191.
§ 265-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 265-10
265:453

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 269-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSING — Door-to-door soliciting or soliciting by the use of circulars,
visitations, or any other means, where the canvasser or his or her employer
has not been invited or requested by the owner (as defined below), to obtain
a listing of real property or to confer with the owner regarding a real
estate transaction. This applies to private, personal and professional activity
alike.[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
CHARITABLE — Includes the words "patriotic," "philanthropic," "social
service," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational," "civic" and "fraternal,"
either actual or purported.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION — The act of asking, bartering, or
communicating in any other such manner, whether orally, or by written or
printed material, direct or implied, by an individual or group of individuals
for a for-profit purpose, including the purchase or intimidation of residents
to sell their real property. Solicitation is not communication that is political,
religious, or charitable in nature and does not involve solicitation of money,
funds, contributions, or anything of value.[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
CONTRIBUTIONS — Includes the words "alms," "food," "clothing," "money,"
"subscriptions," "property" and "donation" under the guise of a loan or
money or property.
ITINERANT SALESMAN and VENDOR — Includes hawkers, peddlers and
salespeople, their agents, servants, employees or representatives, who do
not have or own any retail shop or place of business in the Township of Little
Egg Harbor, who, with or without any form of container, vehicle or other
conveyance, shall, on the streets or other public places of the Township or
otherwise from door-to-door or from house-to-house, sell, cause to be sold,
offer for sale or cause to be offered for sale goods, wares or merchandise
of any description whatsoever, or who solicit funds or subscriptions of any
kind, except as hereinafter excluded.
OWNER — The lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person
having the right of ownership or possession or to sell, rent, or lease any real
property.[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership,
society, or organization, or any agent, employee or representative thereof.
PURCHASER — Any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee, prospective
lessee, buyer, prospective buyer, or any agent thereof.[Added 11-9-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-10]
§ 269-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 269-1
265:455
RELIGIOUS and RELIGION — Shall not mean and include the word
"charitable" as herein defined, but shall be given their commonly accepted
definitions.
RESIDENCE — Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — A request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose.
VENDING UNIT — Any vehicle or device which may be moved without
assistance of a motor; is not required to be registered with the New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles; and is used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor.[Added 11-9-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-10]
VENDOR — Any person who goes from house to house or place to place,
by foot or any means of conveyance, selling goods or services or soliciting
orders for future delivery of goods or services. "Vendor" shall mean the
same as "peddler," "hawker" and "solicitor."[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
§ 269-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, as an itinerant salesman or vendor,
to sell, offer for sale or cause to be sold or offered for sale within the
corporate limits of the Township, any goods, wares or merchandise of any
kind whatsoever, or to solicit funds, subscriptions, or contributions, except
as herein particularly allowed, without first having applied for and obtained
a permit for such purpose.
§ 269-3. Exceptions.
This chapter is intended to particularly exclude wholesalers who are either
licensed by the State of New Jersey or who have been issued a sales tax
exemption permit from the State of New Jersey due to their status as
wholesalers, holders of special privileges, and all of the persons exempted
by operation of law. Any person issued a special license pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 is specifically exempted from all licensing requirements of this
chapter. As permitted by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, any portion of this chapter
regulating working, peddling and vending on public streets and highways
within the Township is applicable to persons issued a special license.
§ 269-4. Application for permit.
An application for a permit as required in § 269-2 hereof shall be made to
the Chief of Police upon forms provided by the Township. Such application
shall be sworn to and filed with the Chief of Police and shall contain
any and all information which the Chief of Police may deem reasonable
§ 269-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 269-4
265:456
and necessary pertaining to the applicant and to the goods, wares and
merchandise intended to be sold or offered for sale, or to the organization
or institution for which any solicitation is to be made, and shall include
the name and address or headquarters or place of business of the person
or persons applying for the permit, and if the said applicant is not an
individual, then the names and addresses of the applicant's principal
officers and managers, a description of the goods, wares and merchandise
to be sold or the purpose for which the solicitation is being made, and, if
the application is for a permit to solicit, the name and address of the person
or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, which
person or persons shall be a resident of the Township, and the names of all
the promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation,
the sales or solicitation method or methods to be used, and, if solicitation,
the time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the dates for the
beginning and ending of such solicitation. In addition, the applicant shall
submit two letters of recommendation to the Chief of Police concerning the
applicant's moral character.
§ 269-5. Investigation of applicant.
The Chief of Police shall examine all applications filed and shall cause to be
made such investigation as he or she shall deem necessary, including the
inspection of any books or records of the applicant, which shall be made
available to the Chief of Police by the applicant at any reasonable time.
§ 269-6. Issuance of permit.
A. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit, provided that he or she shall
find that the sales or solicitation program or activity is not fraudulent
and that the applicant or its managing officers, agents, representatives
and employees are of good character and reputation, that the
application is truthful and that the kind and character of the proposed
sales or solicitation program or activity is in the interest of and not
inimical to the public's welfare and, in the case of solicitation, the
purpose is solely to finance the charitable or religious cause described
in the application and will not be conducted for or result in private
profit.
B. In the case of solicitation, the charitable or religious organization shall
supply its agents, representatives or employees with a badge or ribbon
containing the name of such organization, and the name of said agent,
representative or employee; said badge or ribbon shall be worn and
conspicuously displayed on the front of the clothing of such agent,
representative or employee.
C. In regard to the sale of goods, wares or merchandise by itinerant
salesperson or vendors, said itinerant salesperson or vendors shall have
prominently displayed on their person or on the vehicle being utilized
for the sale of the goods, wares or merchandise, the permit issued by
the Chief of Police.
§ 269-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 269-7
265:457
§ 269-7. Permit fees; expiration of permit; hours of sale.
§ 269-8. Location of signs.
Any signs utilized by any person to sell his or her goods, wares or
merchandise shall be located on the vehicles being used by said person in
the sale of his or her goods, wares and merchandise.
§ 269-9. Hearing following denial of permit.
An application for a permit shall be granted or denied within five days
from the date that the said application is submitted to the Chief of Police,
and in the event of denial the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant
by certified mail, setting forth the reasons for denial. Within five days
thereafter the applicant may file with the Township Committee a written
request for a hearing on the application, together with written exceptions to
the findings of fact upon which the Chief of Police based his or her denial of
the application. Upon the filing of such a request, the Township Committee
shall fix a time and place for a hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof,
which hearing shall be held within 10 days after the request is filed. Within
10 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Township Committee shall
make its decision whether to issue or sustain the denial of the said permit.
§ 269-10. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit which may have been issued may be revoked and canceled by
the Chief of Police on a showing that any of the provisions of this chapter
have been violated or for other good cause. Upon learning of the alleged
A. For each permit to sell any goods, wares or merchandise, the applicant
shall pay to the Township of Little Egg Harbor the sum of $300, and said
permit shall expire December 31 next ensuing the date of issuance.
B. For each permit to solicit funds or subscriptions for any duly
established and recognized charitable or religious organization or
institution, the applicant shall not be required to pay, but such permit
shall expire not more than 40 days next ensuing the date of issuance.
C. No such permit shall be effective for more than one person and one
vehicle, but duplicate permits may be issued in like manner for an
additional fee of $10 for each additional person who will sell any goods,
wares, or merchandise, and an additional $150 for each additional
vehicle being used in the sale of said goods, wares, or merchandise. No
rebate shall be allowed from any fee herein specified for a term of less
than one year.
D. No selling or soliciting shall be permitted except between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., inclusive, provided that home deliveries of
milk, bread and the like shall not be circumscribed hereby; provided,
further, that trucks peddling coffee, doughnuts and similar items to
work sites shall not be limited to the hours herein provided.
§ 269-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 269-10
265:458
violation of any provisions of this chapter, or for other good cause, the Chief
of Police shall immediately suspend the permit and give the holder thereof
written notice by certified mail of a hearing to be held by the Chief of Police
within five days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit
should be revoked and canceled. The notice shall contain a statement of the
facts upon which the Chief of Police has acted in suspending the permit.
If, after such hearing, the Chief of Police finds that the chapter has been
violated or other good cause exists, he or she shall, within five days after
the hearing, revoke the permit and give the holder thereof written notice of
the revocation and the reasons therefor. Or in the absence of such finding,
the holder shall be notified within five days in writing of the termination
of the suspension of the permit. In addition, any permit which may have
been issued may be revoked and canceled for a violation of the said chapter
or on good cause shown by majority vote of the Township Committee at
any regular or special meeting thereof after five days' written notice to the
permit holder and upon affording the permit holder an opportunity to be
heard with respect to the reasons for such revocation and cancellation.
§ 269-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
Any canvasser, peddler, itinerant vendor, or owner or employee of a door-todoor
sales enterprise who violates any provision of this section, if convicted,
shall be:
§ 269-12. No Knock Registry. [Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
A. Subject to a maximum ordinance violation fine of $250 for the first
offense; $500 for a second offense and $1,250 for a third offense;
B. Subject to 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding
90 days for any offense thereafter; and
C. Subject to a permanent revocation of any license issued to the within
chapter.
A. The Township Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk that
canvassing, peddling, itinerant vending, and door-to-door sales
enterprises are not permitted on the premises (hereinafter referred to
as the Little Egg Harbor Township No Knock Registry). Notification
shall be completion of a form available at the Township Clerk's office
during normal business hours. The list shall be updated monthly.
B. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the Little
Egg Harbor Township No Knock Registry pursuant to Subsection A
herein shall be able to procure from the Clerk's office a sticker for
display at his/her/its premises indicating enlistment on the Little Egg
Harbor Township No Knock Registry. The first sticker shall be provided
§ 269-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 269-12
265:459
free of charge and may be picked up in person during regular business
hours. If a replacement sticker is required, the individual may pick up a
replacement at the Clerk's office at no charge.
C. The Township Clerk shall distribute the current Little Egg Harbor
Township No Knock Registry to a licensee at the time of issuance of a
license to peddle, canvass, itinerant vend or otherwise door-to-door
sell, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall not
peddle, canvass, itinerant vend or conduct door-to-door sales at any
premises identified on the then-current Little Egg Harbor Township No
Knock Registry.
D. Although the most current list of registrants on the Little Egg Harbor
Township No Knock Registry shall be provided by the Township Clerk, it
is the responsibility of the canvasser, itinerant vendor, or solicitor to
have the most up-to-date list prior to performing their business.
E. Any canvasser, peddler, itinerant vendor, or owner or employee of a
door-to-door sales enterprise who violates any provision of this section
shall be subject to the violations and penalties set forth in § 269-11.
§ 269-12 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 269-12
265:460
ARTICLE II
Real Estate Canvassing
[Added 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
§ 269-13. Real estate canvassing; requirements.
A. Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other
institution or entity that canvasses in order to obtain listings of real
property, or to bring about the sale, lease, or purchase of real property,
must provide advanced written notice to the Township Clerk before
engaging in such activities. The advanced notice must provide the
following information:
(1) The names and addresses of the persons engaging in the
canvassing or soliciting; and
(2) The names and addresses of the individuals or companies by which
such persons are employed; and
(3) A listing of the streets or streets in the Township in which the
canvassing or soliciting will take place and when; and
(4) The starting and ending dates in which the canvassing, itinerant
vending, or soliciting will take place; and
(5) The applicant's places of residence for the preceding five years;
and
(6) A complete description of any motor vehicle to be used, including
the make, model, color and registration number and all insurance
information, including the name and address of the carrier, policy
number and type of coverage; and
(7) Two one-inch-square photographs showing the applicant's face
shall accompany the application.
B. The notice required hereunder must be filed with the Township Clerk no
less than 14 business days prior to the scheduled start date.
C. Provided the notice requirements have been satisfied, the Township
Clerk shall issue a permit allowing the canvassing or soliciting to take
place. This permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30 days from
the date of issuance. Once expired, the permit must be renewed
following the same notice requirements.
D. All applicants shall notify the Township, in writing, within 30 days of
any changes in the information contained in the registration
application.
E. There is no payment necessary for canvasser.
§ 269-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 269-13
265:461
§ 269-14. Time, place, and manner restrictions.
§ 269-15. Suspension or revocation of registration.
Any registration issued in accordance with the provision of this article may
be suspended or revoked by the Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal
Court for any of the following reasons:
§ 269-16. Prohibited discrimination.
No person shall engage in the following acts:
F. Upon issuance of the permit, a registration certificate shall be issued to
the applicant. The canvasser or solicitor shall carry the registration
certificate at all times and shall include:
(1) The signature of the Township Clerk;
(2) The name and address of the canvasser or solicitor;
(3) The date of issuance and expiration; and
(4) If applicable, a description of any motor vehicle used in the
canvassing business, including any identifying registration and/or
serial numbers.
A. No individual that has been given a permit pursuant to § 269-13 may
operate beyond the timeframe outlined below:
(1) 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
(2) 12:00 p.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Sunday.
B. Further, no individual or group of individuals may knowingly enter
private property that has displayed a no knock sticker or is on the No
Knock Registry.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in the application process.
B. Fraud or misrepresentation made during the course of conducting
canvassing or soliciting.
C. Conducting the business of canvassing or soliciting in such a manner as
to create a public nuisance or jeopardize the public's health, safety or
welfare.
D. Operating beyond the time, place, and manner restrictions outlined in
§ 269-14.
A. The promoting, influencing, or attempt to promote or influence a
property owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, or remove from
a lease real property by referring to race, color, sexual orientation,
ethnicity, or religious affiliation of neighbors, prospective buyers, or
other occupants of prospective occupants of real property.
§ 269-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 269-16
265:462
B. Induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly,
the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing that the
presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race,
religion, or national origin in the area has resulted or may result in:
(1) The lowering of property values;
(2) A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of the block,
neighborhood, or area in which the property is located;
(3) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area;
(4) A decline in the quality of the schools serving in the area.
C. Make any representation (or misrepresentations) concerning the listing
or sale of the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any real property
in any residentially zoned areas for the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of other real property in
such area.
D. Make any representation to any prospective purchaser that any block,
neighborhood or area has, will, or might undergo an adverse change
with respect to the religious, racial, or ethnic composition of the block,
neighborhood or area for the purpose of discouraging the purchase of
property in a particular area.
E. Place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is not in fact
offered for sale.
F. Advertise for sale or rental, a property which is nonexistent or which is
not actually for sale or rental.
G. Engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or activities of
any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite
unrest, create or play upon fear with the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of real property.
H. To solicit or canvass any owner whose name and property address is
included on the list maintained by the Township Clerk of persons
requesting that they not be canvassed or solicited.
I. To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of intimidation
against any person because that person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding
or conference under the terms of this article.
J. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the
practices forbidden by this article or to obstruct or prevent any person
from complying with the provisions of this article.
K. Refer, directly or indirectly, or by implication, to race, color, creed,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation in any advertisement or other
solicitation offering real property for sale or rental.
§ 269-16 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 269-16
265:463
§ 269-17. Enforcement.
§ 269-18. Appeal from denial or revocation of permit to canvass or
solicit.
A person denied a permit or who has had a permit removed, may appeal
that action to the Mayor, or his or her designee, by submitting a letter to
the Township Clerk within 10 days of the complained action. A hearing on
such appeal will then be scheduled within seven days after the receipt of
the appeal, with the hearing to be held within 30 days after receipt of the
appeal. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall render a decision on the
appeal within seven days after the date of the hearing which shall be final.
§ 269-19. Violations and penalties.
Any canvasser or solicitor who violates any provision of this section, if
convicted, shall be subject to the violations and penalties set forth in
§ 269-11.
§ 269-20. Exemptions.
This article does not apply to real estate that is publicly advertised by sale
or to "open houses," sponsored by the owner or listed by real estate agents
for a specific home on a specific date and time.
L. Solicit or attempt to solicit the sale or rental or the listing for sale or
rental of real property without furnishing in written form to the owner
or occupier of such real property the name of the person or
organization soliciting such sale, rental, or listing.
A. The Little Egg Harbor Township Police Department is charged with
enforcing the provisions of this article.
B. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful practice
forbidden by any section of this article may contact the police
department by calling the nonemergent police phone line, and by
themselves, or by their attorney-at-law, make, sign, and file a complaint
directly with the Police Department, or with the Township Clerk, who
shall forward the complaint to the Police Department for a full
investigation.
C. In addition to any other enforcement actions, the Police Department or
the Township Clerk may refer the complaint to the Real Estate
Commission, the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights, or any other
appropriate state or federal agency for disposition.
§ 269-16 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 269-20
265:464
Chapter 271
PET WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 134.
§ 271-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 271-2. Requirement for disposal.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
A. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, unless said property is owned or possessed by said pet owner
and/or keeper or permission has been granted from the owner of said
private property.
B. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
§ 269-20 PET WASTE § 271-3
271:465
§ 271-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 272
PORTABLE TOILETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 282.
§ 272-1. Portable toilets required; removal.
§ 272-2. Location of portable toilets.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service, as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The combination of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any construction site at which work will be performed for more than
one day where water or sewer service has not yet been connected or
where use of the bathroom facilities inside the structure is not available
to the contractor or its employees shall be equipped with at least one
portable toilet per every 10 workers.
B. Any portable toilet on a construction site that has a stop-work order or
an expired building permit must be removed within 48 hours.
A. Whenever one or more portable toilets are to be placed upon a
construction site, they shall be located on the construction site and are
prohibited from being located on a sidewalk, area designated for a
sidewalk, street or public right-of-way. Portable toilets shall be located a
minimum of 15 feet from all curblines and at such locations as to
minimize adverse aesthetic conditions, and the doors thereof shall not
face any street or any neighboring property.
B. In waterfront areas or properties within a designated flood hazard area,
portable toilets shall be removed when the National Weather Service
issues a watch or warning for a major storm event with coastal flooding.
§ 271-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 272-3
271:466
§ 272-3. Servicing and maintenance.
§ 272-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, the Code
Enforcement Official and the Construction Official of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor.
§ 272-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 273
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 145.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
Littering — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 293 and
Ch. 374.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 358.
A. Portable toilets required herein shall be serviced at regular intervals so
as to prevent overloading or the escape of materials and/or noxious
odors contained therein.
B. All portable toilets shall be monitored and serviced by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying portable
toilets and recharged at a sufficient frequency to prevent the escape of
offensive odors or spillage.
C. Portable toilets shall be kept in good working condition without any
broken surfaces or leaks. Doors must be kept in good working condition
and must be able to be securely latched while in use.
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity who or which violates or
fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $2,000.
B. Separate violations. Each and every day in which a violation of the
provisions of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 272-3 PET WASTE § 272-5
271:467

ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Standards
[Adopted 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
§ 273-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement, within the Department of Community Development and
Planning of Little Egg Harbor Township, being marked and designated
as the “International Property Maintenance Code, First Edition, 1998,” as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., the International Conference of Building Officials, and the Southern
Building Code Congress International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor; for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Property Maintenance Code, First Edition, 1998, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in the following sections of this chapter.
§ 273-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, First Edition, 1998, is
amended, revised, and supplemented as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 shall be amended to provide as follows: "These
regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor, hereinafter referred to as "'this
code.'"
(2) Section 102.3 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions and procedures of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Codes and any pertinent
subcodes. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the municipal land use
ordinances."
(3) The caption of Section 103 shall be retitled to read as follows:
"Section 103, Office of Code Enforcement."
(4) Section 103.1 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "The Office of Code Enforcement is hereby established
within the Department of Community Development and Planning,
and the official in charge thereof shall be the Code Enforcement
Officer, known interchangeably throughout this code as the 'code
official.' The Code Enforcement Officer shall be directly
accountable for the performance of his or her powers and duties to
the Director of the Department of Community Development and
Planning. In addition, the Zoning Officer, Construction Official,
§ 273-1 PET WASTE § 273-2
271:469
subcode officials, and Building Inspectors shall also have the
powers and duties of a code official for purposes of enforcing the
requirements of this code."
(5) Section 103.2 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "The code official shall be appointed and removed in
accordance with the civil service system appointment procedures
of the New Jersey Department of Personnel and the Township of
Little Egg Harbor."
(6) Section 103.3 is deleted and its place the following shall be
inserted: "The appointing authority may hire additional assistant or
deputy code enforcement officers, inspectors and other employees
to aid the Code Enforcement Officer in the performance of his or
her powers and duties."
(7) Section 103.4 shall be amended so as to delete the phrase "except
one whose only connection is that of a member of the board of
appeals established under the provisions of Section 111," and to
substitute the word "office" for the word "department."
(8) Sections 103.5 and 103.6 shall be deleted in their entirety.
(9) Section 104.2 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "Under the direction of the Director of the Department of
Community Development and Planning, the code official shall have
the authority to promulgate reasonable procedures for the fair and
efficient interpretation and implementation of the provisions of this
code."
(10) The subtitle of Section 104.7 shall be amended to read as follows:
"Office records" and the word "department" in the first sentence of
this section shall be replaced with the word "Office."
(11) Section 105.1 is amended so that the word "department" contained
in the last sentence thereof is replaced with the word "office."
(12) Section 107.4 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "Except as otherwise provided for elsewhere in this code,
any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine
of not less than $200 for a first offense; a fine of not more than
$500, community service, or both, for a second offense; and a fine
of not more than $1,250, community service, imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, for a third
offense as determined in the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court. Any additional offenses subsequent to the third
offense shall be treated as a third offense for sentencing purposes.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
§ 273-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 273-2
271:470
provided above for each separate offense." [Amended 9-8-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-07; 10-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
(13) Section 107.5 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or
structure who has received a compliance order or a notice of
violation to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of
the dwelling unit or structure until the provisions of the compliance
order or notice of violation have been complied with; or until the
owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a
signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by the compliance order or notice of violation."
(14) Section 108.1 shall be amended to add the words "or damaged"
after the word "unsafe."
(15) Section 108.1.3 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall
be inserted: "A structure is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use whenever conditions exist in or about the structure which
are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants
of such structure, the occupants of neighboring structures, or other
residents of the municipality. Such conditions are deemed to exist
whenever the code official finds that such structure, or parts
thereof, have come into a state of disrepair through neglect,
dilapidation, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident or other
calamities, or through any other act rendering the structure, or
parts thereof, unsafe, unlawful, structurally defective, unsanitary,
vermin or rat infested; or whenever the code official finds that the
structure contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential
equipment required by this code; or whenever the code official
finds that the structure does not comply with the requirements of
the building code or the certificate of occupancy."
(16) Insert a new section numbered Section 108.1.5 entitled "Damaged
structures," to provide as follows: "Any structure, or parts thereof,
which have been damaged to such an extent that nothing remains
but the walls, or parts of the walls and other supports, shall,
regardless of the safety and sturdiness of those remaining walls or
parts thereof, be deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of
the municipality and may be repaired or demolished in accordance
with the provisions of this code."
(17) Section 109.5 is amended to add the following sentence at the end
of the paragraph: "In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.9, any action
taken by the code official using revenues derived from the local
§ 273-2 PET WASTE § 273-2
271:471
property tax shall be taken only after the code official complies
with the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.) unless the action is necessary to prevent
imminent danger to life, limb or property."
(18) Section 110.3 shall be deleted and in its place the following shall be
inserted: "If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official,
acting as a public authority in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.4(c), shall cause the structure to be demolished and
removed by filing a petition with the Chairperson of the Little Egg
Harbor Township Board of Health in accordance with the
procedure set forth in Chapter 148, Buildings, Unfit, of the
Municipal Code."
(19) Section 110.4 shall be deleted in its entirety.
(20) Section 111.1 shall be amended to delete the number "20" in the
first sentence thereof and to replace same with the number "5."
(21) Sections 111.2, 111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.3, 111.2.4 and 111.2.5 shall
be deleted. [Amended 9-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
(22) Section 111.3 shall be deleted. [Amended 9-8-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
(23) Sections 111.4, 111.4.1, 111.5, 111.6, 111.6.1, and 111.6.2 shall be
deleted in their entirety. [Amended 9-8-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
(24) Section 111.7 shall be deleted in its entirety.
(25) Section 201 is amended to include a new subsection numbered
"201.6" and entitled "Mandatory and permissive meaning of words"
and shall provide as follows: "The word 'shall' is mandatory and
shall be applied both retroactively and prospectively. The word
'may' is permissive."
(26) Section 202 is amended to include the following definition in its
appropriate alphabetical other within this section:
BUILDING. Any building, structure or part thereof, whether used
for human occupancy or otherwise, including any outbuildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
(27) Section 202 is amended so as to delete the following definitions and
to replace them with the following substituted definitions:
Replace existing definition of “garbage” with:
GARBAGE. Animal, vegetable and other organic waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food
or other products.
§ 273-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 273-2
271:472
Replace existing “Rubbish” with:
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage, such as but not limited to paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cartons, boxes, rags, excelsior, cardboard, rubber,
leather, aluminum or tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
household bedding, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and
dust, or other similar materials. Rubbish shall not include yard
clippings or leaves which are part of a maintained compost pile.
(28) Section 302.2 shall be amended to add the following sentence: "All
roof gutters and pipes shall be maintained to direct the flow of
water toward the street line or approved water retention areas and
away from abutting or adjacent public or private properties."
(29) Section 302.3 shall be deleted in its entirety and in its place the
following shall be inserted:
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a
good condition and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
Stairs shall comply with the requirements of Sections 303.10 and
702.9. Sidewalks and curbs shall be specifically subject to the
following requirements.
302.3.1 Duty of owner. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et
seq., the owner or owners of any premises in the municipality
abutting a sidewalk or curb shall be responsible for the
construction and reconstruction, paving and repaving, curbing
and recurbing, maintaining, repairing and improving of the
sidewalks and curbs of the streets and highways of the
municipality wholly at the cost of the owner or owners. All new
sidewalks and curbs constructed by an abutting owner shall be
constructed in accordance with the line and grade established
in plans approved by the appropriate approving agency or the
municipal engineer. All old and existing sidewalks and curbs shall
be reconstructed or repaired in accordance with the existing line
and grade unless such line and grade is changed by the Municipal
Engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting owner or
owners in all instances to make inquiry of the Municipal Engineer
respecting such line and grade prior to making the improvement.
§ 273-2 PET WASTE § 273-2
271:473
302.3.2 Removal of grass, weeds, snow and ice from
sidewalks and gutters. The owner or owners of any premises
in the municipality abutting a sidewalk or curb of the streets and
highways of the municipality shall be responsible for removing all
snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks and gutters within 12
hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon,
and all grass, weeds and impediments therefrom within three days
after notice to remove same, notwithstanding any other notice
provisions contained in this code to the contrary, and for removing
all grass, weeds, and impediments from the portion of any street
or highway abutting such lands.
302.3.3 Standard. Sidewalks and curbs shall be kept in good
condition and maintained free from hazardous conditions so that
they are not permitted to become unfit or unsafe to walk upon
or use. Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed,
paved, repaved, curbed, recurbed, and repaired in accordance
with specifications adopted by the Municipal Engineer.
302.3.4 Failure to maintain or repair. In the event the abutting
owner or owners shall fail to construct or reconstruct, pave or
repave, curb or recurb, maintain, repair or improve such part
of the abutting sidewalks and curbs which require such repair,
maintenance or similar action, or shall fail to remove all snow and
ice, or all grass, weeds and impediments as required herein, the
municipality may cause said work to be performed and the cost
thereof to be assessed as a lien against the property in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq.
302.3.5 Service not to constitute acceptance of sidewalks,
curbs, or streets. The provision of any of these services or the
performance of any of this work, as set forth in Section 302.3 et
seq. hereof, by the municipality shall not constitute acceptance
by the municipality of any sidewalk, curb or street not otherwise
properly and legally dedicated to the municipality. Such services
and work, if provided or performed at all, shall only constitute a
courtesy.
(30) Section 302.4 shall be amended to be entitled "Weeds and brush,"
to number the existing paragraph as "302.4.1," and to add the
following sections: [Amended 9-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09;
9-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
§ 273-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 273-2
271:474
302.4.2 Removal of brush, weeds, brush, etc. The owner of
a dwelling or lands lying within the limits of Little Egg Harbor
Township, where the code official deems it necessary and
expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, and
general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, shall remove from
such dwelling or lands or destroy brush, weeds, including
ragweed, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after receiving
notice to remove or destroy the same notwithstanding any other
notice provisions contained in this chapter to the contrary.
302.4.3 Brush and hedges near roadways and intersections.
The owner of lands lying within the limits of Little Egg Harbor
Township, where the code official deems it necessary and
expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, and
general welfare, shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant
life, growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet
of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a height of not more
than 2 1/2 feet within 10 days after receiving notice to cut the
same notwithstanding any other notice provisions contained in
this chapter to the contrary.
302.4.4 Abatement by municipality and costs as lien. In cases
where the owner shall have refused, neglected or failed to abate
any violation of Section 302.4 et seq. hereof, the municipality
may abate the violation by or under the direction of the code
official. These costs shall become a lien against the dwelling or
lands in accordance with the lien procedure established by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.14 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27, respectively. Fees and costs
shall be assessed in accordance with the following rate schedule:
Labor: $25 per hour per laborer
Public Works vehicle fee: $65 per hour
Heavy-duty tree and brush removal equipment fee: $50 per hour
Loader/backhoe equipment fee: $95 per hour
All other mechanical equipment fee: $30 per hour
Administrative fee: $100
Any disposal fees associated with landfill, recycling center, or
hazardous waste will be assessed at the current rate charged by
such facility.
Any fee charged by a contractor for work performed on behalf of
the Township for the abatement of any violation of Section 302.4
et seq.
(31) Section 302.8 shall be deleted in its entirety and in its place the
following shall be inserted:
302.8 Motor vehicles, boats and watercraft.
§ 273-2 PET WASTE § 273-2
271:475
302.8.1 Excepting owners of business establishments that are
duly licensed and permitted as automobile junkyard facilities in
accordance with the municipal land use and zoning ordinances, no
property owner shall park, keep, or store nor allow to be parked,
kept or stored on any premises more than one unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicle nor, alternatively, more than one motor
vehicle which is incapable of operating under its own power for
purposes of transporting passengers regardless of whether or not
the motor vehicle is registered or inspected.
302.8.2 When any motor vehicle is parked, kept or stored in
a state of disassembly, disrepair, or is in the process of being
stripped or dismantled as part of a major overhaul, the motor
vehicle shall be, at all times when no mechanical or body work is
being performed, completely covered by a tarp or other covering
or otherwise garaged.
302.8.3 Except upon a duly permitted marina or marine repair
facility, no property owner shall park, keep or store nor allow
to be parked, kept or stored upon any premises more than one
boat or watercraft which is unregistered nor, alternatively, more
than one boat or watercraft which is incapable of operating under
its own power for purposes of transporting passengers upon the
waterways within the municipality regardless of whether or not
the boat or watercraft is registered.
302.8.4 When any boat or watercraft is parked, kept or stored
in a state of disassembly, disrepair, or is in the process of being
stripped or dismantled as part of a major overhaul, the boat or
watercraft shall be, at all times when no mechanical or other work
is being performed, completely covered by a tarp or other covering
or otherwise enclosed in a structure approved for that purpose.
302.8.5 Any boat or watercraft which sinks, is unseaworthy or
otherwise becomes a hazard to navigation within any waterway
within the municipality shall be deemed a public nuisance and
shall be removed by the owner thereof upon notice as provided
for in this code unless the code official deems the hazard to be
an imminent hazard to life, health or property. Should the owner
of the boat or watercraft not remove the hazard as prescribed by
the code official within 72 hours' notice notwithstanding any other
notice provisions contained in this chapter to the contrary, the
code official may take appropriate steps, with the approval of the
Township Administrator, to cause the hazard to be removed and to
charge the cost thereof to the owner of the boat or watercraft. The
Municipal Attorney, upon the request of and under the direction of
the Township Administrator, shall take necessary and appropriate
steps to recover the municipality's costs of abating the hazard.
(32) Section 303.3 shall be deleted in its entirety and in its place the
following shall be inserted:
§ 273-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 273-2
271:476
303.3 911 Locatable mailing address system. The code official
shall have authority to enforce the provisions of Chapter 145
of the Code of Little Egg Harbor Township, entitled "Buildings,
Numbering of."
(33) Section 303.15 is amended to insert "May 1st" to "September 30th"
where indicated.
(34) Section 305.3.2 is amended to add the following new sentences:
"All garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash and solid waste shall be
disposed of in a clean and sanitary manner by placing same in
household or commercial-strength disposal bags in covered
containers from five gallons to 32 gallons in size. Disposal bags
shall be leakproof and shall not be capable of absorbing liquids."
(35) Section 305.3 is amended to add the following new section:44
305.3.3 Pickup times. Containers shall be placed curbside or
street side for pickup no sooner than 6:00 p.m. on the evening
prior to the date of scheduled collection for the zone where such
building, structure or premises is located and no later than 6:00
a.m. on the scheduled date.
(36) Section 404.4.1 is hereby reserved and shall not take affect until
January 1, 2001.
(37) Section 404.4.4 is deleted in its entirety and in its place the
following shall be inserted:
404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens, laundry rooms,
bathrooms, closets, cabinets, and other nonhabitable spaces and
interior public areas shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes.
(38) Section 507.1 is amended to add the following sentence:
"Stormwater discharge shall be designed and shall function in a
manner which does not permit stormwater or storm-related debris
to cross or accumulate upon any adjoining properties without the
consent of the adjoining owners.
(39) Section 602.3 is amended to insert "October 1st" to "April 30th"
where indicated.
(40) Section 602.4 is amended to insert "October 1st" to "April 30th"
where indicated.
44.Editor's Note: See § 374-1R for similar regulations.
§ 273-2 PET WASTE § 273-2
271:477

ARTICLE II
Control of Invasive Plants
[Adopted 8-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 273-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public health
through the control of the growth of invasive plants.
§ 273-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INVASIVE PLANTS — All native and non-native vines and vegetation that
grow out of place and are competitive, persistent, and pernicious shall be
classified as invasive plants. These plants may damage trees, vegetation, or
structures. Examples include but are not limited to bamboo (spreading or
running type), ragweed, multiflora rose, kudzu vine and poison ivy or oak.
§ 273-5. Control of growth required.
All persons must control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control the
spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of a resident's property is
a violation of this article.
§ 273-6. Inspections.
All places and premises in the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Such
inspection shall be made if that official has reason to believe that any
section of this article is being violated.
§ 273-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever an invasive plant, as defined by this article, is found on any
plot of land, lot or any other premises or place, a violation shall be given
to the owner, in writing, to remove or abate the same within such time
as shall be specified therein. The Township recognizes that certain
invasive plant types can be difficult to eradicate or remove; therefore,
the time for abatement will depend on the particular species of invasive
plant.
B. The cost of abatement shall be borne by the property owner.
C. If the owner fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the enforcing official may remove or otherwise control the
invasive plant species, and the Township may thereafter recover the
§ 273-3 PET WASTE § 273-7
271:479
cost of such removal from the property owner and place a lien on the
property to recover the cost of invasive plant removal.
§ 273-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 273-7
271:480
ARTICLE III
Property Registration
[Adopted 8-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
§ 273-8. Registration of all property for effective code enforcement.
§ 273-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day such violation is
committed or continues after the first 30 days shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense for each day and shall be punishable by an additional fine
of not more than $50 per day. The Township of Little Egg Harbor may, at its
discretion, seek injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction of
the State of New Jersey.
A. In order for the Code Enforcement Department to effectively contact
property owners regarding violations of Property Maintenance Code
and to provide other information, it is necessary for accurate contact
information for all properties to be provided. Accordingly, the Township
shall include, annually, with a tax bill mailing, notice to all property
owners of the requirement to provide the following information to the
Township Clerk no later than December 31 of each calendar year for
any property for which that information has not been provided or has
changed since the date such information was initially provided.
(1) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
owner or owners of the premises shall be provided.
(2) In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all general
partners shall be provided, together with the telephone numbers
and email addresses for each individual partner, indicating where
such individual may be reached both during day and evening hours,
which telephone numbers shall include cell phone numbers.
(3) If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the
registered agent and corporate officers of said corporation shall be
provided, together with the telephone number and email address
for each such individual, indicating where such individual may be
reached both during day and evening hours, which shall include
providing the cell phone numbers of each such individual. All
registration addresses shall be physical addresses; post office
boxes alone are insufficient.
§ 273-8 PET WASTE § 273-9
271:481
Chapter 274
PROPERTY PENDING FORECLOSURE, REGISTRATION OF
§ 274-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the enforcement of Township
property maintenance standards and the State Housing Code against vacant
properties pending foreclosure.
§ 274-2. Service of notice; contents.
§ 274-3. Violation of state or local law at property on list;
responsibility of creditor.
If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a property is
A. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage on residential property located within the Township of Little
Egg Harbor shall serve the Municipal Clerk with a notice indicating that
a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has
been filed against the subject property. The notice may contain
information about more than one property and shall be provided by mail
or electronic communication at the discretion of the Municipal Clerk.
B. The notice shall be served within 10 days of service of a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against the subject
property.
C. Within 60 days of the adoption of this chapter, any creditor that has
initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any residential property which is
pending in Superior Court shall provide to the Municipal Clerk a notice
as described below for all residential properties in the Township for
which the creditor has pending foreclosure actions.
D. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and contact information for the representative of the
creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property
maintenance and code violations;
(2) Whether the property being foreclosed on is an affordable unit
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act;45
(3) The street address, lot and block number of the property; and
(4) The full name and contact information of an individual located
within the state authorized to accept service on behalf of the
creditor.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 273-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 274-3
271:482
otherwise vacated subsequent to the filing of the summons and complaint,
but prior to the vesting of title in any third party; and if the property is
found to be a nuisance or in violation of any applicable state or local code,
the local public officer shall notify the creditor; and the creditor shall have
the responsibility to abate the nuisance or correct the violation in the same
manner and to the same extent as the title owner of the property, to such
standard or specification as may be required by state law or municipal
ordinance.
§ 274-4. Notification of violation.
In the event of a violation of state or local ordinance, the municipality
shall serve the creditor with a notice that shall include a description of the
condition(s) that gave rise to the violation with the notice and shall provide
a period of not less than 30 days from the creditor's receipt of the notice for
the creditor to remedy the violation.
§ 274-5. Repair by Township.
If the Township expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation on a residential property in which the creditor was given
notice pursuant to the provisions of § 274-4 but failed to abate the nuisance
or correct the violation as directed, the municipality shall have the same
recourse against the creditor as it would have had against the title owner of
the property, including but not limited to the recourse provided at N.J.S.A.
55:19-100.
§ 274-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-18]
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any
fines imposed pursuant to this section shall commence 31 days following
receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to the
public health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
§ 274-7. Out-of-state creditor; appointment of in-state
representative; violations. [Added 10-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
A. An out-of-state creditor shall provide the full name and contact
information of an in-state representative or agent who shall be
responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, if it becomes vacant and abandoned, in the
notice required to be provided pursuant to § 274-2.
B. An out-of-state creditor found to be in violation of this requirement by
the Municipal Court of the Township of Little Egg Harbor or any other
court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for
each day of the violation.
§ 274-3 PET WASTE § 274-7
271:483
Chapter 276
PUBLIC RECORDS, INSPECTION OF
§ 276-1. Right to inspect; custodian of a government record; copies;
exceptions.
C. Such fines shall commence on the day after the ten-day period required
by § 274-2B.
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. (the Act),
government records shall be readily accessible for inspection, copying,
or examination by the citizens of this state, with certain exceptions, for
the protection of the public interest, and any limitations in the right of
access accorded by the Act as amended and supplemented shall be
construed in favor of the public's right of access. A "government
record" or "record" shall be as defined within N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the "custodian of a government
record" or "custodian" shall mean the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal
Clerk may delegate responsibility for handling records requests for
particular departments within the Township to deputy custodians.
C. The custodian of a government record shall permit the record to be
inspected, examined, and copied by any person during regular business
hours unless a government record is exempt from public access by the
Act, as amended and supplemented, any other statute, resolution of
either or both houses of the Legislature, regulation promulgated under
the authority of any statute or executive order of the Governor,
executive order of the Governor, Rules of Court, any federal law, federal
regulation, or federal order. A request for a record must be made on a
form adopted by the custodian of the government record.
D. Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute,
regulation, or executive order, a custodian of a government record shall
grant access to a government record or deny a request for access to a
government record as soon as possible, but not later than seven
business days after receiving the request, provided that the record is
currently available and not in storage or archived.
E. During such regular business hours and under the supervision of a
representative of the custodian, every citizen of the state shall also have
the right to copy such records by hand and to purchase copies of the
records. Copies of records shall be made available upon the payment of
the price established by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. The custodian may require a
deposit against costs for reproducing documents sought whenever the
custodian anticipates that the information that is requested will cost in
excess of $5 to reproduce. The actual cost of duplicating the record
upon which all copy fees are based shall be the cost of materials and
supplies used to make a copy of the record, but shall not include the
§ 274-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 276-1
271:484
§ 276-2. Fees for copies. [Amended 6-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-15;
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19]
cost of labor or other overhead expenses associated with making the
copy, except as provided for in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(c). Access to electronic
records and non-printed materials shall be provided free of charge, but
Little Egg Harbor Township may charge for the actual costs of any
needed supplies, such as computer disks. [Amended 6-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 2010-15; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19]
A. The fees for copies of government records shall be $0.05 per letter-size
page or smaller, and $0.07 per legal-size page or larger.
B. Other costs. The following fees shall be charged for copies of
government records which do not meet the specifications within
§ 276-2A:
(1) Duplicate tax bills: $5 for an initial duplicate copy of a tax bill; $25
for each subsequent copy of a tax bill for the same tax year
requested by the same person or organization.
(2) Zoning maps:
(a) Small-scale maps: $5 each.
(b) Large-scale maps: $10 each.
(3) Police photographs:
(a) Per eight-by-ten-inch black and white photograph: $5.
(b) Per eight-by-ten-inch color photograph: $10.
(4) Copies of the Land Development Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance:
$50 each or the cost to the Township for purchasing copies of the
ordinance from the Code publisher, whichever is greater.
(5) Certified copy of disposition of Municipal Court case: $5.
(6) Road maps:
(a) Small road maps: $5 each.
(b) Large road maps: $10 each.
(7) Tax Maps:
(a) Small set (12 inches by 18 inches): $75.
(b) Large set (24 inches by 36 inches): $200.
(c) Small Tax Map (12 inches by 18 inches) (single sheet): $2 each.
(d) Large Tax Map (24 inches by 36 inches) (single sheet): $4 each.
§ 276-1 PET WASTE § 276-2
271:485
Chapter 277
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
(8) Police reports: For accident reports not requested in person and
not part of Municipal Court discovery, an additional fee of $5 for
the first three pages and $1 per page thereafter shall be charged to
cover the administrative costs of the report pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-131.
(9) Little Egg Harbor Township Master Plan: $75.
(10) Duplicate tax sale certificate: $100.
(11) Copies of audio cassette, computer diskette or computer compact
disk: actual cost of media.
(12) Issuance of bid documents/specifications: $50.
(13) Certificates for redemption: $25.
(14) Bid specifications prepared by the Township of Little Egg Harbor:
$10.
(15) Vital statistics records: Fees pursuant to Chapter 328 of the
Township Code.
C. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined, or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by the Township by ordinary document copying equipment
in ordinary business size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of
time and effort by the Township to accommodate the request, and a fee
is not specified for the particular document or record in § 276-2A above,
a special service charge of $25 shall be assessed in addition to the
actual cost of duplicating the record.
D. In the event an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort is needed
by the Township to accommodate a request to inspect, in addition to any
fees for actual duplication and copying incurred by the requestor under
this chapter, the Township shall assess a special service charge based
upon the cost incurred for such extensive use of information technology
resources and/or the labor cost of the personnel providing the service
that is actually incurred or attributable to the Township for the clerical
and supervisory assistance required, or both. The manner by which
such special inspection service fee is calculated shall be kept on file
with the Township. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review
and object to the charge prior to its being incurred.
§ 276-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 276-2
271:486
§ 277-1. Applicability.
All qualified private communities, as defined herein, shall be reimbursed
for eligible municipal services or the Township shall have the option to
provide these services in the same fashion as the municipality provides
these services on public roads and streets.
§ 277-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ASSOCIATION — The entity responsible for the administration of a qualified
private community, which entity may be incorporated or unincorporated.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of real property ownership provided for under
the Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest in the corporation or association is
entitled to possess and occupy, for dwelling purposes, a house, apartment,
or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association, or to
purchase a unit of housing constructed or erected by the corporation or
association.
FEE SIMPLE COMMUNITY — A private community which consists of
individually owned lots or units and provides for common or shared
elements or interests in real property.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — The form of real property ownership
provided for under the Horizontal Property Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.
LOCAL PURPOSE TAX — That portion of the municipal tax rate levied
in support of municipal purpose appropriations. Said rate is identified on
Township tax bills as "municipal tax."
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative, fee simple community, or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction, comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association, or council of
co-owners, wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community.
REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGE — The applicable percentage based on
the statutory phase-in schedule as set forth in the Condominium Services
Act and shall be applied to the eligible services as negotiated and set forth
in the reimbursement agreement.
§ 276-2 PET WASTE § 277-2
271:487
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Little Egg Harbor, Ocean County, New
Jersey.
§ 277-3. Threshold requirements.
The following requirements shall be determined prior to providing
municipal services or entering into a reimbursement agreement.
§ 277-4. Reimbursement agreement.
A. The master deed for the qualified private community shall be provided
to the Township Engineer to document the recorded intent of the owner
to establish and develop the property as a qualified private community
consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq., complete with improvements intended for the common
use and enjoyment of the residents of the property.
B. The site plan for the development shall be clearly marked with the
agreed upon public area of the property and the remaining private
areas of the property.
C. The owner shall indicate its desire or intent to dedicate the public street
areas to the Township or to retain same as private areas of the
community. The Township shall have the sole discretion to determine
whether to accept or reject street areas offered for acceptance by the
Township. The condition precedent to consideration of street dedication
shall be whether the streets and roads meet existing Township street
standards as set forth in Chapter 212, Land Development, with the
exception of width. The Township shall bear no responsibility for
maintenance of streets that it does not own through dedication and
acceptance.
D. The manner and conditions under which service shall be provided by
the Township is based upon conveyance of a deed of dedication by the
owner to the Township and acceptance thereof by the Planning Board
and the Township Committee. Should the Township provide services to
any private street, the qualified private community or association shall
be required to produce an insurance policy naming the Township as the
insured party. The insurance policy shall provide combined liability
coverage in an amount not less than $1,000,000.
E. The Tax Assessor shall certify if the residents of the qualified private
community are the beneficiary of any existing tax abatements or tax
exemptions related to the construction thereof.
F. The Tax Assessor shall certify to the Township Engineer that a complex
meets the definition of a qualified private community as established by
N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2, which definition is recited under § 245-2 of these
regulations.
§ 277-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 277-4
271:488
§ 277-5. Eligible reimbursable expenses.
§ 277-6. Designated representative.
A. In lieu of providing some or all of the municipal services set forth in
these regulations, the Township shall enter into a written agreement to
annually reimburse a qualified private community.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the qualified private community shall
be used by the qualified private community to pay for the services
which the municipality chooses not to provide, and that amount shall be
the actual cost to the qualified private community of providing that
service, but not exceeding the amount which the Township would have
expended on that service if it were provided directly by the municipality
to the qualified private community.
C. The Township shall be held harmless by the association and the
qualified private community property owner, if applicable, from any
lawsuit by virtue of providing services on dedicated streets or through
the reimbursement procedure. An agreement entered into pursuant to
this chapter shall provide for complete accounting of the amount
expended by the qualified private community during the year for which
reimbursement is anticipated by the Township, and said documentation
must be submitted to the Director of Public Works and Township
Attorney before reimbursement by the Township.
A. The Township will reimburse a qualified private community for the
following municipal services or provide said services within a qualified
private community in the same fashion as the municipality provides
these services on public roads and streets:
(1) Removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from the roads and
streets.
(2) Lighting of the roads and streets, to the extent of payment for the
electricity required, but not including installation or maintenance
of lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment; and
(3) Collection of leaves, recyclable materials, trash and garbage and
bulky waste along the roads and streets.
B. Nothing in these regulations shall require the Township to operate any
municipally owned or leased vehicles, or other equipment, or to provide
any of the municipal services enumerated herein, upon, along or in
relation to any road or street within a qualified private community
which either is not accepted for dedication to public use or does not
meet all municipal standards and specifications for such dedication,
except for width.
A. The qualified private community shall designate a coordinator for
purposes of negotiating and implementing an agreement pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 277-4 PET WASTE § 277-6
271:489
§ 277-7. Reimbursement procedures.
Chapter 278
REFUSE CONTAINERS AND DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 222.
Pet waste — See Ch. 271.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 273.
Solid waste — See Ch. 293.
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 296.
B. A resolution of the Board of Directors of the qualified private
community appointing its designated representative and empowering
said representative to negotiate said agreement shall be filed with the
Township Clerk and the Director of Public Works.
A. The Township shall budget annually the reimbursement percentage
required to compensate the qualified private community, said
appropriation to be subject to a cap base budget adjustment as
provided by the State of New Jersey Director of the Division of Local
Government Services.
B. It shall be the qualified private community's responsibility to provide
the Director of Public Works with a properly itemized and certified
invoice for agreed reimbursable expenses for the previous annual year
and with required data to support and justify eligibility for
reimbursement of expenses incurred by the qualified private
community no later than April 15 after the annual year. The Township
shall not be obligated to pay any monies to a qualified private
community or association in which said reimbursement of expenses is
not submitted within the time frame established by ordinance. In no
event shall the qualified private community receive more, based on
Township cost for services, than actually expended during the annual
year.
C. The qualified private community shall furnish its annual year audit to
the Township's Chief Financial Officer.
D. The Township shall issue a check to the qualified private community
designee by June 30 after the applicable annual year as reimbursement
for municipal service costs incurred by the Township for services
covered herein in the preceding calendar year. The amount of the
reimbursement check shall be calculated in accordance with the
formula established by the Township's Director of Public Works.
E. Reimbursement checks received by the qualified private community
from the Township shall be distributed as agreed in the reimbursement
agreement.
§ 277-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 277-7
271:490
§ 278-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor and/
or the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 278-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — Any real property upon which any person
proposes to or does engage in the construction, reconstruction or
demolition, either in whole or in part, of any building, structure or other
improvement located upon said real property.[Added 9-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-09]
DUMPSTER — A container or debris-transfer body commonly used for the
placing or collection of debris and building materials during construction or
renovation.[Added 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 277-7 PET WASTE § 278-2
271:491
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 278-3. Prohibited conduct.
§ 278-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to the prohibition are as follows:
§ 278-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Official of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty allowed by
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 278-7. Requirement for construction sites. [Added 9-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-09]
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container is covered at all
times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. All construction sites upon which construction or demolition activities
thereon will generate any debris or solid waste shall be equipped with
adequate and suitable receptacles, containers or dumpsters for the
deposit of such debris or solid waste. All debris or solid waste
generated by construction or demolition activities upon construction
§ 278-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 278-7
271:492
Chapter 279
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 156.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 273.
sites shall be deposited into the required receptacles, containers or
dumpsters and shall not be permitted to accumulate upon the
construction site.
B. Debris containers, receptacles or dumpsters located upon construction
sites shall be emptied at periodic intervals so as to prevent overloading,
the escape of materials contained therein and to prevent obnoxious
odors or nuisances of any type escaping therefrom during the period
when construction or demolition activities are taking place on the
construction site.
C. Debris containers, receptacles or dumpsters as required by this chapter
shall be located on the property on which the construction or
demolition activities are being performed. There shall be a five-foot
setback requirement from any property line. Debris containers,
receptacles or dumpsters shall not be placed upon the street or any
public right-of-way.
D. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to the
violations and penalties in § 278-6.
§ 278-7 PET WASTE § 278-7
271:493

ARTICLE I
Rental Certificates of Occupancy
§ 279-1. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this article shall have the
following meanings:
AGENT or MANAGER — An individual or individuals designated by the
owner as the person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty
imposed upon the owner by this article. The terms does not necessarily
mean a licensed real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey as
those terms are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include
a licensed real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such
a person designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow or other
dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms for dwelling purposes which
occupy all or part of a floor or floors in a building of one or more floors
or stories, but not the entire building, whether designated with or without
housekeeping facilities and notwithstanding whether the apartment is
designated for residential use or the operation of any industry or business
or any other type of independent use.
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof used for human
habitation, use or occupancy, and includes any accessory buildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoined therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms, suite or a part thereof, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more
persons, including but not limited to the owner thereof or any other
servants, agents or employees. This definition applies only to those dwelling
units, including single-family residences, which are available for lease or
rental purposes.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling unit
used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms containing no cooking
facilities, used for living purposes by a separate family or group of persons
living together or by a person living alone, within a building.
MANAGER — See the definition of “agent or manager.”
OWNER — The person who owns, purports to own or exercises control over
any building.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity or any combination thereof.
RENTAL UNIT — Includes the term "apartment" or "dwelling," "building,"
"dwelling unit," "habitable room" or "lodging unit" as defined by this
§ 279-1 PET WASTE § 279-1
271:495
chapter. This definition shall not apply to any single-family home which is
not available for rental purposes.
SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS — The number of individuals who may be
properly accommodated in the beds and other sleeping facilities located
within a rental unit. A standard single bed shall count as a proper
accommodation for one individual, and a standard double bed as a proper
accommodation for two individuals.
SUMMER LEASE/RENTAL — A fully furnished unit that will be rented
during the period of Memorial Day weekend to the first weekend after Labor
Day or for a portion of that time period.
TENANT — The person or persons to whom a rental unit is leased or rented
by the owner.
§ 279-2. Rental mercantile license required; forms.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units shall obtain a rental mercantile license as provided
herein. Every owner, either personally or through his agent, shall obtain
from the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee as said license for any
rental unit located within the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Said license
form shall include the following information:
A. The name and address of the record owner(s) of the premises and the
record owner(s) of the rental business, if not the same person(s). In the
case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners
shall be provided, together with the telephone numbers for each of such
individuals, indicating where such individuals may be reached both
during the day and evening hours.
B. If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the
registered agent and the name and address of the person to be
contacted for any reason regarding the rental unit, if other than the
registered agent.
C. If the address of any record owner is not located in the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, the owner shall designate an agent or manager who
resides in the Township of Little Egg Harbor and who is authorized by
the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the owner by this article.
D. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the record owner or manager or agent located in the
Township of Little Egg Harbor who may be reached or contacted at any
time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any rental
unit therein, including such emergencies as the failure of any essential
services or system, and who has the authority to make emergency
decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or expenditure
in connection therewith.
E. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
§ 279-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 279-2
271:496
§ 279-3. Public access to license forms. [Amended 6-14-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
The Zoning Officer or his designee shall index and file the license form and
make it reasonably available for public inspection. In doing so, the Zoning
Officer or his designee shall follow the mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1,
as amended and supplemented, so that the filing of the license form will
simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28, to
the extent that it applies to the property being registered and will also
satisfy the license requirements of this article. The Zoning Officer or his
designee shall maintain a master index of all such forms, and any person
may obtain a list of all properly licensed rental units upon payment of the
appropriate fees as listed on the ordinance fee schedule.
§ 279-4. Amendments to license forms.
Every person required to file a mercantile license form pursuant to this
article shall file an amended rental registration form within 20 days after
any change in the information required to be included thereon.
§ 279-5. Form to be provided to occupants; exceptions.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the form required by this article. This particular provision
shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guest house registered with the State
of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Motel Multiple Dwelling Law as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the form in a conspicuous place within the rental unit(s).
F. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
G. As to each rental unit, specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit and the exact number of sleeping
accommodations contained in each of the sleeping rooms, identifying
each sleeping room specifically by the number and location within the
rental unit and by the square footage thereof. In order to satisfy the
requirements of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan which
shall become a part of the registration application and which shall be
attached to the registration form when filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee.
H. The fee for the rental mercantile license shall be $50 for each premises,
which shall be submitted with the completed license form. [Added
6-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
I. Rental mercantile licenses shall expire each year on December 31. Each
license shall be required to submit a renewal application prior to such
expiration each year. [Added 6-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 279-2 PET WASTE § 279-6
271:497
§ 279-6. Limits on occupancy.
Each owner of a unit registered pursuant to this article shall be permitted
to lease or rent said rental unit to a number of registered tenants, which
number shall not exceed the number which has been computed in
accordance with the following:
§ 279-7. Violation of occupancy requirements; enforcement.
§ 279-8. Payment of taxes and charges required.
No rental unit shall be issued a rental mercantile license unless all
municipal taxes, water charges, sewer charges and other municipal
assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 279-9. Certification of inspection and occupancy.
A. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
B. Rental units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by
the minimum occupancy area requirements as set forth in this article. If
there is a discrepancy regarding the number of occupants permitted
pursuant to this article, the most restrictive requirement shall govern.
C. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of this article.
D. The maximum allowable number of people on any deck shall be one
person per nine square feet.
A. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for an owner or a
tenant of any registered rental unit to allow a number of people greater
than the permitted maximum number of occupants to rent or occupy
any dwelling unit. It shall also be a violation of this article for the owner
to lease a rental unit to a number or group of tenants which exceeds the
total number of sleeping accommodations which has been established
for said rental unit pursuant to this article. It shall also be unlawful for
any tenant or any owner of a dwelling unit to knowingly permit a
number of people greater than the maximum number of sleeping
accommodations to sleep in or occupy the dwelling unit overnight. It
shall also be unlawful for a tenant or an owner to allow a number of
people greater than the maximum number of people permitted to
occupy the decks or porches of a rental unit to occupy the decks or
porches of said rental unit.
B. The police officers of the Little Egg Harbor Police Department and the
officials of the Little Egg Harbor Code Enforcement Office are
authorized to issue a summons for a violation of this article to any
owner or tenant that is found to be in violation of this article.
§ 279-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 279-9
271:498
§ 279-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the penalties of N.J.S.A. 46:8-35, any person who violates any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of
the Township of Little Egg Harbor or such other court having jurisdiction,
be liable for a fine not exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or by any one or more of the above. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation subject to the penalty
provisions of this article. The penalties provisions contained in this article
will automatically be deemed altered and amended in conjunction with any
amendments to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
A. Every owner or agent shall obtain from the Township of Little Egg
Harbor a certificate of inspection and occupancy for each rental unit
which is within the boundaries of the Township of Little Egg Harbor and
is rented or leased for a period of 31 days or more prior to occupancy of
same.
B. Every owner or agent of a rental unit shall obtain from the Township of
Little Egg Harbor an initial certificate of inspection and occupancy for
each rental unit required to obtain the same pursuant to this article. For
each new rental which commences after the passage of this article,
every owner or agent of a rental unit which requires a certificate of
inspection and occupancy shall obtain said certificate of inspection and
occupancy from the Township of Little Egg Harbor at any time as
required by this article, including but not limited to any time a change
in one or more tenants occurs or any time the premises is rented or
leased for a period of 31 days or more.
C. Certificates of inspection and occupancy shall be obtained by making
applications to the Code Official of the Township of Little Egg Harbor or
his designee.
D. Once an application for a certificate of inspection and occupancy has
been made to the Township of Little Egg Harbor, the appropriate
officials shall conduct an inspection of the rental unit to determine if the
same complies with all applicable ordinances, codes, regulations and
statutes. If the determination is made that a rental unit is in compliance
with all ordinances, codes, regulations and statutes and it is further
determined that a current and valid rental mercantile license exists for
said rental unit and the appropriate fee has been paid for a certificate of
inspection and occupancy, said certificate of inspection and occupancy
will be issued by the appropriate officials of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor.
§ 279-9 PET WASTE § 279-10
271:499

ARTICLE II
Seasonal Property
§ 279-11. Purpose.
The Township of Little Egg Harbor and its residents are subject to
disturbances, and damage at public expenses resulting from carelessly
granted and inadequately supervised seasonal rentals of properties by inept
or indifferent landlords. To preserve the peace and tranquility of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor for the residents thereof, it is necessary and
desirable that the Township of Little Egg Harbor have adequate means to
curb and discourage those occasional excesses arising as a result of said
irresponsible seasonal rentals. Therefore, it is the specific purpose of this
article to enable the Township of Little Egg Harbor to take effective action
to assure that such excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated and
that landlords offering seasonal rentals shall be held to sufficient standards
of responsibility regarding the same. This article is adopted pursuant to the
authority granted in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n.
§ 279-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
HEARING OFFICER — A person designated pursuant to § 279-13 of this
article to hear and determine proceedings brought pursuant to this article
regarding posting and forfeiture of bonds/security.
LANDLORD — A person or persons, partnership, corporation or other entity
who owns or purports to own any building in which there is rented or
offered for rent housing space for living or dwelling under either a written
or oral lease, including but not limited to any buildings subject to the Hotel
and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and
owner-occupied two-unit premises.
SEASONAL RENTAL — Any rental of residential accommodations for a term
of less than one year and including any part of the period extending from
May 15 to September 15 of any given year.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — A complaint which forms the basis for
proceedings in accordance with § 279-16 of this article.
§ 279-13. Hearing officer.
Any hearings conducted and decisions rendered regarding posting and
forfeiture of bonds/security pursuant to this article shall be so conducted
and rendered by a licensed attorney of the State of New Jersey appointed
by the governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Said licensed
attorney of the State of New Jersey shall not be an owner or lessee of
any real property within the Township of Little Egg Harbor, nor shall said
licensed attorney hold any interest in the assets of or be entitled to the
profits arising from the ownership or lease of any such property within
§ 279-11 PET WASTE § 279-13
271:501
the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Nothing contained in this section shall
prevent said hearing officer from being the Judge within the Township of
Little Egg Harbor having jurisdiction over housing and like matters, as
long as said Housing Judge does not own or lease any property within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor or hold any interest in the assets or profits
arising from the ownership or lease of such property.
§ 279-14. Posting of bond under certain circumstances.
If, during any twelve-month period, three separate convictions in any court
of competent jurisdiction are obtained concerning three separate
complaints of disorderly, indecent, tumultuous or riotous conduct upon or
in proximity to any seasonal rental premises, and attributable to the acts
or incitements of any of the tenants of those premises, with all of said
complaints being filed on separate occasions, then the Township of Little
Egg Harbor or any officers or officials of said Township so designated may
institute proceedings which will require the landlord of the premises in
question to post a bond against the consequences of future incidents of the
same nature and character.
§ 279-15. Notice of hearing.
Upon conviction of three separate complaints as provided for in § 279-14
hereof, the Township of Little Egg Harbor or the officer or official thereof
as designated in § 279-13 shall cause to be served upon the landlord of
said premises, in person or by registered mail, to the address appearing on
the tax records of the municipality for that property, notice advising of the
institution of proceeds pursuant to this article, together with the particulars
of the substantiated complaints upon which said proceedings are based,
and of the time and place at which a hearing will be held in the matter,
which said hearing shall be in the municipal courtroom of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor or other such public place as designated within the
municipality. Said hearing shall not occur sooner than 30 days from the date
on which the notice required in this section is served or mailed.
§ 279-16. Landlord hearing.
At any hearing concerning a landlord which is convened pursuant to this
article, the hearing officer shall give a full hearing so as to allow both the
landlord and the municipality to submit any and all evidence, including any
evidence in contradiction or mitigation of the charges that the landlord
may present. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
determine whether the landlord shall be required to post a bond in
accordance with this article. Any party appearing at said hearing may be
represented by legal counsel.
§ 279-17. Amount and term of bond.
§ 279-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 279-17
271:502
§ 279-18. Complaints during period of bond or security.
If, during the period of time for which a landlord has been required to give
security or post a bond pursuant to this article, a conviction concerning
a complaint is recorded against the property in question, the Township of
Little Egg Harbor or its designee may institute proceedings against the
landlord for the forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the security or bond posted
and for an extension of the period of time for which said bond is required
to be posted and for an increase in the amount of security or bond which
is required to be posted or for any or all of those purposes. The amount
of any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or security posted shall
be determined by the hearing officer solely in accordance with the amount
A. If the hearing officer determines that a bond is required to be posted,
said bond shall be adequate in the case of subsequent offenses to make
reparation for:
(1) Damages likely to be caused to public or private property and
damages consequent upon disruption of the affected resident's
rights of fair use and quiet possession of his premises.
(2) Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for
such offenses.
(3) Compensating the municipality for the cost of representing and
prosecuting such incident of disorderly behavior.
B. The amount of said bond is to be determined in light of the nature and
extent of the offenses indicated in the substantial complaints but in no
event shall be an amount less than $500 or more than $5,000. The
Township of Little Egg Harbor may enforce the bond requirement by
bringing action in the Superior Court and shall be entitled to any
injunctive relief which prohibits the landlord from making or renewing
any lease of the affected premises for residential purposes until the
bond or equivalent security, in satisfactory form and amount, has been
deposited with the municipality. The Township of Little Egg Harbor may
also prohibit the registration pursuant to the rental registration
ordinances of the Township of Little Egg Harbor or the issuance of any
necessary permits or approvals, until said bond or equivalent security
has been so deposited.
C. In order for any bond or other security to be in compliance with this
article, the same must be deposited with the Township of Little Egg
Harbor and shall remain in full force for a period of four years. After
expiration of said four-year period, the landlord shall be entitled to
discharge of the bond unless prior thereto further proceedings leading
to a forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall
have been held pursuant to this article, in which case the security or
bond shall be renewed in an amount and the term extended as set forth
in § 279-18 of this article and for a period that shall be specified by the
hearing officer, but in no event for less than four years.
§ 279-17 PET WASTE § 279-18
271:503
deemed necessary to provide for the compensatory purpose as set forth in
§ 279-17 of this article. Any decision by the hearing officer to increase the
amount or extend the period of time of the required bond or security shall
be determined in light of the same factors as set forth in § 279-17 of this
article, and the amount taken as said forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the
bond or security posted shall be taken only to the extent that the nature
of the complaint or complaints out of which proceedings arose pursuant to
this article indicates the appropriateness of such amount in order to carry
out the purposes of this article effectually. Any increase in the amount of
bond or security to be posted or extension of time during which said bond
or security must be posted shall be enforceable in the same manner as
provided in § 279-17 of this article.
§ 279-18 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 279-18
271:504
Chapter 282
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 296. Water — See Ch. 333.
§ 282-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling, commercial and/or industrial purposes,
either temporary or permanent, or other use or occupancy by persons.
CONNECTION DATE — When used with respect to a building constructed
prior to the date of the initial operation, as part of any sanitary sewage
treatment and disposal system in the Township owned or operated by the
Township, the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority or any other
public authority, of a sewer available to serve said building, the 60th day,
next ensuing after the date of initial operation, and when used with respect
to a building constructed after the date of initial operation, as a part of any
sanitary sewage treatment and disposal system owned or operated by the
Township, the Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority or any other
public authority, of a sewer available to serve said building, the 60th day
after the date of completion of construction or the date of initial occupancy
of said building, whichever of said dates shall be earlier in point of time.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designed or used for collection or disposal of
sanitary sewage within the Township.
§ 282-2. Connection required; exception for Pinelands Area.
The owner of each property along the line of any sewer now or hereafter
constructed in the Township shall connect each building on such property
with a sewer prior to the connection date with respect to said building.
No such connections shall be required or permitted within the Pinelands
Area of Little Egg Harbor Township unless expressly permitted pursuant the
Land Development Chapter of this Code.
§ 282-3. Compliance with standards.
Every connection required by this chapter shall be made in conformance
with the plumbing subcode of the State Uniform Construction Code and
shall comply with all requirements of the plumbing subcode official of the
Township.
§ 282-4. Notice to connect.
§ 279-18 SEWERS § 282-4
282:505
A. Whenever any sewer is available to serve buildings on any properties in
the Township, the Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities
Authority shall notify each owner of property along the line of said
sewer to connect each building on such property with said sewer in
accordance with the terms of this chapter. The Secretary or any other
authorized person of the Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities
Authority shall be deemed the proper official to issue the notice to
connect. Said notice to connect shall state that the owner of said
property is required to connect each building on said property with a
sewer, in accordance with the terms of this chapter, on or before the
connection date with respect to each building. Said notice shall also
describe the penalty which may be imposed for failure to comply with
said notice and shall be sent by regular mail. Said notice shall advise
each owner of property that the Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal
Utilities Authority shall enforce the terms and provisions of Chapter
282 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(d) as empowered by Little Egg Harbor
Township, and that any inquiries with regard to the failure to connect
shall be addressed and forwarded to the Secretary of the Little Egg
Harbor Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
B. The Little Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall
order each owner of property along the line of said sewer to connect
each building on such property with said sewer in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and as empowered by Little Egg Harbor Township
as required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(d).
C. The Secretary or any other authorized person of the Little Egg Harbor
Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall be deemed the proper
official to issue the connection order required by § 282-4A of this
chapter. Such notice shall be addressed to the owner of the property as
the name of said owner appears in the last tax duplicate of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor and by the street address, if a street address exists,
and shall state that by order of the Little Egg Harbor Township
Municipal Utilities Authority the owner is required to connect each
building on said property with a sewer in accordance with the terms of
this chapter and as required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(d) on or before the
connection date with respect to such building or, if such connection
date shall have passed, within 60 days after service of such notice as
hereinafter provided, and said notice shall also describe the penalty
which may be imposed hereunder for failure to comply with said notice
and order in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The notice may
be served on the owner personally or by leaving it at the owner's usual
place of abode with a member of the owner's family above the age of 18
years. The notice may also be served within or without the limits of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor by mailing the same by registered mail to
the last known post office address of the owner as the same appears on
the last tax duplicate of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 282-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 282-5
282:506
§ 282-5. Waiver of connection.
Any owner may apply to the Township for a waiver or extension of time of
such connection and the Township may grant such waiver or extension of
time if the owner can demonstrate compelling reasons for such waiver or
extension of time or that an extreme hardship exists and that the granting
of the waiver or extension of time will not have an adverse effect upon the
water quality or environment of the immediate area.
§ 282-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or corporation who shall not comply with any order issued
in accordance with the provisions hereof within 30 days after notice by
the proper officer of the Township as hereinabove provided shall, upon
complaint by the Township of Little Egg Harbor and upon conviction, forfeit
and pay a fine of $25 and shall also forfeit and pay an additional fine of
$10 for each day of delay, after the expiration of said period of 60 days, in
which the provisions of the order or notice are not complied with. Penalties
under this chapter may be enforced in the Municipal Court of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 285
SIGNS
§ 285-1. Signs on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
business entity to staple, tape, tie, fasten or otherwise attach signs in the
public right-of-way or to Township property, public property and public
utility property, including, but not limited to, street signs and telephone or
utility poles. Any such sign which has been so attached shall be removed
immediately by the Township.
§ 285-2. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 282-5 SIGNS § 285-2
285:507
Chapter 286
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 261. Sale of tobacco — See Ch. 307.
§ 286-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the general public pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 by prohibiting smoking in
certain areas of the Township.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks,
playgrounds, and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor and all property owned or leased by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor upon which the public is invited or upon which the
public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities,
including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to,
any parking area, driveway or lane.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 286-3. Smoking prohibited in public places; signs.
A. Smoking is hereby prohibited in all municipal parks and recreational
facilities owned, leased or rented by the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. Notice of the prohibitions contained in this article shall be
conspicuously posted by signs stating "No Smoking" and shall reference
applicable Code provisions.
C. "No Smoking" signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
circle with a diagonal red line through its cross-section) shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this
chapter. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and indicate that
violators are subject to a fine.
§ 285-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 286-4
285:508
§ 286-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor.
§ 286-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250, and/or community service of
not more than 90 days, and/or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days in the Ocean County Jail or any combination of fine, community service
and imprisonment, as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge.
Chapter 287
SNOW EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management service — See Ch.
33.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 97.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 196.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
§ 287-1. Emergency contracts for snow emergencies.
In accordance with the authority granted within N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6, upon
a determination of a snow emergency, any contract may be negotiated or
awarded on behalf of the municipality without public advertising for bids
and bidding therefor, notwithstanding that the contract price will exceed
the bid threshold, when an emergency affecting the public health, safety
or welfare requires the immediate delivery of goods or the performance of
services, in the following manner:
A. The Superintendent of Public Works, upon the occurrence of a snow
emergency, shall notify the Township Administrator of the need for the
performance of a contract for snow plowing, snow removal, sanding,
salting and other needed service, the nature of the emergency, the time
of its occurrence and the need for invoking this section. A "snow
emergency" shall be considered to exist if a legitimate weather
forecasting agency predicts more than six inches of snow and/or
another weather-serious winter emergency, such as an ice storm, which
requires additional equipment and/or manpower, is imminent.
B. If the Township Administrator is satisfied that a snow emergency exists,
the Township Administrator shall direct the Superintendent of Public
Works to authorize the award of a contract or contracts to address the
snow emergency as may be necessary. The Township Administrator
shall file a report as to the award with the Division of Local Finance,
§ 286-4 SIGNS § 287-1
285:509
Chapter 290
SOIL REMOVAL, EXCAVATION AND MINING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 185.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Land development — See Ch. 212.
§ 290-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Soil Removal, Excavation and Mining
Ordinance."
§ 290-2. Determinations.
The governing body of the Township of Little Egg Harbor has made the
following determinations:
§ 290-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply as follows:
Department of Community Affairs, the Mayor, Committee, and Chief
Financial Officer as soon as practicable.
A. The unregulated and uncontrolled removal, relocation, filling and
excavation of soil by the owners of property within the Township is
likely to result and has resulted in conditions detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Township. The
unregulated and uncontrolled removal, relocation, filling or excavation
of soil in, on or from lands within the boundaries of the Township will
create one or more of the following conditions: a serious erosion by
wind and water; inadequate and improper or complete lack of surface
water drainage; decrease in or destruction of the fertility of the soil;
removal of lateral support of abutting streets, lands and premises; and
the creation of excessive amounts of dust and deposit of such dust and
siltation on adjoining property; the deposit on the streets of the
Township of large quantities of mud, dirt or dust; the deterioration of
adjoining property values; the rendering of lands unfit or unsuitable for
their most appropriate uses; and other conditions hampering and
interfering with the coordinated and harmonious physical development
of the Township.
B. Such stripping and removal operations are denuding the area involved
of all trees, underbrush, natural vegetation and topsoil and are creating
problems of erosion, siltation, dust and drainage, all of which are
detrimental to adjoining lands as well as to the health of the citizenry.
§ 287-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-3
285:510
§ 290-4. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following definitions:
APPLICANT — An individual, partnership or corporate entity who applies
for a soil removal permit in the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
COMMERCIAL MINING, EXCAVATING AND SOIL REMOVAL — The
digging, excavating or removal of sand, gravel, clay, ilmenite or stone for
the purpose of selling or with the knowledge that same or any part thereof
is to be sold, resold or used as a part of a commercial enterprise.
A. No owner, applicant, developer, excavator, subdivider or other person
shall engage in commercial mining, excavating and soil removal, as
defined herein, on any premises in the Township for use other than on
the premises from which it is taken, until obtaining a permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 11-13-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-20]
B. This chapter shall apply to all existing and proposed mining operations
in the Township, regardless of whether the existing operation is
conforming or nonconforming. All existing operations shall file for the
required permit within six months of the effective date of this chapter
or when the current soil removal permit expires, whichever is later.
C. This chapter shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To the removal of soil for building excavations, a private sewage
disposal system or landscaping.
(2) To the plowing, spading, cultivation, harrowing or disking of soil or
any operation usually associated with agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
(3) To any operations for the purposes of soil and water conservation
as defined or prescribed by the Soil Conservation Service of the
United States Department of Agriculture.
(4) To any site plan or subdivision application subject to review and
approval by the Township Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
pursuant to Chapter 15, Land Use and Development. [Added
11-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-20]
D. Soil removal permits are not required for projects involving the removal
of less than 1,000 cubic yards of soil, where the peculiar topographic
conditions existing on a property make it unusable for the purpose for
which it is zoned, and where the removal of soil, where properly
performed, may result in the benefit of the Township in the reclamation
of the property for its zoned use. This exemption shall not apply in the
Pinelands Area unless the activity is part of another Pinelands approved
development on the site.
§ 290-3 SIGNS § 290-4
285:511
EXCAVATOR — Any person engaged in the moving, removal or excavation
of soil or topsoil from, in or upon any land in the Township.46
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any land or having such
other interest or estate as will permit the exercise of effective possession,
dominion or control.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous parcels of land in single ownership
or control. Parcels shall not be deemed to be contiguous if separated by a
road, railroad, right-of-way, brook, stream or other natural division except
in the Pinelands Area where such separation shall not affect the contiguity
of land.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, gravel, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt,
irrespective of the presence or absence of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of the
earth, is composed of 2% or more weight of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation. Topsoil shall also include the overburden
stockpiled during clearing operations.
§ 290-5. Soil removal permission procedures.
General requirements:
A. All applications for soil removal must be approved by the Planning
Board. In order for a permit application to be considered at a Planning
Board meeting, the application, application fees and all documents
required by this chapter must be filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Board at least five weeks prior to the regular Planning Board
meeting.
B. The administrative officer of the Planning Board shall, within 45 days,
determine if the application is complete. If the application is deemed
complete, the Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing on the
application, said hearing to be held within 45 days. The applicant shall
be responsible for providing notice to all property owners within 500
feet of the premises and shall provide notice, as required by the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for a development
application. For applications in the Pinelands Area, the applicant must
notify the Pinelands Commission in compliance with the requirements
of Chapter 212, Land Development.
C. Upon deeming the application complete, the Planning Board shall
transmit copies of the application to the Township Engineer and
Township Environmental Commission for their review. The Engineer
shall report his findings in writing to the Planning Board within 30 days
of the date of referral. The Environmental Commission shall also submit
its recommendations on the application to the Planning Board within 30
days; however, if the Environmental Commission has not transmitted a
46.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “move,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 11-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-20.
§ 290-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-5
285:512
§ 290-6. Application and site plan requirements.
Unless the submission requirements are modified or waived by the Planning
Board, an application filed pursuant to this chapter shall include at least the
information listed below. The applicant shall file with the Planning Board
Secretary three application forms addressing the items listed below, as
well as 20 copies of the site plan map prepared in accordance with the
requirements specified in Chapter 212, Land Development, and the fees
specified in § 290-9A. In addition, the applicant must file the soil erosion
and sediment control permit issued by the Ocean County Soil Conservation
recommendation within the thirty-day period, it shall be deemed to
have taken no position with regard to the application.
D. The Planning Board shall, after reviewing the application, the report(s)
and holding the public hearing, take appropriate action by resolution.
An applicant who receives Planning Board approval may request the
Township Clerk to issue the necessary permit. Prior to issuance of the
permit, the Township Clerk and Township Engineer must find that all
fees are paid, bonds are posted and other requirements are met; both
the Township Engineer and Township Clerk must sign the permit in
order for the permit to become effective.
E. All permits shall be for a period of two years. No permits shall extend
beyond said maximum two-year period without submission and
approval of a new application. The renewal application must meet all
the requirements specified in this chapter, with the exception of the
inspection fees specified § 290-9C. [Amended 7-24-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-08]
F. Plans submitted as part of the permit application shall be developed in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 12:185 et seq., Rules and
Regulations for Pits and Quarries; Laws of New Jersey 1972, Chapter
418; N.J.A.C. 7:29 et seq., Noise Control; N.J.S.A. 34:6-98.1 et seq., Mine
Safety Act; U.S.P.L. 91-596; Chapter 212, Land Development; and other
such requirements that may be applicable.
G. Any mining operation must receive a soil erosion and sediment control
permit — mining permit from the Ocean County Soil Conservation
District in accordance with Chapter 451 of the Public Laws of 1980 of
the State of New Jersey. No permit may be issued by the Township and
no mining may commence until a copy of the Ocean County Soil
Conservation District permit has been filed with the Township Engineer,
Planning Board, Township Clerk and Code Enforcement Officer.
H. In addition to the above requirements, applicants for permits in the
Pinelands Area must comply with the requirements for development
specified in Chapter 212, Land Development. The Planning Board may
not deem the application complete unless it is accompanied by a
certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands Commission.
§ 290-5 SIGNS § 290-6
285:513
District and, if the project is in the Pinelands Area, the certificate of filing
issued by the Pinelands Commission.
A. The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
B. The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's, and the
owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
C. The legal description, i.e., block and lot number, and the street address,
if any, of the subject property.
D. The present use of the subject property.
E. A project site base map, at a scale of no less than one inch to 200 feet,
including the area extending 300 feet beyond each boundary of the
subject property, showing ownership boundary lines; the boundary of
the proposed development; owners of holdings, if any, adjoining and
adjacent to the subject property existing facilities; buildings and
structures on the site; all proposed development, wetlands, streams,
including intermittent streams, rivers, lakes and other water bodies;
and existing roads. On an annual basis, prepare a site plan of the area
to be mined at a scale not greater than one inch equals 50 feet showing
existing and proposed contours. In Pinelands Area, said location map
must also indicate all forest associations and wildlife habitats.
F. A soils map, including a county soils survey, in conformance with the
guidelines of the United States Department of Agricultural Soil
Conversation Service, at the same size and scale as the project site base
map, delineating all soil series at an appropriate level of detail.
G. For projects in the Pinelands Area, a resource capability map, at the
same size and scale as the project site base map, indicating the
cumulative limitations to development due to the standards and
guidelines contained in the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan.
H. A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map, showing
existing vegetation and identifying the significant vegetation types in
the area.
I. A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map, showing
stormwater drainage patterns and calculations and the applicant's
proposed stormwater runoff management plan, including results of
percolation tests and soil borings performed in the recharge area,
together with letters of review and comment from the local Soil
Conservation District and County Engineer.
J. All public utility agreements or other documentation evidencing the
availability of electric, gas, water, sewer and other necessary public
services.
§ 290-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-6
285:514
K. For applications in the Pinelands Area, the cultural resource survey
described in Chapter 212, Land Development.
L. A list of all permits required for the proposed development from county,
municipal, state and federal agencies.
M. A topographic map, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing the
proposed dimensions, location and operations on the subject property.
N. A United States Geological Survey quadrangle map showing the
dimensions of the property and an area of at least 1,000 feet beyond
such boundary in all directions. For applications in the Pinelands Area,
USGS Quadrangle Map or copy thereof and a copy of the municipal tax
map sheet on which the boundaries of the subject property in the
Pinelands Management Area designation and zoning designation are
shown.
O. The location, size and intended use of all existing and proposed
buildings.
P. The location of all points of ingress and egress.
Q. The location of all existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way, as
well as those included within the area to be mined, showing spot
elevations at fifty-foot intervals. For applications in the Pinelands Area
of the Township, railroad rights-of-way must also be indicated.
R. The location and message to be shown on all signs as required by
N.J.A.C. 12:185-10.4.
S. The plan shall show existing and proposed noise contours, and the
application shall indicate the methods to be used to comply with the
Township's noise standards.47
T. A reclamation plan which includes:
(1) The method of stockpiling topsoil and overburden.
(2) The proposed grading and final elevations shall show contours at
two-foot intervals (existing and proposed).
(3) Topsoil material application and preparation.
(4) The type, quantity and age of vegetation to be used.
(5) Fertilizer application, including methods and rates.
(6) Maintenance requirements schedule.
(7) Planting method and schedules.
U. An estimate in cubic yards of the quantity of soil, topsoil and materials
to be removed and/or mined.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Noise.
§ 290-6 SIGNS § 290-6
285:515
§ 290-7. Resource extraction standards.
Resource extraction operations shall be approved only if the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed resource extraction operation:
V. A statement from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to
date.
W. A list of owners of the organization or partnership having 10% or more
of its shares of stock, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1.
X. For applications in the Pinelands Area, the following additional
requirements:
(1) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development; and
(2) A signed acknowledgment from both the owner and the applicant
that they are responsible for any resource extraction activities
which are contrary to any provision of this chapter or of the
approved resource extraction plan done by any agent, employee,
contractor, subcontractor or any other person authorized to be on
the parcel by either the owner or the applicant; and
(3) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and
(4) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the
Township, evidence of Pinelands Commission review pursuant to
Chapter 212, Land Development.
A. Is designed so that no area of excavation, sedimentation pond, storage
area, equipment or machinery or other structure or facility is closer
than:
(1) Two hundred feet to any property line.
(2) One thousand five hundred feet to any residential or non-resourceextraction-
related commercial use which is in existence on the date
the permit is issued.
(3) Three hundred feet from any wetland as defined in Chapter 212,
Land Development, unless the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.14 are
met.
B. Is to be located on a parcel of land of at least 20 acres.
C. Provides that all topsoil that is necessary for restoration will be stored
on the site and will be protected from wind or water erosion.
D. Is fenced or blocked so as to prevent unauthorized entry into the
resource extraction operation through access roads.
§ 290-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-7
285:516
E. Provides ingress to and egress from the resource extraction operation
from public roads by way of gravel or porous paved roadways.
F. Is designed so that the surface runoff will be maintained on the parcel
in a manner that will provide for on-site recharge to groundwater.
G. Will not involve excavation below the seasonal high water table, unless
the excavation will serve as a recreational or wildlife resource or a
water reservoir for public, agricultural or industrial uses or for any
other use authorized in the area in which the site is located; provided
that in no case shall excavation have a depth exceeding 65 feet below
the natural surface of the ground existing prior to excavation unless it
can be demonstrated that a depth greater than 65 feet will result in no
significant adverse impact relative to the proposed final use or on offsite
areas:
(1) Maximum pond size: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum pond size: five acres.
(3) Maximum depth of water in pond: 35 feet.
(4) Variances shall be required from the Little Egg Harbor Township
Planning Board to permit any excavation below an inwater depth of
30 to 35 feet or of ponds in excess of 20 acres or fewer than five
acres in area.
H. Will be carried out in accordance with an extraction schedule which
depicts the anticipated sequence, as well as the anticipated length of
time that each of the twenty-acre units of the parcel proposed for
extraction will be worked. This shall not preclude more than one
twenty-acre unit from being worked at any one time, provided that
there is a demonstrated need for additional units, restoration is
proceeding on previously mined units and the area of clearing does not
exceed that specified in Subsection J below.
I. Will involve restoration of disturbed areas at the completion of the
resource extraction operation in accordance with the requirements of
§ 290-8, Restoration standards, of this chapter, and the implementation
of the restoration plan is secured by a surety bond.
J. Will not involve clearing adjacent to ponds in excess of 20 acres or an
area necessary to complete scheduled operations; or will not involve
unclaimed clearing exceeding 100 acres for 50% of the area to be
mined, whichever is less, for surface excavation at any time.
K. Temporary slopes. All slopes shall be graded to a four-to-one slope if
operations cease for more than two weeks.
L. Dust control measures shall be taken to ensure compliance with all
state, county and local regulations.
§ 290-7 SIGNS § 290-7
285:517
M. Maintenance of all roads leading to excavation areas from the streets,
roads, highways and thoroughfares in the Township is the responsibility
of the applicant to whom said permit is issued; all such roads used by
the applicant shall be maintained by him in a safe and usable condition
for public use. All access roads shall be paved and maintained to control
dust.
(1) Maintenance of traffic safety. It shall be the responsibility of the
mining permit holder to maintain a safe traffic flow on the mining
site, the access road to the mining site and at the point or points at
which the access road enters any public highway. Appropriate
signs, as approved by Township Engineer, shall be placed along the
public highway warning approaching motorists of the intersection
of the access road with the public highway and of heavy truck
traffic entering the public highway.
(2) Access to public highways.
(a) All mining operations shall have a direct means of access to a
dedicated public highway, street or thoroughfare. If such
access requires traveling through properties outside the
mining tract, the mining operator shall secure access
easements from the property owners through whose land
access is required. A map of the access route and copies of the
executed access agreements shall be provided both to the
Zoning Officer and the Township Engineer. The mining
operator shall be required to construct and maintain a safe,
adequate, all-weather haul road of sufficient width to allow
safe, simultaneous two-way travel of trucks and mining
equipment. All access roads shall be shown on the mining plan.
Plans and profiles of such proposed haul roads shall be
provided to the Township Engineer for review and approval.
(b) Maintenance of all access and haul roads leading from mining
areas to public roads, streets or thoroughfares shall be the
responsibility of the mining operator to whom the mining
permit has been issued and shall be maintained in a safe and
usable condition at all times.
(c) The mining operator shall be responsible for the immediate
cleanup of any mined materials spilled on the public roads on
to which the mining operation haul road enters.
(d) All mining operation access and haul roads shall be properly
maintained to eliminate dust or mud conditions. Only those
dust palliative measures deemed by the Engineer to be
environmentally acceptable shall be permitted; the use of road
oiling or calcium chloride as dust palliative is expressly and
strictly prohibited.
(e) Access to the mining operation shall be solely by means of the
access road(s) as shown on the approved mining plan. All other
§ 290-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-7
285:518
§ 290-8. Restoration standards.
All parcels of land which are used for resource extraction operations shall
be restored as follows:
possible means of access shall be fenced or blocked to prevent
unauthorized entry.
N. In the Pinelands Area, will not result in a substantial adverse impact
upon those significant resources of Little Egg Harbor Township as
depicted on the Special Areas Map Figure 7.1 of the Comprehensive
Management Plan.
A. Restoration shall be a continuous process, and each twenty-acre section
of the parcel shall be restored within two years after resource
extraction is completed for that portion. In the Pinelands Area, each
twenty-acre portion of the parcel shall be restored such that ground
cover be established within two years and tree cover established within
three years after resource extraction is completed for each twenty-acre
portion of the site mined.
B. Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time frame set out
in the extraction schedule required in § 290-7.
C. Drainage flows, including direction and volume, shall be restored to the
maximum extent practical to those flows existing at the time the
resource extraction operation was initiated.
(1) The slope of the surface of restored upland areas shall not exceed
one foot vertical to four feet horizontal.
(2) Any body of water created by the resource extraction operation
shall have a shoreline not less than three feet above and three feet
below the projected average water table elevation. The shoreline
both above and below the surface water elevation shall have a slope
of not less than five feet horizontal to one foot vertical. This
requirement shall apply to any water body or portion of a water
body created after December 5, 1994. For any water body or
portion of a water body created prior to December 5, 1994, this
requirement shall apply to the extent that it does not require
grading of areas which have not been disturbed by mining
activities. Where grading would require such disturbance, a
reduction in the distance of the graded shoreline above and below
the average water table elevation shall be permitted.
(3) Slopes beyond a water body's shoreline shall be permitted at the
natural angle of repose to the bottom of the pond.
D. Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality and quantity
as existed at the time the resource extraction operation was initiated.
All topsoil removed shall be stockpiled and used for the next area to be
§ 290-7 SIGNS § 290-8
285:519
§ 290-9. Fees, bond and insurance.
restored, unless it is immediately reused for reclamation that is
currently underway.
E. All equipment, machinery and structures, except for structures that are
usable for recreational purposes or any other use authorized in the
area, shall be removed within six months after the resource extraction
operation is terminated and restoration is completed.
F. Reclamation shall, to the maximum extent practical, result in the
reestablishment of the vegetation association which existed prior to the
extraction activity and shall include:
(1) Stabilization of exposed areas by establishing ground cover
vegetation; and
(2) Reestablishment of the composition of the natural forest and shrub
types that existed prior to the extraction activity through one of the
following:
(a) The planting of a minimum of 1,000 one-year-old pitch pine
seedings or other native Pinelands tree species per acre in a
random pattern;
(b) Cluster planting of characteristic Pinelands oak species, such
as blackjack oak, bear oak, chestnut oak and black oak, and
shrubs, such as black huckleberry, sheep laurel and mountain
laurel, at a spacing sufficient to ensure establishment of these
species;
(c) A combination of the planting techniques set forth in
Subsection F(2)(a) and (b) above; or
(d) The use of other planting techniques or native Pinelands
species as may be necessary to restore the vegetation
association which existed prior to the extraction activity.
G. In the Pinelands Area, all restored areas shall be graded so as to
conform to the natural contours of the parcel to the maximum extent
possible. Grading techniques that help to control erosion and foster
revegetation shall be utilized.
A. Application fee.
(1) At the time of application to the Planning Board, a nonrefundable
fee for application and review shall be paid to the Township in
accordance with the following:
§ 290-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-9
285:520
Area
(cubic yards) Fee
0 to 10,000 or part thereof $1,500
10,001 to 50,000 $2,000
50,001 to 300,000 $3,000
300,001 to 1,000,000 $4,000
1,000,001 or more $5,000
(2) The fee schedule contained herein represents estimated costs to
the Township related to the land development review process.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the applicable board from
requiring the applicant to reimburse the Township for all
professional review costs of the application as determined by the
Township Treasurer. The fees are nonreturnable if the application
for the permit is denied by the Planning Board or withdrawn.
(3) The fee determined for permit renewal shall be based upon as-built
quantities from the prior permit. If the previous fee was excessive
for the actual amount of soil removed, then a credit shall be
applied, and if the actual amount of soil removed is greater, then
the increased permit cost shall be made a part of the fee for permit
renewal.
B. Bonds.
(1) No mining permit will be issued until the applicant has posted with
the Township a performance bond naming the Pinelands
Commission and the Township as the obligee if the application is
for soil removal in the Pinelands Area in a form and with a surety
that is acceptable to the Township and in an amount that the
Planning Board Engineer deems to be reasonable, using the
following as a standard.
(2) The performance bond will be conditioned upon the full and faithful
performance by the applicant, within the time specified in the
application, of all the proposed work in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and of the soil removal permit issued
pursuant thereto.
(3) In the Pinelands Area, the letter of credit, surety bond, or other
guarantee of performance which secures restoration for each
section shall be released after the requirements of § 290-8A
through G above are determined by the Township as being met and
is replaced with a maintenance guarantee for a period of two years
thereafter.
C. The applicant shall fund an escrow account to reimburse the Township
for the costs of annual inspections required by this chapter. The escrow
§ 290-9 SIGNS § 290-9
285:521
§ 290-10. Enforcement.
The Township Engineer or his authorized representative shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. He shall, from time to time, upon his own
initiative, and whenever directed by the Township Committee, inspect the
premises for which permits have been granted to ensure compliance with
the terms of the permit of this chapter. He shall report all violations to
the Township Committee and take any action deemed necessary in the
circumstances.
§ 290-11. Payment of Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer shall be paid for his services at fees on an hourly
basis.
§ 290-12. Inspection; reports.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, any authorized officer, agent or employee of the Township shall
have the right to enter any land where mining operations are being
conducted, in order to examine and inspect the land and the operation. Sites
shall be inspected and a report will be filed with the Township Committee
twice a year.
§ 290-13. Revocation of permit.
The Township Engineer may, upon written notice, revoke the soil removal
permit for violation of this chapter. The minimum revocation shall be for
a period of 10 calendar days. The Township Committee shall review and
confirm and/or modify actions of the Township Engineer relating to
revocation at the next Committee meeting following the action of the
Township Engineer.
§ 290-14. Violations and penalties.
amount shall be determined by the Township Engineer in an amount
necessary to cover the annual review fee.
D. Liability insurance. The applicant shall provide, not later than 10 days
after approval, a certificate of public liability insurance issued to him
wherein the Township is named as coinsured for damages arising out of
any activity of the applicant, under a permit issued in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The minimum amount of liability
insurance that will be considered to be acceptable will be $5,000,000.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
§ 290-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 290-14
285:522
Chapter 293
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 222.
Pet waste — See Ch. 271.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 273.
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 290-14 SIGNS § 290-14
285:523

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste
[Amended 4-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
§ 293-1. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any dwelling house, store or other
building to place or cause or suffer to be placed upon any street, sidewalk,
gutter, areaway or public place any garbage, rubbish, ash and recyclable
materials except in compliance with the provisions of this article and Article
II, Recycling, of this chapter, as applicable.
§ 293-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASH — The residue from the burning of coal or other fuel and shall include
accumulations of dirt or floor sweepings made up mostly of noncombustible
materials.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any man-made
physical structure including houses, buildings, industrial or commercial
facilities, and roadways by a developer or contractor. Does not include
amounts of such debris which are created by minor projects undertaken by
a homeowner or residential tenant when the amount of debris fits within the
Township-provided automated trash and recycling containers.
BULK ITEMS — Any large items that are not easily combustible or
disposable such as refrigerators, car parts, boat motors, water heaters,
metal cabinets, and other similar items.
GARBAGE — The refuse of animal or vegetative matter; noncombustible
debris composed of natural or man-made materials; unwanted trash.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL(S) — Those materials which would otherwise
become municipal solid waste and which may be collected, separated or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products. This term is intended to have the same meaning as
utilized within Article II, Recycling, of this Chapter 293 of the Township
Code.
RUBBISH — Combustible debris, such as rags, mattresses, discarded
wearing apparel, furniture, carpets, rubber and refuse.
§ 293-3. Rules and regulations.
The following regulations shall govern the collection and removal of
garbage, rubbish, ash and recyclable materials:
A. Occupants of any dwelling, house, or other residential building shall
place the materials described in this article for collection in an
§ 293-1 SIGNS § 293-3
285:525
appropriate place on the curb in front of such dwelling house, store or
other building, after separation in appropriate separate containers. The
owner of the said dwelling house or other residential building shall be
jointly and concurrently responsible for the compliance with the terms
of this article by all occupants of the same.
B. All garbage and rubbish containing food waste shall be kept in
containers or bags which do not leak and do not absorb liquids. If bags
are utilized, they must be enclosed within the Township-provided
automated trash containers, the fees for which are established by
§ 293-7.
C. Each container shall be placed for collection at the curbline in a place
which is easily accessible and at least three feet from any obstacle
adjacent to the road if no curb exists.
D. Additional solid waste containers procured by the property owner for
curbside pick-up must be compatible with the Township's automated
trash collection system.
E. There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all of the
garbage and rubbish containing food waste which accumulates
between periods of removal from the premises. Residents are permitted
to purchase additional containers if necessary.
F. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to a
length not to exceed four feet and not wider than four inches in
circumference before being deposited just inside the curbline for
collection.
G. Leaves shall be loosely piled on the curbside for collection. No bags or
bundling of leaves is permitted. No leaves may be burned in any street
or highway. Leaves may also be brought to the Township Department of
Public Works for disposal.
H. All grass, weeds and similar growths shall be placed in a Townshipprovided
automated trash container for nonrecyclable items so they
may be readily emptied into the municipal collection vehicle. No bag
shall be utilized for the disposal of grass, weeds and similar growths.
I. If any container of garbage or refuse is upset or overturned, other than
by Township employees engaged in garbage and refuse collection, the
property owner, tenant or other person placing garbage for municipal
collection shall promptly clean up such spilled garbage and restore it to
the garbage can.
J. If any container of garbage or refuse is upset or overturned by a
Township employee, they shall immediately collect such garbage and
dispose of same in the municipal garbage truck.
K. No person shall place any of the items referred to in this section in any
street or highway, either for municipal collection or other disposal.
§ 293-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 293-3
285:526
L. The use of fifty-five-gallon drums or drums of greater size as containers
is strictly prohibited.
M. Any containers deemed unacceptable due to the contents thereof shall
be affixed with a red tag. In the event that a container is affixed with a
red tag, it shall be a violation of this chapter to attempt to dispose of the
contents through the Township's solid waste collection program.
N. Garbage or other refuse shall be placed for municipal collection at the
curb or street line no sooner than 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the
designated day for collection and no later than 6:00 a.m. on the
designated day for collection. Township employees will not be
responsible for picking up any garbage or refuse which is placed for
municipal collection in violation of these time restrictions. All garbage
containers must be removed from the curb by the property owner,
tenant, or other person placing garbage for municipal collection, the
same day that garbage or other refuse is collected, unless suitable rack
is provided for receptacle storage.
O. Collection of bulk items shall only occur on days designated by the
Township.
P. Township employees shall not be responsible for discarding building
materials and debris from any site within the Township. This is the
responsibility of the owner and/or builder, and no such discarded
building materials or debris shall be placed for municipal collection.
Building materials and debris must be brought to a County landfill or
other suitable disposal site. Building materials may not be brought to
the Township Department of Public Works.
Q. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump garbage, rubbish, ash or
recyclable materials upon any public property of the Township or to
trespass upon the property of another and deposit said materials
thereon.
R. No person shall break into any container of garbage, rubbish, ash or
recyclable materials that may be found upon the streets or sidewalks of
the Township, nor shall any owner or occupant permit the same to
occur with regard to such garbage, rubbish, ash or recyclable materials
placed at or near the curb for collection.
S. No garbage, rubbish, ash or recyclable materials shall be collected by
the Township from any manufacturing, commercial office or other
business establishment. Any manufacturing, commercial or other
business establishment, including nonprofit organizations, that
receives Township solid waste collection services (for either Townshipprovided
automated trash containers or commercial dumpsters) as of
April 1, 2018 shall, either pursuant to past practice or to a resolution of
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, be entitled to continuation
of such service at no greater than the level of service provided as of
April 1, 2018, only until such time as a relevant manufacturing,
commercial or other business establishment or nonprofit organization
§ 293-3 SIGNS § 293-3
285:527
§ 293-4. Presumption created by curb placement.
When any of the items named in or referred to in this chapter are placed
at or just inside the curbline, it shall be assumed same are so placed for
municipal garbage and refuse collection and disposal.
§ 293-5. Noncollection of garbage and refuse.
No municipal employee shall be obligated to collect any garbage or refuse
unless and until said garbage or refuse is prepared for collection and
disposal as referred to and directed in this chapter.
§ 293-6. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Property Maintenance Official, or their
designees, and the Ocean County Department of Health are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening
of solid waste bags.
§ 293-7. Fees for automated trash and recycling containers.
The following fees and charges are hereby established for automated trash
containers:
§ 293-8. Days of collection.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall determine the days of the week
when collections shall be made, and public notice shall be given to the
Township residents.
§ 293-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity who or which violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $200, nor more than $2,000, and/or a term of community
service of not more than 90 days, and/or by a term of imprisonment not
ceases operation or a relevant manufacturing, commercial or other
business establishment changes ownership. Governmental offices or
operations shall receive Township solid waste services pursuant to past
practice as of April 1, 2018, as authorized by a shared service or other
appropriate agreement.
A. Thirty-five-gallon container: $45 each.
B. Sixty-five-gallon container: $50 each.
C. Ninety-five-gallon container: $55 each.
D. Ninety-six gallon container: $55 each.
§ 293-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 293-9
285:528
to exceed 90 days in the Ocean County Jail or any combination of fine,
community service and imprisonment, as determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Each day for which a violation of this article occurs
shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 293-9 SIGNS § 293-9
285:529

ARTICLE II
Recycling
§ 293-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Ocean County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling are: commingled (bottles,
glass and cans), newspaper, mixed paper (magazines, catalogues, junk mail,
used writing paper), leaves, white goods, newspaper, cardboard, high-grade
office paper, tree parts, leaves, ferrous and nonferrous scrap metal.
DUAL STREAM —
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; cathode ray tubes, cathode ray tube devices, flat panel displays
or similar video display devices with screens that are greater than four
inches measured diagonally and that contain one or more circuit boards,
including televisions and cell phones.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes [See
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13(a).] and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13-A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the Township Committee who shall be authorized to, among
other things, enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
by residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SINGLE STREAM — The combination of commingled and paper, listed
above, in one container; does not include plastic bags, food waste, paper
Commingled; all plastic bottles, aluminum and steel cans, glass bottles
and containers.
A.
Paper: magazines, catalogues, junk mail, used writing paper, newsprint,
corrugated cardboard, office and school paper; no chipboard or pizza
boxes.
B.
§ 293-10 SIGNS § 293-10
285:531
towels, paper napkins, pizza boxes, egg cartons, aluminum foil, plastic cups
and utensils; no plastic other than bottles; no juice boxes or bags; no
garbage.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 293-11. Mandatory source separation.
It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, tenants or occupants
of residential and nonresidential premises, which shall include but not be
limited to retail or other commercial locations, as well as government,
schools and other institutional locations within the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, to separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste.
Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from
other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a clean and safe
manner to coincide with the designated recycling schedule.
§ 293-12. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy. All uses, except for single- and twofamily
dwellings, shall comply with the requirements of § 15-11.18, Solid
waste management.48
§ 293-13. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
A. All commercial or institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or its designee, unless the municipality provides for the
collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Land Development.
§ 293-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 293-13
285:532
§ 293-14. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13(a) and 13:1E-99.16(c):
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report, on an
annual basis, to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as
may be prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products and maintain such records as may be
prescribed for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
E. All nonresidential uses shall comply with the requirements of
§ 293-14.1, Solid waste management. [Amended 4-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-03]
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amount of solid
waste and recyclables generated at the proposed development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, the owner of any new multifamily housing or
commercial, institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in
those instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the municipal engineer.
§ 293-13 SIGNS § 293-14
285:533
§ 293-14.1. Solid waste management. [Amended 4-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-03]
D. All uses, except for single- and two-family dwellings, shall comply with
the requirements of § 293-14.1, Solid waste management. [Amended
4-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
A. Provisions shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage
and refuse.
B. Outside garbage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas
approved by the municipal agency. Such areas shall, as nearly as may
be practicable, be shielded from public view and protected by adequate
fencing and/or screening.
C. Screening of refuse areas. These areas adjacent to or within the
parking area designated as refuse storage and pickup areas shall be
properly screened to prevent the unsightly display and the scattering of
debris. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) The area shall be surrounded on all sides by a uniform solid fence
or masonry wall not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in
height. The fence or wall shall be located and be of such type as to
promote safety and ensure against creation of an unsightly
condition. The fence must at all times be maintained so as to be
kept in a sound, upright, fully repaired and painted condition or, if
not painted, shall be made of such material as does not corrode,
rust or change appearance if left unpainted. The opening in the
fence or wall shall be so located as to prevent the visual display of
refuse from any adjacent parking area, building, street or site.
(2) In addition, the fence or wall shall be of a design which is
consistent with the architectural design of the principle building on
the site or the style of the neighborhood, including gates, which
shall screen from view, entirely, the refuse containers and refuse
storage areas.
(3) No refuse enclosure or area shall be located in any area considered
to be a front yard or in any area of a site which fronts on any street.
(4) In addition to the fence or wall, plantings such as dense shrubs or
trees shall be planted around the refuse enclosure to further screen
the enclosure and enhance the enclosure aesthetically.
D. Debris.
(1) Materials accumulated by clearing, grubbing and excavation, as
above described, shall be disposed of by the developer in a manner
satisfactory to the Engineer, except that materials suitable for
embankment shall be used for that purpose if needed therefore.
Burying of the above materials will not be permitted in any case.
§ 293-14 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 293-14.1
285:534
(2) At the time of the tender of a plan for final approval for subdivision
of real estate in this municipality, an estimate shall be made, for
and on behalf of the municipality, by the Township Engineer as to
the cost of removal of the development debris for the development.
Before final approval of the plan, such estimate furnished by the
Township Engineer shall be included in the guaranty to be
furnished by the developer.
(3) The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a constant
check on debris from the subdivision of land and construction of
buildings and shall not permit accumulations in any real estate
development. In the event that there is any substantial
accumulation of such debris in any development, the Building
Inspector shall forthwith give written notice to the developer to
remove such debris from the real estate development. In the event
that such debris is not promptly removed, the Building Inspector is
hereby authorized and directed to refrain from giving certificates
of occupancy for building permits until the debris is cleared up and
removed.
(4) Whenever the subgrade is established to be coincident with the
existing ground surface, the vegetation and underlying topsoil of
the existing ground surface within the excavation and embankment
areas shall be stripped off to a depth of not less than four inches
and not more than six inches. Street and roadway excavation shall
be carried out so that the subgrade throughout the work is kept
properly drained.
(5) Excavated materials shall be placed in an embankment when
suitable therefore or shall be used for backfill or other purposes.
Material in excess of that required shall be disposed of by the
developer, contractor or subcontractor.
(6) Borrow excavation for road construction shall include the
furnishing, transporting, placing and consolidating of materials
required for embankment in excess of that obtained from other
excavations and other incidental work. All borrow excavation shall
be suitable for embankment and approved by the Township
Engineer.
E. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) In all districts permitting such an operation, use or any activity
involving the manufacture, utilization or storage of flammable,
combustible and/or explosive materials, such storage shall be
conducted in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the
Department of Labor and Industry of New Jersey or the Fire Code
of the National Fire Protection Association, whichever is more
restrictive.
(2) All flammable, explosive and/or combustible material shall be
stored in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association
§ 293-14.1 SIGNS § 293-14.1
285:535
§ 293-15. Collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable materials
prohibited.
§ 293-16. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Property Maintenance Official, or their
designees, and the Ocean County Department of Health are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening
solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable
material.
§ 293-17. Violations and penalties; Municipal Recycling Trust Fund.
or the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry Code,
whichever is more restrictive. All outdoor storage facilities for
fuel, raw materials and products and equipment stored outdoors,
wherever permitted, shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence
and visual screen and shall conform to all yard requirements
imposed upon the principal buildings in the district.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers that are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 293-14.1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 293-17
285:536
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity who or which violates or
fails to comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $2,000. Each
day for which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund.
Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for the
expenses of the municipal recycling program.
§ 293-17 SIGNS § 293-17
285:537
Chapter 294
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 261.
§ 294-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Shall be deemed to include but not be limited to
any block party, parade, contest, carnival, musical event, circus or other
organized group of 25 or more people having a common purpose or goal,
desiring to use public property owned by the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
or any park as defined within Chapter 261, as well as proceedings along a
public street or other public right-of-way. Special events shall include any
event which will require use of a portion of Township property for sole use
by a person, people or an organized group to the exclusion of the general
public.
§ 294-2. Application procedure.
A. A person seeking the issuance of a permit to carry on a special event
shall file an application with the Township Clerk. The application shall
state:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person applying
for the permit. The person requesting the permit shall be deemed
the contact person for the event unless otherwise specified. If a
second person is specified as the contact person for the event, then
that person's name, address and telephone number shall also be
provided.
(2) If the use or activity is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any
person other than the applicant, the name, address and telephone
number of that person.
(3) The exact nature of the use or activity for which the permit is being
sought.
(4) The number of agents or representatives of the organization
hosting the special event who will be present at the time of and
during the special event shall be provided. Names of such agents
and representatives shall be provided. Some identifying clothing or
accessory, such as name tags, shall be worn by each representative
or agent so as to make such persons readily identifiable.
§ 293-17 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 294-2
285:538
§ 294-3. Standards for issuance of permit.
(5) The date the special event is to be conducted and the hours it will
commence and terminate.
(6) The Township property desired to be used, or if a park, the park
and the portion of the park desired to be used to carry out the
proposed special event.
(7) Whether any music will be provided, either live or recorded.
(8) The number, types and locations of all loudspeakers and amplifying
devices to be used.
(9) The activities planned for the event, the estimated number of
persons to participate and/or attend, and the number and types of
vehicles (if any) to participate participate and/or attend, and the
number and types of vehicles (if any) to participate.
B. Applications shall be filed not less than 21 days nor more than 60 days
before the date of the proposed use or activity.
C. A fee of $25 to cover the expenses incident to processing the
application.
D. Upon submission of an application for a special event and acceptance of
the appropriate fee, the Township Clerk shall review the application for
completeness and forward said application to the Chief of Police and
the Township Administrator for review in accordance with § 294-3.
A. Chief of Police.
(1) The Township Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police of the special
event application and request that the area of the proposed area be
inspected using the following criteria:
(a) The conduct and location of the special event will not
substantially interrupt or impede the safe and orderly
movement of traffic.
(b) The conduct of the special event will not be likely to result in
damage to persons or property nor cause serious harm to the
public.
(c) The conduct of the special event will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment to such an extent that
adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the Township.
(d) Such other concerns deemed necessary in order to properly
provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance
and the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(2) If the Chief of Police determines that the above criteria are
satisfied, he or she shall sign the application, indicating whether
§ 294-2 SIGNS § 294-3
285:539
§ 294-4. Conditions contained in permit.
said application is approved and any special conditions required,
and return same to the Township Clerk.
B. Township Administrator.
(1) The Township Clerk shall forward a special event application to the
Township Administrator for determination and approval in
accordance with the following:
(a) Any special event permit issuance shall be contingent upon the
Township Administrator providing for the closing of the street
or streets which are the subject of the special event
application, to be determined in accordance with Chapter 323,
Vehicles and Traffic, Article XIV, Closing Municipal Streets for
Preservation of Public Safety, Health or Welfare, §§ 323-24 and
323-25.
(b) If the proposed activity or use for the special event will
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
use and enjoyment of the park or Township property, the
permit shall not be approved.
(c) If the proposed activity or use will entail an extraordinary
expense or operation by the Township, the permit shall not be
approved.
(2) If the Township Administrator determines that the above criteria
are satisfied, he or she shall sign the application, indicating
whether said application is approved and return the application to
the Township Clerk.
C. Upon the satisfaction of the conditions contained in § 294-3A and B
above, the Township Clerk shall issue a permit unless he or she finds
that the facilities desired have been reserved for another activity or use
on the day and at the hour requested in the application.
A. The Township may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions on the
granting of a permit, including, but not limited, to any of the following:
(1) Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, use of alcoholic
beverages, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment or vehicles,
the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand
or stage, or any other use which appears likely to create a risk of
unreasonable harm to the use and enjoyment of the park by others
or of damage to park property.
(2) A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable security deposit
for the repair of any damage to park property or the cost of
cleanup, or both.
§ 294-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 294-4
285:540
(3) A requirement that the permittee submit evidence of liability
insurance covering injuries to members of the general public
arising from permitted activities.
(a) All applicants must provide a certificate of insurance
specifically naming the Township of Little Egg Harbor as an
additional insured providing general liability, bodily injury and
property damage coverage with minimum limits of liability not
less than $1,000,000. If the applicant is an individual and the
special event is not being held on behalf of any organization,
the applicant may request a waiver of this requirement upon a
showing to the Township Administrator of undue hardship.
(b) The applicant shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its agents, servants, representatives
and employees, from and against all losses, damages, claims,
liabilities and causes of action of every kind, or character and
nature, as well as costs and fees, including reasonable
attorneys' fees connected therewith, and the expense of
investigation thereof, based upon or arising out of damages or
injuries to third persons or their property caused by the acts,
omissions or negligence of the applicant, anyone for whose
acts the applicant may be liable, or any claims arising out of or
in any manner relating to the activities permitted pursuant to
this chapter to the extent permitted by law. The applicant shall
give the Township prompt and reasonable notice of any such
claims or actions.
(c) Any applicant that is insured by the Ocean County Joint
Insurance Fund shall be exempt from the requirements listed
in § 294-4A(3)(a) and (b) above. If an organization other than
the applicant will be using Township property in connection
with participation in a particular event and no separate
application is submitted by that organization, the organization
must comply with the requirements listed in § 294-4A(3)(a) and
(b). If the additional organization(s) is also insured by the
Ocean County Joint Insurance Fund, then that organization
shall also be exempt from the requirements listed in
§ 294-4A(3)(a) and (b) above.
(4) A requirement that the applicant pay a reasonable fee to defray the
cost of furnishing adequate security forces by the Department at
the proposed use or activity.
(5) A requirement that the permittee furnish additional sanitary and
refuse facilities that might be reasonably necessary, based on the
use or activity for which the permit is being sought.
B. Permits shall not be transferable without the written consent of the
Township.
§ 294-4 SIGNS § 294-4
285:541
§ 294-5. Revocation.
The Township Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon the
finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon the violation of any
condition or restriction under which the permit was issued.
§ 294-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000, by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days and/or by a term of community service not to
exceed 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 296
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 282.
C. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations, if special
event is in a park, and all applicable ordinances fully as though the
same were inserted in his or her permit.
D. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any
loss, damage, or injury to any person or property whatsoever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit was
issued.
§ 294-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 294-6
296:542
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 296-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance, or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains), that is owned or operated by the
Township of Little Egg Harbor or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat), or
finished product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 296-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 296-1
296:543
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with, or results from, the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 296-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 296-1
296:544
ARTICLE II
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 296-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater, to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) that is owned or operated by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor, or other public body, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 296-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system in the Township of Little Egg
Harbor is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 296-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges, and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
§ 296-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 296-4
296:545
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts, and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 296-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 296-4
296:546
ARTICLE III
Illicit Connection
§ 296-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Little Egg Harbor, or other public body, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 296-6. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system in the Township of
Little Egg Harbor, any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 296-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 296-6
296:547

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 296-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer of Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 296-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fine of no less
than $100 and no more than $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90
days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service, as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 296-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 296-8
296:549
Chapter 299
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 145.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 194.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 196.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 287.
Special event permits — See Ch. 294.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 296.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 324.
§ 296-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 296-8
296:550
ARTICLE I
Excavation of Streets
§ 299-1. Permit required.
No person, business or corporation shall dig up, break, tunnel, undermine,
disturb, or in any manner excavate any Township street, road, right-of-way,
sidewalk, curbing, or public easement, or make or cause to be made any
excavation in or under the aforementioned areas for any purpose or place,
or deposit, or leave in any of the aforementioned areas any earth or other
excavated material obstructing or intending to interfere with the free use
of same unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit
therefor from the Township Clerk as hereinafter provided. Openings may be
made without the necessity of filing a written application and obtaining an
excavation permit only in emergencies, such as a broken or frozen water
main, gas leak, or other happening which would endanger public life, health
and safety; provided, however, that notice thereof shall be immediately
given verbally to the Township Engineer, Superintendent of Public Works or
Police Department, and written application in accordance with this chapter
shall be made within 48 hours.
§ 299-2. Application for permit.
No excavation permit under this chapter shall be issued until the person,
business or corporation seeking such permit shall have first done the
following:
A. Made a written application for the issuance of such permit submitted to
the Township Clerk, signed by the person making the application or by
a duly authorized agent, and containing the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person for whom the
work is to be performed.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the person performing the
work.
(3) Location of the work area, including a map or sketch.
(4) An outline or plan describing the work to be performed.
(5) Number of square yards of surface to be opened.
(6) Cubic content of material to be excavated.
(7) Type of surface to be removed or disturbed.
(8) Cubic content of material to be burrowed.
(9) Date and time of commencement and estimated date of completion
with an agreement by the applicant to refill or resurface the
opening or excavation so that the street surface shall be restored to
the same condition, or better, in which it was before.
§ 299-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-2
296:551
§ 299-3. Conditions of permit.
(10) The types of proposed traffic control devices and procedures to be
utilized for the project, which devices and procedures shall be in
conformity with the guidelines set forth in the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, current edition, hereinafter called the
"Manual."
(11) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons
responsible on a twenty-four-hour call basis to handle emergency
repairs for the contractor.
B. An application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, and a permit fee, both
of which shall be in accordance with the Township fee schedule, shall be
paid to the Township of Little Egg Harbor before any permit is granted
under this chapter. In no case shall a permit be issued until the fees, the
guarantees required by Subsection C below, and proof of insurance
required by Subsection D below have been received by the Township.
C. In the case of openings more than 16 square feet and four feet deep, the
applicant must furnish to the Township a cash or surety bond to
guarantee that the opening or trench made by the permittee will be
closed properly. Upon completion of the work in a satisfactory manner,
the bond or cash surety will be released in return for a maintenance
bond or cash guarantee that the road, street, or highway over the same
will remain in good condition for at least one year after the closing by
the permittee. The minimum amount of each maintenance bond shall be
25% of the amount of the cash or surety bond, but shall not be less than
$500. A utility company may, in lieu of giving a separate maintenance
bond on each project, annually, once in January of each year, give the
Township such a bond for $5,000; provided that when the total linear
footage of openings or trenches made by such utility company reaches
5,000 feet, such utility company may give either an additional bond or
deposit cash security in an amount equivalent to $1 per foot of length of
additional openings or trenches it desires to make in that calendar year.
D. Deliver to the Township satisfactory proof of insurance in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per person, and $3,000,000 per occurrence,
insuring the permittee and the Township against liability for injury or
loss sustained by any person or persons as a result of the acts of
commission or omission of the permittee, or any servants, agents or
employees of the permittee.
A. In the case of all openings larger than 16 square feet and four feet deep,
the application shall be forwarded to the Township Engineer for review
as to whether or not a permit should be issued. If it is recommended by
the Township Engineer that a permit be issued, the Township Clerk will
issue same and forward the money tendered with the application and
permit fee to the Township Treasurer for deposit. If the permit is
denied, then the Township Clerk shall retain the application fee and
§ 299-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-3
296:552
§ 299-4. Notice of street paving by Township.
When the Township shall improve or pave any street, the Township Clerk
shall first give notice by certified and regular mail to all persons owning
property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved, and to
all public utilities and authorities operating in the Township, and all such
persons, utilities, and authorities shall make all connections as well as any
repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation or disbursement of the
street, within 90 days from the provision of such notice. The time shall
be extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the
Township Engineer.
§ 299-5. Permits not to be issued on streets improved within three
years.
notify the applicant in writing no later than five days after the action of
the Township Engineer regarding the application.
B. In addition, every opening and all excavations, backfilling or grading
shall be done by the person to whom any permit is issued. Such person
shall give at least 72 hours' written notice to the Township Engineer
prior to the commencement of any work.
C. All work shall be performed and completed in such a manner as to
cause a minimum of interference with travel on the street affected. No
street shall be closed to traffic unless the closing is approved by the
Chief of Police. Street and/or traffic lanes approved for closure to traffic
must be closed and then reopened at the times specified in the
application, with no deviations permitted. The Police Department shall
be informed in writing of all street closings at least 24 hours in advance,
except where the work is of an emergency nature, in which case notice
shall be given to the Police Department when work commences.
D. Construction work will be permitted only during the hours and times
specified on the application and in accordance with municipal
ordinances which regulate the times of construction work. The
Township Engineer or Public Works Superintendent must approve
emergency situations or work required beyond the permitted time.
A. No permit shall be issued by the Township Clerk to any person which
would allow an excavation or opening in a street surface which was
paved or improved less than three years prior to the date of the
application, unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that public
health or safety requires that the proposed work be permitted or unless
an emergency condition exists.
B. In such cases, the applicant shall make the request for a waiver of the
permit moratorium in writing to the attention of the Township Engineer,
Superintendent of Public Works, and Township Administrator. The
request may be approved upon the affirmative vote of two of said
officials.
§ 299-3 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-6
296:553
§ 299-6. Construction operations.
A. Whenever an opening is made in a paved road, the surface pavement
shall be cut with a pavement cutter no wider than one foot outside of
the proposed excavation. Where paved sidewalks and gutters or
curbing are to be crossed, they shall in no case be removed, but the
work shall be done by tunneling beneath them. The work shall be so
conducted as to not interfere with the water, sewer, or gas mains or any
connections with any building or structure until permission of the
proper authorities shall have been obtained. All rock within five feet of
any water, sewer, or gas main or other pipe, which may be damaged
thereby, shall be removed without blasting. No excavation that will
damage trees or shrubbery shall be made without the approval of the
Township Engineer.
B. Where 25% or more of the existing pavement surface has been
destroyed or disturbed, final paving shall consist of a one-inch overlay
of the entire width of the pavement surface with Bituminous Concrete
Type FABC (Mix I-5).
C. All pavement openings for which any permit is granted shall be
replaced by the permittee by a temporary pavement of a bituminous
concrete Type A immediately after filling. Permanent pavement is to be
restored by the permittee no less than 30 days nor more than 60 days
after opening is made, unless this time is extended by the Township
Engineer, depending on the road and weather conditions.
D. In the event of a snow or ice storm, the permittee will be required to
take whatever steps the Chief of Police and Superintendent of Public
Works deem necessary to secure the traveled way for snow removal
operations. At the first sign of precipitation, all work on the shoulders
and traveled way shall stop and they shall be cleared of all dirt, etc., and
then backfilled so as not to interfere with Township snow operations
until the weather permits resumption of work.
E. The permittee shall maintain the trench and regrade the subgrade as
required until final paving is installed. In case the work has not been
completed before the day of expiration as shown in the permit and the
permittee has not requested an extension of time, the Superintendent
of Public Works may, if he or she deems it advisable and necessary, take
steps to backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over the
opening for which the permit has been issued, and if any extension of
time beyond said date is needed for the completion of work, a new
application must be filed if required by either the Township Engineer or
the Superintendent of Public Works.
F. The restoration of the opening or trench shall be maintained for one
year after completion.
G. In the event that the proposed excavation or opening is to extend across
the entire width of a public street, no more than 1/2 of the traveled road
surface shall be opened at any one time and such half shall be backfilled
§ 299-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-6
296:554
before the other half is opened. No excavation within and/or
immediately adjacent to roadways available to traffic shall remain open
after the hour of 5:00 p.m., nor over any weekend or holiday, unless
special permission has been granted by the Township Engineer.
H. The excavation and all piles of excavated material, or any stored
material to be used in the work to be performed, shall be carefully
marked with barriers complete with appropriate warning devices that
shall conform to the Manual. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation
work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times so as to
minimize inconvenience to the public and to the occupants of the
adjoining property, and to assure the passage of emergency vehicles
including first aid, fire and police.
I. During the hours of actual operation, construction, excavation or other
work at the site, the permittee shall maintain and have in attendance at
least one flag person who shall be responsible for the flow of traffic to
assure safe passage of vehicles in both directions and to avoid traffic
hazards during the use of heavy equipment. When traffic conditions
permit, the Chief of Police (or his or her duly authorized representative)
may, by written approval, permit the closing of municipally-owned
streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by the Chief if, in the
Chief's opinion, it is necessary. Such written approval shall require that
the permittee give notification to various agencies, first aid and fire
companies, and to the general public. In such cases, such written
approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. Warning signs
shall be placed far enough in advance of the street, and cones or other
approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with
the instructions of the Chief of Police of the Township.
J. The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of traffic at all
intersections where possible, and safe crossings for pedestrians at
intervals not more than 300 feet.
K. No work may commence before markout by the appropriate agencies.
Right-of-way or property monuments and/or markers, traffic control
devices and other public entity maintained devices in the right-of-way
shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing by the Township Engineer.
L. No person shall divert or pump surface or other waters onto or across
Township roads or do any act upon property abutting Township roads
resulting in the flow or spill of water from the property across the
Township roads. No dewatering equipment, well, points, or piping shall
occupy the traveled portions of roadways unless specifically approved
and adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
M. Effluent from dewatering systems shall be discharged in such a manner
that erodible soils are not adversely affected. All silt and sediments
being carried in the dewatering effluent must be intercepted prior to
§ 299-6 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-6
296:555
§ 299-7. Placement of excavated materials and backfilling.
effluent discharge into any drainage system through use of a
sedimentation basin designed to allow retention of discharge for
sufficient time to render such waters free of suspended silt and
sediments. The use of screening devices in lieu of a sedimentation basin
must receive specific approval and be employed only for minor flows.
N. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the utility owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate
an existing utility, this shall be done by the owner. No utility owned by
the Township or any authority shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The
cost of moving a privately owned utility shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless the permittee makes other arrangements with the
person or persons owning the utility. The permittee shall support and
protect by methods approved by the Township Engineer, all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires and other apparatus which may be in any way
affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along and across the
work. The permittee shall secure approval of method of support and
protection from the owner of the utility in case any of the pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this
purpose pipe coating or other encasement of devices are to be
considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged utilities shall be repaired by the
agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be
charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this subsection that the
permittee shall assume all liability for damage to utilities and any
resulting damage to or injury to anyone because of such utility damage
and such assumption of liability of a contractual obligation of the
permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is
exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The Township
shall not be made a party to any action because of this section.
A. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or
in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area
being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated
material beside the trench, the Township Engineer shall have the
authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of
backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the
necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all
required storage sites. However, if material requires disposal, the
permittee shall dispose of all excavated materials at an approved
location for this purpose. In its application, the permittee shall also
describe in detail the location where any and all excavated materials
§ 299-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-7
296:556
shall be disposed of and provide written documentation that the
proposed location for disposal is an approved location for this purpose.
If said location is a landfill, the permittee shall provide proof that said
landfill is registered and licensed to accept such material.
B. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified
by the Superintendent of Public Works or the Township Engineer.
Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate
the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the
Township Engineer to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
Further, no person shall place any material on or along any Township
road, gutter, or shoulder resulting in any stoppage of drainage along
the road or roads.
C. Any and all material excavated and stored or piled at or near any
intersection, driveway or other access roads or alleys shall be so stored
and piled as to provide an adequate line of site for those persons
entering and exiting the intersection streets, alleys or driveways, which
line of sight shall provide a minimum of 150 feet visibility.
D. The permittee shall completely backfill the excavation and replace as
great a portion as possible of the material excavated, compacting it by
flushing, tamping or other suitable means, and supply additional
material where there is a deficiency. Whenever the Township Engineer
shall deem the material unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall
backfill the trench with sand, or other acceptable material compressed
as required, and shall remove all excess material from the premises. If
tamping alone is employed, the material shall be placed in layers not
exceeding six inches in thickness, moistened as directed, and each layer
adequately tamped until thoroughly compacted.
E. Where excavations are made in tunnels beneath concrete pavement or
beneath a pavement having a concrete base, the tunnel shall be
backfilled with concrete composed of one part of cement, two parts of
sand, and five parts of broken stone or washed gravel, or another
approved material, tamped into place so that the cavity is completely
filled.
F. As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly
cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting
from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and
shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public
Works. From time to time, as may be ordered by the Superintendent of
Public Works, and in any event immediately after completion of the
work, the permittee shall, at its own expense, clean up and remove all
refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work, and
upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so
by the Superintendent of Public Works, the work may be done by the
§ 299-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-7
296:557
§ 299-8. Permit regulations.
Superintendent of Public Works and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee. The permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under
the surety provided hereunder.
G. After the backfilling of the opening or trench has been completed as
above specified, the restoration of the pavement shall be governed by
the following applicable rules:
(1) In the case of an opening or trench in the earth shoulder, the
permittee shall restore the top four inches of the trench or opening
with material capable of supporting the growth of grass and shall
fertilize and seed the surface with grass seed.
(2) In the case of a gravel pavement, the permittee shall fill in the top
eight inches of the excavated trench or opening with compacted
soil aggregate Type I-2.
(3) In the case of a penetration macadam road that consists of broken
stone of various sizes, the permittee may salvage the broken stone
and replace it in the top of the trench similar to the original
pavement and cover it with two inches of hot-mixed bituminous
concrete.
(4) In the case of a gravel-based bituminous concrete road, the
permittee shall restore the surface with six inches of compacted
soil aggregate Type I-2, covered with four inches of bituminous
stabilized base stone mix and two inches of bituminous concrete
surface course, Type FABC-1, Mix No. I-5.
(5) In the case of a bituminous-treated gravel road, the permittee shall
restore the surface with six inches of compacted soil aggregate
Type I-2, covered with four inches of bituminous stabilized base
stone mix and two inches of bituminous concrete surface course,
Type FABC-1, Mix No. I-5.
(6) In the case of portland cement concrete surfaces, steel mesh
reinforcement or deformed steel rod reinforcement (rebar) shall be
provided in the spacing gauge or diameter and placement as set
forth by the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Specifications, 1983 Edition, or as amended. All concrete
thickness, classifications and compressive strength shall be in
conformance with the current New Jersey Department of
Transportation standards. Admixtures or curing compounds shall
be added only upon approval of the Township Engineer.
(7) In the case of any special condition, the permittee shall restore the
trench or opening as directed by the Township Engineer. If the
Township is required to restore the pavement, the final charges,
based on the schedule of costs, shall be billed to the permittee upon
the completion of the work by the Township.
§ 299-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-8
296:558
§ 299-9. Revocation of permit.
The Township may, at any time, revoke or annul any permit, or extension
endorsed thereon for cause, or for performing work not in accordance
with the permit granted, or for failure or neglect to pursue the work in
accordance with such permit, or for any conditions which might prove to
be dangerous or injurious to any person or interests of the Township. Every
person receiving a permit, or any extension thereof, shall accept the same
subject to the foregoing provisions and conditions, without any liability or
responsibility attaching to the Township for any loss or damage that might
result by reason of such revocation.
A. The applicant in accepting a permit under this article shall be deemed
to have agreed to be liable for, and to indemnify and save harmless the
Township from and against, any and all loss or costs or damages
incurred by reason of any damage to any property, injury to any person
or any loss of life resulting from its negligence or the negligence of its
agents, employees, or subcontractors in undertaking or performing the
work covered by the permit, or in failing to properly guard or maintain
the opening or excavated material, equipment, or materials to be
incorporated in the work.
B. No permit will be approved for openings scheduled during the period
from December 15 to March 1, except in cases of emergency or when
deemed necessary by the Township Engineer.
C. Construction equipment shall not be positioned or stored on any street
after working hours unless approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
D. When a contractor is obligated to supply uniformed police officers on
the job site as a condition of its permit, all arrangements shall be made
through the Traffic Division of the Little Egg Harbor Police Department,
who may assign the officers 48 hours in advance of the commencement
of work on the project in accordance with the provisions of municipal
ordinances regulating off-duty services of municipal police officers.
E. Flagmen, when utilized in construction work areas, shall be equipped
with the following:
(1) Orange reflectorized vests.
(2) Red flag, measuring 24 inches by 24 inches. For night conditions,
lights shall be used in lieu of the flag.
(3) Sign paddles consisting of STOP/SLOW messages, as per the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition. When
used at night, the STOP and SLOW faces shall be reflectorized. All
traffic control devices utilized on any road construction within the
Township of Little Egg Harbor shall conform to the Manual.
§ 299-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-10
296:559
§ 299-10. Township exempted from permit.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any opening or excavation by
the Township or its employees.
§ 299-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $500 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as determined
by the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense. The violation of
any provision of this article shall be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Nothing in this article shall be understood or construed by any permittee
or other person to absolve any permittee or its employees, agents or
contractors of any responsibility for any damage done to any person or
property in opening or digging a trench in any public road, street, or
highway.
§ 299-12. Township saved harmless.
The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the Township, its officers,
agents and employees from any loss, injury or damage resulting from any
negligence or fault of the permittee, its agents, servants or employees or
contractors in connection with the performance of any of the work covered
by the permit. The terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed a
covenant by such permittee to so indemnify and save harmless the Township
of Little Egg Harbor of curb being repaired.
§ 299-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-12
296:560
ARTICLE II
Street Vacations
§ 299-13. Application for street vacation; fee.
A. Any person who is desirous of applying to the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for the vacation of any street, highway, right-of-way or other
public place, heretofore dedicated to the Township, shall be required to
complete a street vacation application, on a form to be promulgated by
the Township Clerk, and shall file same with the Township Clerk,
together with a fee in the amount of $250, which shall be payable to the
Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. The street vacation application shall call for the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying
for such vacation.
(2) If such person is represented by an attorney, the name, address,
and telephone number of such attorney and/or the name, address,
and telephone number of any other person to be contacted on
behalf of the applicant.
(3) The name and general description of the street, highway, right-ofway
or other public place to be vacated.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other entity, the
name and address of each person holding an interest of 10% or
more on the ownership of such corporation, partnership or other
entity.
(5) A list of the lot and block numbers of all property adjoining the area
to be vacated, together with a list of the names and addresses of
the assessed owners of such adjoining properties.
(6) A narrative description of the current use of the area to be vacated.
(7) A narrative description of the applicant's intended use of the area
to be vacated.
(8) A description of any improvement on the area to be vacated,
including, but not limited to, paving, gravel, utilities, or structures.
C. The applicant shall furnish with the application a reproduction of the
tax map, showing the area surrounding the area to be vacated, as well
as all intersecting roads, adjoining parcels, the current zoning of all
properties adjoining the area to be vacated, and, where application has
been made for the vacation of any street, highway or other right-of-way,
the reproduction shall show the length of such street, highway or rightof-
way.
D. The applicant shall furnish with the application executed forms to be
furnished by the Township Clerk, which shall indicate the consent of the
§ 299-13 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-13
296:561
§ 299-14. Escrow fees.
In addition to the above application fee, the applicant shall, at the time
of filing a street vacation application, submit the following escrow fees to
the Township Clerk of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Said fees shall
be used to pay any and all fees incurred by the Township of Little Egg
Harbor for any expense incurred by the municipality in the review of a
street vacation application. A deposit of $1,250 shall be required at the
time of the initial application based on a fee of $750 for the services of the
Township Engineer, $250 for the services of the Planning Board Engineer,
and $250 for the services of the Township Attorney.
§ 299-15. Review of application.
Upon receipt of a completed application, together with the required fee,
the Township Clerk shall forward a copy of same to the Department of
Engineering and Public Works for review and recommendation. Upon the
completion of its review, the Department of Engineering and Public Works
shall forward a written recommendation, together with a copy of the
application, to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall thereafter
review such report and forward its written recommendation to the Township
Committee, together with a copy of the application.
§ 299-16. Committee to notify applicant.
The Township Committee shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its
determination as to any action on the application.
§ 299-17. Favorable determination; additional fees.
Where the applicant has been notified that the Township Committee has
determined to act favorably on the application, the applicant shall forthwith
provide the Township Clerk with a metes and bounds description of the
area to be vacated, prepared and sealed by a surveyor, together with such
other information as may be requested by the Township Committee in its
notification to the applicant. In addition, the applicant shall forward the
following additional fees to the Township Clerk which shall be payable to
the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
owners of each property adjoining the area to be vacated to the
proposed vacation.
E. The application shall be executed by the applicant or the applicant's
representative, indicating that the information set forth or attached to
the application is true and accurate.
A. A sum equal to the costs of preparation of the ordinance to be enacted
by the Township Committee in connection with the proposed vacation in
excess of the escrow deposit of $250 for the services of the Township
Attorney.
§ 299-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-17
296:562
B. A sum equal to the costs of advertising such ordinance, which such
estimate shall be prepared by the Township Clerk and made available to
the applicant.
C. A sum equal to the estimated recording costs of the ordinance to be
enacted by the Township Committee. The Township Clerk shall prepare
such estimate and make the same available to the applicant.
D. Where the Township Committee has advised the applicant that action
upon the application is contingent upon the reservation of an easement
or a development restriction, the sum of $275 shall be payable to the
applicant to the Township Clerk toward the costs of the preparation of
such easement and/or deed providing for restricted development.
§ 299-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-17
296:563

ARTICLE III
Temporary Street Occupation
[Added 4-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
§ 299-18. Permit required.
No person, business or corporation shall move a house or other structure
onto or temporarily occupy any Township street, road, right-of-way,
sidewalk, curbing or public easement, for any purpose of place, or deposit,
or leave in any of the aforementioned areas any earth or other excavated
material obstructing or intending to interfere with the free use of same
unless such person shall first have obtained an occupancy permit therefor
from the Township Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 299-19. Application for permit.
No road occupancy permit under this chapter shall be issued until the
person, business or corporation seeking such permit shall have first done
the following:
A. Made a written application for the issuance of such permit submitted to
the Township Clerk, signed by the person making the application or by
a duly authorized agent, and containing the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person for whom the
work is to be performed.
(2) Lot and Block number, street address and location where the work
will be performed.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the licensed contractor
performing the structure elevation.
(4) Location of the work area, including a map or sketch depicting
dimension of area to be occupied as well as pavement dimension to
the opposing edge of pavement.
(5) An outline or plan describing the work to be performed.
(6) Date and time of commencement and estimated date of completion
with an agreement by the applicant to restore the street to the
same condition, or better, than it was prior to the temporary
occupation.
(7) The types of proposed traffic control devises and procedures to be
utilized for the project, which devises and procedures shall be in
conformity with the guidelines set forth in the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, current edition, hereinafter called the
"Manual."
B. An application fee, which shall be nonrefundable, and a permit fee, both
of which shall be in accordance with the Township fee schedule, shall be
§ 299-18 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-19
296:565
§ 299-20. Conditions of permit.
§ 299-21. Performance guarantee.
Before any permit is granted, a refundable performance guarantee shall be
deposited with the Township to insure proper restoration of the right-of-way.
paid to the Township of Little Egg Harbor before any permit is granted
under this chapter. In no case shall a permit be issued until the fees,
the guarantees required by Subsection C below, and proof of insurance
required by Subsection D below have been received by the Township.
C. The applicant shall furnish to the Township a refundable cash or surety
bond in accordance with § 299-21 to guarantee that the structure will
be removed from the street, and that the Township right-of-way will be
returned to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition
prior to the temporary occupation.
D. Deliver to the Township satisfactory proof of insurance in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per person, and $3,000,000 per occurrence,
insuring the permittee and the Township against liability for injury or
loss sustained by any person or persons as a result of the acts or
commission or omission of the permittee, or any servants, agents or
employees of the permittee.
A. In the case of all road occupancies, the application shall be forwarded
to the Township Engineer for review as to whether or not a permit
should be issued. If it is recommended by the Township Engineer that a
permit be issued, the Township Clerk will issue same and forward the
money tendered with the application and permit fee to the Township
Treasurer for deposit. If the permit is denied, then the Township Clerk
shall retain the application fee and notify the applicant in writing no
later than five days after the action of the Township Engineer regarding
the application.
B. All work shall be performed and completed in such a manner as to
cause a minimum of interference with travel on the street affected. The
Police Department shall be informed in writing of all street occupancy
permits at least 24 hours prior to their issuance.
C. Only one permit per street shall be issued at a time.
D. A road occupancy permit shall expire in 30 calendar days from its
issuance. Each day following the expiration of the road occupancy
permit that a road continues to be occupied is considered a separate
violation. In the event of unforeseen circumstances, for example,
inclement weather, an extension of the thirty-day permit period may be
granted upon application to the Township Engineer.
A. For temporary occupancy of a Township right-of-way with a residential
or commercial structure, the deposit shall be $10,000.
§ 299-19 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-21
296:566
§ 299-22. Insurance required.
§ 299-23. Permit regulations.
B. For temporary occupancy of all other obstructions, the deposit shall be
$1,000 or $25 per square foot of the actual occupied area, whichever is
greater.
C. The guarantee shall be refunded if the surface is vacated according to
Township specifications and will be forfeited in lieu of restoration in the
event that the Township specifications are not met.
A. A permittee, prior to the commencement of work hereunder, shall
furnish the Township with satisfactory evidence in writing that the
permittee has in force and will maintain in force, during the duration of
the occupancy and the period occupancy permit, public liability
insurance of not less than $500,000 for any one person and $1,000,000
for any one accident and property damage insurance of not less than
$50,000 duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business
in this state. The Township of Little Egg Harbor and its Engineer shall
be named as additional insureds.
B. In cases where the character or nature of the proposed work is such as
to present an unusual hazard or a higher than normal risk of damage or
injury, the Township Committee may require provision of increased
amounts of liability and property damage insurance. Any permits which
occasion such increased hazard or liability shall be referred by the
Township Administrator for the consideration by the governing body
prior to the issuance of a permit.
A. The applicant in accepting a permit under this article shall be deemed
to have agreed to be liable for, and to indemnify and save harmless the
Township from and against, any and all loss or costs or damages
incurred by reason of any damage to any property, injury to any person
or any loss of life resulting from its negligence or the negligence of its
agents, employees, or subcontractors in undertaking or performing the
work covered by the permit, or failing to properly guard or deter traffic
from the structure temporarily occupying the street.
B. Construction equipment shall not be positioned or stored on any street
after working hours unless approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
C. The applicant shall keep all road encroachments properly guarded
through the use of breakaway barricades, flashing lights, signs and
reflectorized drums consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Devices.
D. All road signage and protection devices must be in conformance with
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. A minimum of 48 hours'
notice shall be given to the Township Engineer in advance of the start of
§ 299-21 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-23
296:567
§ 299-24. Revocation of permit.
The Township may, at any time, revoke or annul any permit or extension
endorsed thereon for cause, or for performing work not in accordance
with the permit granted, or for failure or neglect to pursue the work in
accordance with such permit, or for any conditions which might prove to
be dangerous or injurious to any person or interests of the Township. Every
person receiving a permit, or any extension thereof, shall accept the same
subject to the foregoing provisions and conditions, without any liability or
responsibility attaching to the Township for any loss or damage that might
result by reason of such revocation.
§ 299-25. Township held harmless.
The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township, its officers,
agents and employees from any loss, injury or damage resulting from any
negligence or fault of the permittee, its agents, servants or employees or
contractors in connection with the performance of any of the work covered
by the permit. The terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed a
covenant by such permittee to so indemnify and hold harmless the Township
of Little Egg Harbor of any accident, injury or other harm caused by street
occupation, or its employees, agents or contractors of any responsibility for
any damage done.
§ 299-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $500 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as determined
by the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense. The violation of
any provision of this article shall be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Nothing in this article shall be understood or construed by any permittee
a road occupancy so that an onsite review of such signs and protection
devices can be made by Township inspection personnel.
E. Any proposed road occupancy must be reviewed by the Township
Engineer to ensure the noninterruption of essential municipal services
(i.e., garbage, recycling) and emergency services (i.e., adequate access
to ambulance, police, fire).
F. Any proposed road occupancy shall be reviewed in order to permit
continued access to underground utilities. Municipal Utilities Authority
mark-outs of utility access locations are required prior to moving a
structure onto the street.
§ 299-23 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-26
296:568
or other person to absolve any permittee or its employees, agents or
contractors of any responsibility for any damage done to any person or
property in occupying any public road, street or highway.
§ 299-26 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-26
296:569

ARTICLE IV
Damage to Personal Property During Township Operations
[Added 2-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
§ 299-27. Purpose.
The intent of this article is to provide for reimbursement of specified real
property damaged during snow or ice removal from the Township rightof-
way and to clarify that property owners may be liable for damage to
Township equipment when said property is placed within the Township
right-of-way.
§ 299-28. Reimbursement.
§ 299-29. Exceptions.
The Township shall not be liable and shall not reimburse property owners
where the Township determines that:
A. For any mailbox located in a Township right-of-way, the Township of
Little Egg Harbor will reimburse property owners for the replacement
or repair of a mailbox and/or post damaged due to snow and/or ice
removal up to a total amount of $150 only under the following
circumstances:
(1) Physical damage must be caused by actual contact with Townshipowned
and -operated equipment; such damage must be proven and
documented by the owner.
(2) The existing mailbox and post were in good condition and repair
prior to the alleged event causing damage.
(3) The mailbox is securely fastened to a sturdy post which is
sufficiently anchored in the ground.
B. For actual physical damage caused by direct contact with Townshipowned
equipment to any privately owned curbing, including but not
limited to railroad ties and asphalt curbing, the Township will
reimburse up to $150 for actual cost of repair or replacement, not
including labor costs.
C. To be eligible for reimbursement, the resident must notify the Township
within seven days of the date the alleged damage occurred, unless the
resident was out of town, in which case the resident must notify the
Township of the damage within seven days of his/her return.
A. The mailbox and/or post was not in good condition and repair; or
B. The mailbox and/or post was damaged due to plowed snow and/or ice
and not physical contact with Township-owned and -operated
equipment.
§ 299-27 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-30
296:571
§ 299-30. Limitation on reimbursement amount.
In the event that actual physical contact with Township-owned equipment
damages a mailbox and/or post, the Township will reimburse the property
owner up to $150 towards replacement costs. If any damage exceeds $150,
the property owner shall be responsible for any costs above the $150
approved reimbursement by the Township for materials only; no
reimbursement for labor given.
§ 299-31. Other personal property/equipment.
All basketball equipment, including, but not limited to, posts, backboards
and rims, shall be located at least 10 feet from the edge of a Townshipowned
roadway. In no event should any basketball equipment be located
in a Township right-of-way. A property owner shall be responsible for any
damage to Township equipment due to the placement of equipment within
the right-of-way.
§ 299-32. Reservation of rights.
Nothing in this article shall be construed in any way to waive any or
all defenses available to the Township under Title 59 of the New Jersey
Statutes.
§ 299-30 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 299-32
296:572
Chapter 305
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
§ 299-32 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 299-32
296:573

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs and Autocabs
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, as amended and supplemented: "autocab,"
"person" and "street."
§ 305-2. Compliance with statutory provisions; insurance.
The applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 48:16-12, both inclusive, as
amended and supplemented, shall be complied with in the licensing and
regulating of autocabs in this article.
§ 305-3. Insurance.
No license shall be issued by the Township Clerk unless the applicant
has filed an insurance policy with the Clerk in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.
§ 305-4. Licensing. [Amended 2-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ 305-5. License fees; term of license; renewal.
License fees, to cover the administrative costs associated with processing
the application, are nonrefundable. The annual license fee is $150, which
shall be paid to the Clerk, who shall deliver the same to the Treasurer. An
additional fee of $25 will be charged for each additional vehicle owned and/
or operated by the licensee. If any additional vehicles are added to the fleet
subsequent to the initial license issuance, an additional fee of $25 will be
assessed for the added vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee
to advise the Clerk of any vehicle added to the fleet prior to operating said
additional vehicle within the Township.
A. There shall be a maximum of two autocab owner’s licenses available for
issuance. Said number may be increased subject to the discretion of the
Township through the public bid process in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:16-2.1 et seq.
B. Owner’s licenses. The Township Committee is hereby authorized to
issue licenses to owners of autocabs who are of good moral character
and who otherwise qualify according to the provisions of this article.
C. Operator’s licenses. The Township Committee is hereby authorized to
issue licenses to operators of autocabs, whether or not they are owners,
who are capable and of good moral character and who otherwise qualify
according to the provisions of this chapter. Such licenses shall
hereinafter be referred to as an "operator’s license."
§ 305-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 305-6
296:575
§ 305-6. Application.
Application for a license to operate or own an autocab within the Township
of Little Egg Harbor shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk of the Township
of Little Egg Harbor on forms provided by the Municipal Clerk. All
applications shall be verified under oath. All applications shall require the
following information regarding the applicant and the vehicle to be utilized
as an autocab:
§ 305-7. Investigation of applicant. [Amended 2-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02]
A. Applicant information.
(1) The name and current address of the applicant. In the event that
the applicant is not an individual person, the name and address of
all owners of the legal entity, including all officers, directors, or any
authorized agents of the applicant, or any person legally authorized
to conduct business on behalf of the applicant.
(2) A listing of places of address for the five years previous to filing of
the application.
(3) The name, date and description of the applicant's last employment,
including the name of a contact person from that employment for
reference purposes.
(4) Social security number.
(5) Copy of valid New Jersey driver's license.
B. Vehicle information.
(1) The year, make and model of vehicle for which the license is
desired.
(2) The dealer-recommended and legal passenger capacity of the
vehicle.
(3) The ownership of the vehicle as indicated on the certificate of title,
and the name and address of any lien holders thereof.
(4) The vehicle identification number and New Jersey registration
number for the vehicle.
A. Neither an owner’s nor an operator’s license shall be granted to any
persons unless the application for such license has been submitted to
the Township Committee. An applicant for an owner’s license shall be
thoroughly investigated by the Chief of Police and shall be fingerprinted
and photographed. An applicant for an operator’s license shall be
investigated for any criminal or motor vehicles violations by the Chief of
Police and shall be fingerprinted and photographed. A person shall be
§ 305-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 305-7
296:576
§ 305-8. General qualifications.
No application for an autocab license under the terms of this article shall be
issued unless the applicant:
disqualified from operating a taxicab if a criminal history record
background check reveals a conviction of any of the following crimes:
(1) In New Jersey or anywhere else: aggravated assault, arson,
burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery,
aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault of endangering the
welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other
than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense for
the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection A(1).
(3) If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside of New
Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the
criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify
the applicant from operating or driving an autocab.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an operator or
driver of an autocab who has received the consent to operate in a
municipality prior to November 29, 2011.
B. In the event of the denial of an owner’s license, the Township
Committee shall instruct the Township Clerk to notify the applicant, by
certified mail, setting forth the reasons for denial. Within five days
thereafter, the applicant may file with the Township Committee a
written request for a hearing on said application, together with written
exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the Chief of Police based
his investigative report. Upon the filing of such a request, the Township
Committee shall fix the time and place for a hearing and shall notify the
applicant thereof, which hearing shall be held within 10 days after the
request is filed. Within 10 days after the conclusions of the hearing, the
Township Committee shall make its final decisions whether to issue the
owner’s license or sustain the denial of said application.
§ 305-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 305-8
296:577
§ 305-9. Issuance of license.
No license shall be issued pursuant to this article unless and until the
Township Committee reviews the application, including the results of the
police investigation, and finds:
§ 305-10. Content of license.
A. Has been a licensed driver for at least four years. (This shall not include
any time spent driving pursuant to a permit.)
B. Is able to effectively communicate with passengers for the purpose of
transporting passengers from a location within the Township of Little
Egg Harbor to another destination, specifically for the purpose of
following directions.
C. Submits two personal letters of reference as to his or her good
character.
D. Submits a photocopy of a valid New Jersey driver's license.
A. That, based on all the information available to the Township Committee,
the applicant is a qualified person to operate or own an autocab;
B. In the event of a renewal application, that the applicant remains
compliant with the provisions of this article, N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.,
and any applicable law, and that based on a review of the prior year's
reports regarding violations or incidents, the applicant is qualified for a
renewal.
C. That the applicant is qualified and able to operate or own an autocab in
accordance with the provisions of this article, N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.,
and any applicable law.
A. After issuance, each license shall be numbered consecutively and
classified according to whether the licensee is an owner or operator of
an autocab. Every license shall contain the following:
(1) The purpose of the license.
(2) The number of the license.
(3) The name and address of the licensee.
(4) Every owner's license shall also include the year, make and model
of the vehicle.
B. Every licensee shall be provided with a license which contains the
above information and a two-inch-by-two-inch photograph of the
licensee adhered to the license.
C. Every license shall be displayed in the autocab for which it was issued
on the front right dashboard or the front right visor so that it may be
viewed from location within the autocab.
§ 305-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 305-10
296:578
§ 305-11. Power of attorney.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-5, the owner of the autocab shall execute
and deliver the Township Clerk a power of attorney, wherein and whereby
the owner shall appoint the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality as his
true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any
process, out of a court of competent jurisdiction, to be served against the
insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy or
bond filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-4. Said power of
attorney shall be executed and delivered concurrently with the filing of the
insurance policy or bond.
§ 305-12. Ownership of autocab.
§ 305-13. Occupancy of taxi by additional passengers.
No operator shall permit any person or persons other than the person or
persons first employing the autocab to occupy or ride in said autocab unless
the person or persons first employing the autocab shall consent to the
acceptance of such additional passenger or passengers.
§ 305-14. Baggage.
Each passenger shall be entitled to have carried and conveyed within any
licensed autocab, without charge, his or her traveling baggage to the extent
that the same fits safely within the autocab and in no way impedes the safe
operation of said autocab.
D. Each autocab licensed pursuant to this chapter shall display the
Township license number on the exterior of the vehicle. The number
shall be three inches in height and located in the center of the rear
quarter panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear
centerline of the trunk of the vehicle. [Amended 2-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-02]
E. Each autocab shall display on each rear door of the autocab the name
“Little Egg Harbor Township” in letters three inches in height.
[Amended 2-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
A. No license issued pursuant to this article shall be assigned, mortgaged,
pledged or otherwise transferred to secure a debt, loan, advance or
other financing transaction or for any other purpose.
B. Any sale or transfer in ownership of an autocab by any means shall
result in the expiration of the owner's license as to the autocab, and any
operator of that autocab, unless and until an owner's license is issued to
the new owner pursuant to the provisions of this article, or the approval
of the governing body is obtained for any such transfer.
§ 305-10 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 305-15
296:579
§ 305-15. Proof of child safety restraint required.
No autocab license shall be issued to or renewed for any autocab unless
and until proof is provided that such autocab is in compliance with N.J.S.A.
39:3-76.2 et seq. regarding child passenger restraints, including, but not
limited to, a proof of child passenger restraint system that complies with
the federal motor vehicle safety standards applicable at the time of
manufacture as provided under N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2a.
§ 305-16. Suspension or revocation of license.
Every owner's or operator's license granted hereunder may be suspended
or revoked by the Township Committee, after notice and hearing, for the
violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the statutory provisions
incorporated in § 305-2 hereof or for other good and sufficient cause.
During said suspension and after revocation, the license shall be inoperative
and of no effect, and the license shall be surrendered to the Township
forthwith, along with the badge supplied by the Township pursuant to
§ 305-10 hereof.
§ 305-15 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 305-16
296:580
ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 305-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13, as amended and supplemented: "limousine,"
"person" and "street."
§ 305-18. Compliance with statutory provisions.
The applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 to 48:16-22, both inclusive,
as amended and supplemented, shall be complied with in the licensing and
regulating of limousines in this article.
§ 305-19. Power of attorney.
The owner of any limousine to be licensed under this article shall execute
and deliver to the Division of Motor Vehicles, concurrently with the filing
of an insurance policy as required under N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, a power of
attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the Director of
the Division of Motor Vehicles his or her true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 305-20. Limousine insurance; filing in Little Egg Harbor; fee.
In the event that the principal place of business of a limousine business is
the Township of Little Egg Harbor, then said policy shall be filed with the
Township Clerk. There shall be a filing fee of $50. Upon payment of said
fee, the Township Clerk shall issue in duplicate a license to operate showing
that the owner of the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions
of this article.
§ 305-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 305-20
296:581

ARTICLE III
Violations and Penalties
§ 305-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days and/or by
a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, in the discretion of
a court of competent jurisdiction. The continuation of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense. The violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 305-21 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 305-21
296:583
Chapter 307
TOBACCO, SALE OF
§ 307-1. Purpose.
§ 307-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor Board of Health and/or his or her authorized representative.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any member of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor Police Department.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS — A display or display shelves designed for the
customer to serve oneself without the aid of a sales clerk and where the
customer is required to pay the cashier upon leaving.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession, or place at which sales of tobacco are made to
purchasers for consumption or use, and shall mean a person or entity that
owns or operates a vending machine.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payments, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
§ 307-3. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors; sign.
A. Extensive medical and scientific evidence reveals and the Surgeon
General of the United States has determined that the use of tobacco is
harmful to a person's health, such that it can lead to severe medical
conditions. The American Cancer Society has cited that approximately
90% of today's regular smokers started before reaching adulthood.
Statistics such as this have lead the FDA to classify nicotine addiction
as a pediatric disease.
B. Therefore, the Township of Little Egg Harbor finds it necessary to limit
the accessibility of cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors and
to regulate the means by which tobacco products are sold in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents.
§ 305-21 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 307-3
307:584
§ 307-4. Identification required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit to be sold
tobacco to any individual without requesting and examining identification
from the purchaser, positively establishing purchaser's age as 19 years or
greater, unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for determining
the purchaser is over the age of 19 years of age.
§ 307-5. Vending machines prohibited.
Sale of tobacco products through vending machines shall be prohibited.
§ 307-6. Self-service displays prohibited.
Self-service displays of tobacco products, from which individual packages
or individual cigarettes may be selected by the customer, are prohibited.
§ 307-7. Enforcement.
The Township of Little Egg Harbor Health Officer and/or his or her
designee, and/or a Township of Little Egg Harbor law enforcement officer,
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 307-8. Violations and penalties; inspections.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.1 et seq., it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, give, or permit to be sold, given or
furnished to an individual under the age of 19, tobacco in any form.
B. A sign, not less than six inches by eight inches, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place near each cash register in all retail establishments
which sell tobacco products containing the following language:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF
19 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A
person who sells or offers to sell a tobacco product to a person under
19 years of age may be prosecuted in accordance with state and local
ordinances.
A. No person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a
vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's
establishment, shall sell, offer for sale, distribute for commercial
purpose at no cost or minimal cost or with coupons or rebate offers,
give or furnish, to a person under 19 years of age any cigarettes made
of tobacco or of any other matter or substance which can be smoked, or
any cigarette paper or tobacco in any form, including smokeless
tobacco. A violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500 for the second
violation, and $1,000 for the third and each subsequent violation in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A: 170-51.4(c); and the Township may
§ 307-3 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 307-8
307:585
Chapter 309
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 196. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
§ 309-1. Rotating list of towing contractors established.
There is hereby established a rotating list of towing and storage contractors
authorized to provide vehicle towing and storage services as required by
the Township of Little Egg Harbor. The Chief of Police shall be responsible
recommend license revocation in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2A:170-51.4(d).
B. Whenever the Health Officer, his or her designee, Code Enforcement
Officer, or a law enforcement officer reasonably believes there exists a
violation of this chapter, such individual may, by written notification not
later than 60 days after discovery of the alleged violation, advise the
tobacco retailer of the nature of the violation and that any subsequent
failure or refusal to comply with this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in this chapter.
C. The Health Officer, his or her designee, Code Enforcement Officer, or a
law enforcement officer, after giving proper identification, may inspect
any matter, thing, premises or place as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose or otherwise obstruct a
Health Officer or his or her designee or the Code Enforcement Officer.
Such individual may request the assistance of a law enforcement officer
when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a manner
prescribed by law.
E. Except as provided in Subsection A above, any person violating or
failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000, by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment, and community service, as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above, for each separate offense.
F. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 307-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 309-1
309:586
for the administration of the rotating list. Nothing in these rules and
regulations shall be construed so as to prevent any owner or operator from
selecting his or her own towing service.
§ 309-2. Responsibilities of tower and storage service.
§ 309-3. Release from impound.
No vehicle shall be released from impound without written authorization
from the Little Egg Harbor Township Police Department.
§ 309-4. Required equipment.
A. Basic towing. Basic towing services shall be available and provided on a
seven-day-per-week, twenty-four-hour-per-day basis for the entire
geographic area of the Township of Little Egg Harbor. Contractors shall
respond to all calls from the police dispatcher for towing services.
Failure to comply with this requirement may subject the contractor to
removal from the rotating list in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 309-9F and G. The contractors on the rotating list must be
able to respond to any tow scene within 20 minutes of the Township's
request.
B. The contractor shall be responsible for the cleanup of debris in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8, with the exception of fuel oil,
chemicals or hazardous waste materials.
C. Storage. Each storage area must be enclosed by a secured fence which
is a minimum six feet in height. In addition, that area shall be
illuminated during the hours of darkness to the satisfaction of the
licensing authority. Each storage area must be open to the public for
release of stored vehicles, at a minimum, Monday through Friday, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
D. Recovery services. Recovery services will be furnished when necessary.
Recovery services are those services which require the recovery of an
automobile from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from
being impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm by
several actions that may include, but not be limited to, winching and
rigging.
A. All contractors on the rotating list shall provide and maintain the
following minimum equipment:
(1) A minimum of two tow/wreckers, one of which shall be sufficient to
tow vehicles over two tons and one of which shall be a flatbed.
(2) Communication equipment between vehicles and their dispatchers
via two-way radio.
§ 309-1 TOWING AND STORAGE § 309-4
309:587
§ 309-5. Eligibility for rotating list.
In addition to meeting all other criteria of this chapter, and in order to
be eligible for placement upon the rotating list of authorized towers, the
contractor shall supply a certificate of liability insurance by a company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, certifying that the
contractor maintains workers' compensation and garage liability insurance
of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit, garage keepers liability
of not less than $100,000 per vehicle, said garage keepers legal liability
insurance policy to further provide for fire, theft and explosion. All public
liability insurance, including garage liability and garage keepers legal
liability coverage, shall name the Township of Little Egg Harbor, its officers,
agents and employees as additional insureds on the policy, shall hold them
harmless, indemnify them from any and all claims filed against the Township
arising out of any act or failure to act on behalf of the contractor and
shall contain an endorsement providing 30 days' notice to the Township
in the event of any material changes of the policy or cancellation thereof.
Those contractors meeting the eligibility requirements shall be approved
and added to the rotating list by resolution of the Township Committee,
upon advice of the Chief of Police.
§ 309-6. Maximum rates and charges for passenger vehicles,
motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and mopeds.
The rates and charges for municipally required towing and storage services
for passenger vehicles, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and mopeds shall
be as follows:
(3) Tow vehicles shall have the name, address and telephone number
of the contractor painted or permanently attached to both sides of
the vehicle in compliance with state law.
B. All equipment must meet applicable state standards and shall be
subject to periodic inspection by the Township.
A. Maximum basic towing and storage charges.
(1) Days: first mile or less, $65; each additional mile, $3, based upon a
one-way charge.
(2) Nights, weekends and New Jersey State holidays: first mile or less,
$75; each additional mile, $3, based upon a one-way charge.
B. Maximum storage fee charges. Secured (outside or inside) 20 to 40
spaces: $35 per day.
C. The storage period shall start at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the
first full day the vehicle is placed into storage and ends at 12:00
midnight each day. Vehicles released on the same day that the vehicle is
placed into storage will be assessed a pro rata fee of $1 per hour for the
partial day. If a vehicle is towed or transported from the storage area by
§ 309-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 309-6
309:588
§ 309-7. Maximum rates and charges for trucks and other vehicles
with a gross weight of 1 1/2 tons or more.
The maximum rates and charges for trucks and other vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight of up to 15,000 pounds shall be as follows:
§ 309-8. Towing information supplied to Township.
the towing contractor at the request of the owner or authorized
representative, a fee not exceeding $3 per mile may be charged.
D. Recovery services. When it is necessary for certain recovery services to
be performed in order to preserve the condition of a motor vehicle while
moving the vehicle to a towable position, the rate for such services shall
be $110 per hour or any portion thereof.
E. The contractor shall prominently display this fee schedule at the
towing/storage facility.
A. First mile or less, $110; each additional mile, $4, based upon a one-way
charge.
B. Maximum storage fee charges. Secured (outside or inside), 20 to 40
spaces: $50 per day.
C. The storage period shall start at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the
first full day the vehicle is placed into storage and ends at 12:00
midnight each day. Vehicles released on the same day that the vehicle is
placed into storage will be assessed a pro rata fee of $1 per hour for the
partial day. If a vehicle is towed or transported from the storage area by
the towing contractor at the request of the owner or authorized
representative, a fee not exceeding $3 per mile may be charged.
D. Recovery services. When it is necessary for certain recovery services to
be performed in order to preserve the condition of a motor vehicle while
moving the vehicle to a towable position, the rate for such services shall
be $110 per hour or any portion thereof.
E. The contractor shall prominently display this fee schedule at the
towing/storage facility.
F. The towing rates set forth in Subsection A above are not intended to
apply to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight over 15,000 pounds, such
as tractor trailers, cement trucks and trash trucks, which require the
use of a special towing vehicle. Contractors may charge market rates
for towing such vehicles which exceed this 15,000 pounds weight.
A. The contractor shall provide to the Township the following information
concerning vehicles and employees:
(1) The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, type of
vehicle and registration number and proof of insurance.
§ 309-6 TOWING AND STORAGE § 309-8
309:589
§ 309-9. Miscellaneous provisions.
(2) The full name and address of all employees and license numbers.
Each listed employee must be competent to provide minimum road
services for disabled vehicles, present a neat appearance at all
times, obey all traffic safety laws and regulations, be subject to
periodic and unannounced inspections by the Chief of Police or
designee, and shall be approved by the Chief of Police prior to
rendering any services pursuant to this chapter.
(3) The addresses where the contractor shall be regularly based,
telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis
and the names of all operators, their addresses and the serial
numbers of their New Jersey motor vehicle licenses.
(4) Certification of approved emergency warning lights.
B. The contractor shall submit to the Little Egg Harbor Township Police
Department the following information on vehicles unclaimed over 30
days:
(1) The year, make, model, color and vehicle identification number.
(2) The owner's name and address.
(3) A copy of a certified letter advising the owner of the vehicle's
location and circumstances surrounding the same.
(4) A photograph of the vehicle.
(5) The mileage of the vehicle.
C. The contractor shall provide the Township with records of all towed
vehicles, storage and towing charges upon request.
A. The hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. shall apply to the day rate on
Monday through Friday, except New Jersey State holidays. The night,
weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
B. The Township of Little Egg Harbor shall assess an administrative fee of
$20 per vehicle to recover costs of administering the towing and
storage services for all vehicles coming under the purview of police
impound. Such assessment shall be placed on each vehicle processed
plus an additional fee to include storage rates consistent with this
chapter.
C. Under no circumstances shall the rates and fees charged by the
contractor exceed the amounts prescribed in §§ 309-6 and 309-7 of this
chapter.
D. The contractor shall charge the motor vehicle owner/operator or
insurance company directly for all services provided.
§ 309-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 309-9
309:590
Chapter 318
UNIFIED ELECTRONIC REPORTING SYSTEM FOR DEALERS
IN PRECIOUS METALS AND OTHER SECONDHAND GOODS
§ 318-1. Compliance required.
No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or occupation
of the buying, selling or pawning of precious metals or other secondhand
goods without complying with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 318-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable
U.S. government-issued identification, which will be recorded on the receipt
retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local Police
Department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, advertises for and/or engages
in or operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for
purposes of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods
as defined herein; pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as
defined herein. For the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined
E. The contractor may charge an hourly rate for standby time incurred for
winching, uprighting, excessive cleanup, waiting at the towing scene,
and other circumstances which fall outside the scope of services
classified as normal in §§ 309-6 and 309-7 at the prevailing/established
rate, which rate shall not exceed $60 per hour. The contractor must
verify all standby charges for waiting at the scene by direct contact
with the Police Communications Center. The police shall, if appropriate,
provide subsequent verification documentation. No standby charge for
waiting at the scene shall be charged without such verification.
F. The Chief of Police shall also maintain a record of the regular response
of wreckers to police calls and any complaints from vehicle owners as to
improper service or charges. The Police Department is authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with applicable
laws of the state. The Chief of Police may request contractor removal
from the rotating list pursuant to Subsection G below.
G. Upon written notice, a towing contractor may be removed from the
rotating list by resolution of the Township Committee if, after
opportunity to be heard, performance is determined to be unreliable or
inadequate, or in violation of this chapter or applicable state laws.
§ 309-9 TOWING AND STORAGE § 318-2
309:591
herein, are subject to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any
other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the Township or at varying locations.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this ordinance, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his or her permanent
residence or in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby
of collecting coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase,
or exchange of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by
billboard, sign, handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other
form of printed or electronic advertising.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the Township where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 318-3. License required; application requirement; advertising;
transferability of license.
§ 318-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 318-3
309:592
§ 318-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial; appeal.
A. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of
precious metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within
the Township of Little Egg Harbor, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a
number issued by the Municipal Clerk.
B. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the
name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or not he or she
is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she has ever
been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
C. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase
of such articles or goods without stating in the advertising the license
number issued to a person or entity by the Township. In any print
advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller than
eight point in the lower right-hand corner of the advertisement. In any
advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be visually
or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license number shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
established in § 318-9.
D. Licenses granted under this chapter are not transferable or assignable.
A. Applications for licensure under this chapter shall be referred by the
Clerk to the Chief of Police, who shall make an investigation of the
prospective licensee, pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of
determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing. The
investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 318-2 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant, including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
§ 318-3 TOWING AND STORAGE § 318-4
309:593
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 318-6D of this chapter will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 318-6A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the completed application
to the Municipal Clerk. If a criminal record check has been requested
within the thirty-day period and has not been received by the Chief of
Police within that period, the Chief of Police may, if all other factors are
satisfactory, recommend a conditional issuance of the license subject to
the finding regarding a criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. The Municipal Clerk shall notify the applicant in
writing within 10 days of a denial and the Clerk shall forward to the
applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) involving theft or the
receiving of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a
principal, accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator;
or any prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of
its principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 318-5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 318-6, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
§ 318-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 318-4
309:594
§ 318-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 318-7 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Township Committee, at which time the
applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as may be
deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of denial of a license to act as a dealer of secondhand
goods.
A. Require acceptable identification from each person selling or pawning
precious metals or other secondhand goods.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, in a format acceptable by the Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
(6) The receipt number;
§ 318-4 TOWING AND STORAGE § 318-5
309:595
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds troy,
pennyweight (troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter,
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or a dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so, including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 318-6.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
§ 318-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 318-5
309:596
§ 318-6. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well
as the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 318-6. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
A. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police, except for jewelry, which must be
maintained for at least 10 business days or for the statutory period
provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36d. All precious metals or other secondhand
goods subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as when
purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of,
changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the seven-day
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers
will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where
the purchased items are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement upon the sale
of those goods, a law enforcement officer with jurisdiction should
charge the seller with theft by deception under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on
behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the victim of the offense
for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer shall seize the goods,
provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a criminal complaint
against the seller for theft by deception and any other criminal charges
for which the officer has probable cause that the seller has committed.
If convicted of theft by deception and if so found by an order of a court
of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible for providing
restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the amount paid by
the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought against a dealer for a violation of this section if
retention for the time period required would have resulted in serious
and substantial economic losses to the dealer, or the probability of such
losses was significant due to rapid and highly fluctuating market
conditions, provided that the persons so charged shall prove the
existence of the market conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense
by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be a
defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts would
characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence so as to
clearly distinguish trading conditions from normal variations in market
movement in response to economic news or other events.
§ 318-5 TOWING AND STORAGE § 318-6
309:597
D. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods.
E. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
F. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 318-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the Township;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection H. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the Township until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
H.
G. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 318-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
§ 318-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 318-6
309:598
§ 318-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by
a surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State
of New Jersey. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township Attorney, and shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned
for the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions
and requirements of all ordinances of the Township in force or which may be
adopted respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned also that
the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons who
shall have received judgment against the dealer licensed under this chapter,
which damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within the Township of Little Egg Harbor or any
jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation, and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the Township.
H. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township
Committee, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such suspension or
revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of
revocation or suspension of license.
I. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 318-6 TOWING AND STORAGE § 318-7
309:599
jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation
of this bond shall, in addition to the Township of Little Egg Harbor, be and
remain for the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against
obligor as a result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license
granted under this chapter." Said bond shall be kept for a minimum of one
year from the date of issuance of license and must be renewed annually
along with the license.
§ 318-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license under this chapter is
$300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are separate
from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to the
mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police.
Payments are to be made in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A
license is valid for a one-year period from the date of its issuance.
§ 318-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of $2,000 or by a
term of imprisonment or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, in addition to a suspension or revocation of the operating license as
provided in § 318-6. Each and every violation shall be considered a separate
violation. Each violation shall result in an additional suspension period. Any
person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter within
one year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the
previous violation may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a
repeat offender and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings
as provided in § 318-6G. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of this chapter.
§ 318-10. Time limit for conformance.
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods, shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 319
UNIFIED ELECTRONIC REPORTING SYSTEM FOR DEALERS
IN SCRAP METAL
§ 318-7 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-1
309:600
§ 319-1. Compliance required.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or occupation
of the buying, selling, or pawning of scrap metal without complying with the
requirements of this chapter in the exact manner described herein.
§ 319-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable
U.S. government-issued identification, which will be recorded on the receipt
retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local Police
Department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates a
scrap metal business involving the buying and/or selling of scrap metal
as defined herein, including itinerant businesses, and transient buyers as
defined herein.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any scrap metal dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the Township or at varying locations.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which scrap metal is purchased or
pawned.
SCRAP METAL — Used, discarded, or previously owned items that consist
predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium,
tin, nickel, or alloys.
SCRAP METAL BUSINESS — A commercial establishment which, as one of
its principal business purposes, advertises for the purchase of or purchases
scrap metal for purposes of resale or processing, including transient buyers
of scrap metal and itinerant businesses, as defined herein.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells scrap metal to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — An operator of a scrap metal business, as defined
herein, who has not been in the scrap metal business continuously for at
least six months at any address in the Township where the dealer is required
to register or who intends to close out or discontinue the scrap metal
business within six months.
§ 319-3. License required; application requirement; advertising;
transferability of license.
§ 319-1 TOWING AND STORAGE § 319-3
309:601
§ 319-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial; appeal.
A. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in a scrap metal business within the Township of
Little Egg Harbor without having first obtained a license therefor from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk.
B. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the
name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or not he or she
is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she has ever
been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
C. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase
of such articles or goods without stating in the advertising the license
number issued to a person or entity by the Township. In any print
advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller than
eight point in the lower right-hand corner of the advertisement. In any
advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be visually
or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license number shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
established in § 319-9.
D. Licenses granted under this chapter are not transferable or assignable.
A. Applications for licensure under this chapter shall be referred by the
Clerk to the Chief of Police, who shall make an investigation of the
prospective licensee, for the purpose of determining the suitability of
the applicant for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of scrap metal, although nothing in this section shall be
construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack
of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant, including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
§ 319-3 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-4
309:602
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of scrap metal, and
other factors bearing on whether the licensed business will be of
a fixed and permanent nature. This section shall not be construed
to require denial of any license solely on the grounds that the
business is not from a fixed location or that the applicant is a
transient buyer or itinerant business; however, applicants who fall
under the category of a transient buyer or itinerant business must
state with specificity on the license application the business
address where transaction records required by § 319-6D of this
chapter will be stored as well as the location where scrap metal
goods will be retained during the mandatory inspection period
required under § 319-6A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the completed application
to the Municipal Clerk. If a criminal record check has been requested
within the thirty-day period and has not been received by the Chief of
Police within that period, the Chief of Police may, if all other factors are
satisfactory, recommend a conditional issuance of the license subject to
the finding regarding a criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. The Municipal Clerk shall notify the applicant in
writing within 10 days of a denial, and the Clerk shall forward to the
applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a scrap metal business. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) involving theft or the
receiving of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a
principal, accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator;
or any prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of
its principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 319-5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 319-6, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 319-7 of this chapter.
§ 319-4 TOWING AND STORAGE § 319-4
309:603
§ 319-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Township Committee, at which time the
applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as may be
deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of denial of a license to act as a scrap metal business.
A. Require acceptable identification from each person selling scrap metal.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, in a format acceptable by the Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police.
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) purchased, including
but not limited to the manufacturer, type, amount, form, model, any
identifying marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers;
(8) The price paid for the item(s);
§ 319-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-5
309:604
(9) The make, model and license plate of the motor vehicle delivering
the scrap metal;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter,
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase. The information entered must contain all
pertinent information outlined in Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or a dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so, including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 319-6.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of scrap metal, as well as the articles purchased or
received and, where necessary, relinquish custody of those articles as
provided in § 319-6. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the address where these
records and articles will be stored.
G. For all reportable transactions between a dealer and a member of the
public, the dealer may only accept delivery of scrap metal for purchase
by motor vehicle, and the license plate of the motor vehicle must be
recorded as provided in Subsection C above.
H. No scrap metal business shall purchase the following, except as
provided in Subsection I below:
§ 319-5 TOWING AND STORAGE § 319-5
309:605
§ 319-6. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
(1) Any metal marked with identification of a telephone, cable, electric,
water, other public utility, or other government entity;
(2) Any utility access or water meter cover;
(3) Any streetlight pole or fixture;
(4) Any road or bridge guard rail;
(5) Any highway or street sign, traffic directional or control sign, or
light signal;
(6) Any metal beer keg that is clearly marked as being the property of
the beer manufacturer;
(7) Any historical marker, grave marker, or burial vase;
(8) Any central air conditioner evaporator coils or condensers or
catalytic converters that are not attached to a vehicle; or
(9) Any metal bleachers or benches.
I. The provisions of Subsection H shall not apply to purchases of scrap
metal from entities that manage such metal in the ordinary course of
business. These entities include manufacturing, industrial, government,
contractor, individual or other commercial vendors or scrap metal
businesses that generate, purchase or process scrap metal in the
ordinary course of business.
A. All scrap metal purchased or received by a dealer in a reportable
transaction is to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police
or designee thereof at the designated business address for a period of
at least seven calendar days from the date the transaction information
is actually reported to the Chief of Police. All scrap metal subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified,
or melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible
for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the purchased
item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement upon the sale
of those goods, a law enforcement officer with jurisdiction should
charge the seller with theft by deception under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on
behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the victim of the offense
for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer shall seize the goods,
provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a criminal complaint
against the seller for theft by deception and any other criminal charges
for which the officer has probable cause that the seller has committed.
If convicted of theft by deception and if so found by an order of a court
§ 319-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-6
309:606
of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible for providing
restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the amount paid by
the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought against a dealer for a violation of this section if
retention for the time period required would have resulted in serious
and substantial economic losses to the dealer, or the probability of such
losses was significant due to rapid and highly fluctuating market
conditions, provided that the persons so charged shall prove the
existence of the market conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense
by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be a
defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts would
characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence so as to
clearly distinguish trading conditions from normal variations in market
movement in response to economic news or other events.
D. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of scrap
metal.
E. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
F. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 319-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the Township;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection H. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease all purchasing and/or selling of scrap metal in
the Township until reinstatement.
§ 319-6 TOWING AND STORAGE § 319-6
309:607
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
H.
G. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 319-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within the Township of Little Egg Harbor or any
jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation, and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating a scrap metal business within the Township.
H. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township
Committee, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such suspension or
revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of
revocation or suspension of license.
§ 319-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-6
309:608
§ 319-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by
a surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State
of New Jersey. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township Attorney, and shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned
for the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions
and requirements of all ordinances of the Township in force or which may be
adopted respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned also that
the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons who
shall have received judgment against the dealer licensed under this chapter,
which damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper
jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation
of this bond shall, in addition to the Township of Little Egg Harbor, be and
remain for the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against
obligor as a result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license
granted under this chapter." Said bond shall be kept for a minimum of one
year from the date of issuance of license and must be renewed annually
along with the license.
§ 319-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license under this chapter is
$300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are separate
from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to the
mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police.
Payments are to be made in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A
license is valid for a one-year period from the date of its issuance.
§ 319-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of $2,000 or by a
term of imprisonment or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, in addition to a suspension or revocation of the operating license as
provided in § 319-6. Each and every violation shall be considered a separate
violation. Each violation shall result in an additional suspension period. Any
person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter within
one year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the
previous violation may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a
repeat offender and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings
as provided in § 319-6G. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of this chapter.
I. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 319-6 TOWING AND STORAGE § 319-10
309:609
§ 319-10. Time limit for conformance.
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods, shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 323
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 196.
Towing and storage — See Ch. 309.
Vehicular sound reproduction — See Ch. 326.
§ 319-10 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 319-10
309:610
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 323-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
§ 323-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Little Egg Harbor are
hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the
prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in
violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this
chapter.
§ 323-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 323-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
another section of this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.
§ 323-1 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-4
309:611

ARTICLE II
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 323-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, or any other New Jersey statute,
or as hereinafter provided.
§ 323-6. Parking, stopping and standing prohibited at all times.
§ 323-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III
(§ 323-35) of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 323-8. Direction and side of street; violations and penalties.
§ 323-9. Fire zones.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I (§ 323-33), attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle for the times specified in
Schedule II (§ 323-34) on any day, except Sundays and public holidays,
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II
attached hereto and made a part of this chapter.
A. The operator/owner of a vehicle shall not stop, stand, or park the
vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway
headed in the direction of traffic, on the right-hand side of the road and
with the curbside of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of the
roadway, except as follows:
(1) Upon those streets which have been designated by ordinance and
have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be
parked at the angle to the curb designated and indicated by the
ordinance and marks or signs.
(2) Upon one-way streets, the Township Committee may permit
parking of vehicles parallel with the left-hand edge of the roadway
headed in the direction of traffic, on the left-hand side of the road
and with the curbside of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of
the roadway.
B. Every person convicted of violation of Subsection A shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in § 323-4 of this chapter.
§ 323-5 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-9
309:613
A. No person shall at any time park a vehicle, or in any other manner
obstruct any driveway or other area that has been designated as
hereinabove provided as a "Fire Zone," as designated by the fire
subcode official or other appropriate individual.
B. The Board of Fire Commissioners is authorized to regulate, restrict and
prohibit the parking and operation of motor vehicles in and near such
fire areas and to impose other reasonable regulations necessary to
insure that such areas are free from obstruction.
C. The Board of Fire Commissioners of each fire district, the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Police Department of the Township of
Little Egg Harbor shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this section.
D. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment of not more than 90
days, or both.
E. Notwithstanding the penalties hereinabove provided for violations of
this section, the municipality shall be entitled to pursue any other
remedy available at law or equity to enforce the provisions hereof.
§ 323-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 323-9
309:614
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Trucks
§ 323-10. Trucks over four tons excluded from certain streets;
weight restrictions; transport of flammable substances.
A. Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets specified in Schedule IV (§ 323-36), except for
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets. Schedule IV is hereby
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. No person, firm, or corporation shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, or
omnibus, having a weight in excess of 12,000 pounds, on any street in
the Township of Little Egg Harbor between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., prevailing time, of any day. This section shall not apply to
self-propelled recreational vehicles.
C. No person shall permit any truck or other vehicle designated to
transport flammable or toxic substances, and carrying such substances,
to be parked within 200 feet of any residential zone, except when
making a delivery of such substances to a residential dwelling. If any
truck or other vehicle is being used to deliver said flammable or toxic
substance, it shall be permitted to park in the vicinity of the delivery
place only for such time as is necessary to make such delivery.
D. Nothing herein contained within this section shall be construed to
prevent any such vehicle from making deliveries of merchandise or
other property to the premises on the street along which said vehicle is
so parked, nor to prevent the parking of any such vehicle by any public
utility company in connection with the construction, installation,
operation and maintenance of public utilities, nor to prevent the
parking of vehicles attending to an emergency.
E. Signs with the following specification shall be posted on all streets and
highways at the entrance to the Township:
(1) The signs shall be in red letters on white background and
reflectorized, incorporated on a single plate 30 inches in width and
24 inches in height, with the legend COMMERCIAL TRUCKS and
BUSES, lettering to be six inches.
(2) On a plate below said COMMERCIAL TRUCKS and BUSES, which
plate shall be 36 inches in height and 30 inches in width, shall
appear the legend NO PARKING ANY STREET 11:00 P.M. TO 6:00
A.M., the lettering therefor to be five inches for NO PARKING and
four inches for ANY STREET 11:00 P.M. TO 6:00 A.M.
F. For the purposes of this section, unless another meaning is clearly
apparent, the classes of vehicles hereinabove enumerated shall be
defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey, Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Regulations, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 323-10 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-10
309:615

ARTICLE IV
Through Streets
§ 323-11. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule V (§ 323-37) attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 323-11 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-11
309:617

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 323-12. Stop and yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedules VI and VII (§§ 323-38 and 323-39), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop or yield intersections,
designated therein. Stop or yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 323-12 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-12
309:619

ARTICLE VI
Emergency No Parking
§ 323-13. Posting of signs.
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets, where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his or her absence, the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires, or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of
hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic.
§ 323-14. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 323-15. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 323-13 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-15
309:621

ARTICLE VII
Storage of Impounded Vehicles
§ 323-16. Collection of fees; disposition.
The Chief of Police, or designated alternate, is authorized to collect the fees
assessed under this article and to deposit same in the treasury.
§ 323-16 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-16
309:623

ARTICLE VIII
Speed Limits
§ 323-17. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule VIII (§ 323-40), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 323-18. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 323-17 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-18
309:625

ARTICLE IX
Traffic Control Signals
§ 323-19. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
an Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Violations, Subtitle 1 of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, and shall conform to the design
and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 323-19 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-19
309:627

ARTICLE X
Turn Prohibitions
§ 323-20. Left-turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule IX (§ 323-41), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 323-20 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-20
309:629

ARTICLE XI
One-Way Streets
§ 323-21. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule X (§ 323-42), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated. All regulatory and warning signs shall be erected
and maintained to effect this one-way street designation as authorized by
the Department of Transportation.
§ 323-21 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-21
309:631

ARTICLE XII
No-Passing Zones
§ 323-22. No-passing zones designated.
The Township Committee does hereby designate that no-passing zones shall
be established and maintained upon the roads described in Schedule XI
(§ 323-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter. Regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect such no-passing
zones as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 323-22 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-22
309:633

ARTICLE XIII
Bus Stops
§ 323-23. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 323-44), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 323-23 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-23
309:635

ARTICLE XIV
Closing of Municipal Streets for Preservation of Public Safety,
Health or Welfare
§ 323-24. Purpose; statutory authority.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the Township Administrator of the
Township of Little Egg Harbor shall provide for the closing of any municipal
street, or portion thereof, to motor vehicle traffic on any day, or during any
specified hours on any day, whenever he or she finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
§ 323-25. Determination of closure; warning signs.
§ 323-26. Violations and penalties.
A. Prior to the closing of any municipal street, in accordance with this
chapter, the Township Administrator shall confer with the Chief of
Police and the Committee member in charge of streets and roads
concerning the municipal street to be closed and the duration of the
closure of said municipal street.
B. In the event that the Township Administrator, acting under the
authority of this chapter, determines that the municipal street, or
portion thereof, should be closed for a specified period of time, the
Township Administrator shall direct that proper warning signs of such
closing be posted on any municipal street, or portion thereof, during the
time that municipal street, or portion thereof, is closed.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service, as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The combination of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provisions of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 323-24 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-26
309:637

ARTICLE XV
Snow Emergencies
§ 323-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESSENTIAL VEHICLE — Those vehicles that are vital or necessary for the
safe and orderly operation of the Township during a snow emergency, such
as, but not limited to, police vehicles and public works vehicles.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets,
roads or highways, including, but not limited to, snow, sleet, hail, or freezing
rain.
SNOW EMERGENCY — Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation
is such that it covers a Township street, an emergency shall exist and no
vehicle shall be parked on any Township street or portions thereof.
§ 323-28. Parking prohibited.
§ 323-29. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this article shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any
police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall
pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage, which may result from
such removal, before regaining possession of such vehicle.
§ 323-30. Driving regulations during snow emergency.
Driving restrictions may be imposed as warranted by the severity of the
storm to ensure the safety of the general public.
§ 323-31. Construal of provisions.
A. Parking of any vehicle on any portion of a Township road, street, or
highway improved, designated, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic is
prohibited whenever snow has fallen and results in an accumulation
sufficient to require plowing of Township roads, streets, or highways by
the Little Egg Harbor Township Department of Public Works.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit parking at any time
or place where it is forbidden by other provisions of the New Jersey
statutes or the Township Code.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with the provisions
of the New Jersey statutes pertaining to driving during emergencies.
§ 323-27 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-32
309:639
§ 323-32. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by community
service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine,
imprisonment and community service, as determined in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for
each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provisions of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 323-32 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 323-32
309:640
ARTICLE XVI
Schedules
§ 323-33. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Beloff Drive West Between Frazier Road and Nugentown
Road
Cedarbrook Court North From a point 50 feet from the
intersection of Cedarbrook Lane
clockwise on the cul-de-sac to a point
450 feet therefrom
Cedarbrook Lane East From a point 50 feet from the
intersection of Country Club Boulevard
clockwise to the end of the radius on its
terminating cul-de-sac
Gifford Road North From US Route No. 9 to a point 245
feet westerly therefrom
Gifford Road South Entire length
Hollybrook Drive North/
East
From a point 35 feet from the
intersection of Cedarbrook Lane to a
point 50 feet from the intersection of
Willowbrook Lane
Laureldale Court South From a point 50 feet from the
intersection of Cedarbrook Lane
clockwise on the cul-de-sac to a point
550 feet therefrom
Mystic Shores
Boulevard
Both From Mathistown Road to Valley Forge
Drive
Oakbrook Drive South/
East
From a point 50 feet from the
intersection of Country Club Boulevard
to a point 35 feet from the intersection
of Cedarbrook Lane
Willowbrook Lane South/
East
From a point 50 feet from the
intersection of Country Club Boulevard
to a point 35 feet from the intersection
of Harbourtown Boulevard
§ 323-34. Schedule II: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-6, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 323-33 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-34
309:641
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Giffordtown Lane Both At all
times
From the westerly curbline of
Route US 9 to a point 125
feet westerly therefrom
Oak Lane Both At all
times
From the easterly curbline of
Route US 9 to a point 125
feet easterly therefrom
Oak Lane North At all
times
From the easterly curbline of
Radio Road to a point 75 feet
east thereof
Oak Lane South At all
times
From the westerly curbline of
Radio Road to a point 65 feet
west thereof
§ 323-35. Schedule III: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Center Street Both 11:00
p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between the Tuckerton/Little
Egg Harbor Township
corporate line and its
southerly terminus
Radio Road Both 11:00
p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between the Tuckerton/Little
Egg Harbor Township
corporate line and its
southerly terminus
§ 323-36. Schedule IV: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-10, trucks over four tons' gross
weight are excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Kadlubeck Way Between Radio Road and Cala Breeze Way
Leitz Boulevard Between Gale Road and Center Street (County
Road 103)
Wisteria Lane Between US Route No. 9 and Leitz Boulevard
§ 323-37. Schedule V: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
§ 323-34 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 323-37
309:642
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Atlantis Boulevard Between Country Club Road and Great Bay
Boulevard
Boulder Lake Drive Between Seneca Lake Drive and its terminus
Cala Breeze Way Between Radio Road and Twin Lakes Boulevard,
thence between Twin Lakes Boulevard and its
southerly terminus
Cedarbrook Lane Between Country Club Boulevard and its westerly
terminus
Country Club
Boulevard
Between its northerly and southerly intersections
with Radio Road (County Road 25)
Forest Edge Drive Between Nugentown Road and its terminus
Frog Pond Road Between Route No. 539 and Parkertown Drive
Great Bay Boulevard Between the Tuckerton/Little Egg Harbor
Township line and its southerly terminus
Kadlubeck Way Between Radio Road and Cala Breeze Way
Lake Champlain Drive Between Twin Lakes Boulevard and National
Union
Leitz Boulevard Between Gale Road and Center Street
National Union
Boulevard
Between Center Street and Twin Lakes Boulevard,
thence between Twin Lakes Boulevard and
Kadlubeck Way
Nugentown Road Between Otis Bog Road and Marginal Road
Oakleaf Drive Between Center Street and its terminus into itself
Playhouse Drive Between its easterly terminus and Radio Road
Pulaski Boulevard Between Cala Breeze Way and Radio Road
Sea Meadow Drive Between US Route No. 9 and its easterly terminus
Senica Drive Between Twin Lakes Boulevard and Center Street
Staysail Drive Between Captains Drive and North and South
Binnacle Drive
Taylor Street Between US Route No. 9 and its westerly terminus
Twin Lakes Boulevard Between Radio Road and its southerly terminus
§ 323-38. Schedule VI: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-12, the following intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections:
§ 323-37 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-38
309:643
Intersection Stop Sign On
Arlene Drive and John Street Arlene Drive
Cherry Street and Brook Street Cherry Street
Falcon Drive and West Anchor Drive Falcon Drive
Greenwood Lake Road and Mountain
Lake Road
Greenwood Lake Road
Hollybrook Drive and Oakbrook Drive Hollybrook Drive
Hollybrook Drive and Willowbrook Hollybrook Drive
Huron Drive and Lakewood Court Huron Drive
Jefferson Lane and Revere Drive (west) Revere Drive
Kentucky Drive and Louisiana Drive Kentucky Drive
Lake Drive and Candle Lake Drive Candle Lake Drive (both sides)
Lake Drive and Lake Ontario Place Lake Ontario Place
Lake Michigan Drive and Lake Superior
Drive
Lake Michigan Drive
Lake Superior Drive and Falcon Drive Lake Superior Drive
Lake Winnepesaukee and Candle Lake
Drive
Candle Lake Drive (both sides)
Mountain Lake Road and Lake
Crystalbrook Drive
Mountain Lake Road
Mountain Lake Road and Oneida Lake
Drive
Oneida Lake Drive
My Way and John Street My Way
North Captains Drive and Playhouse
Drive
North Captains Drive
Oakleaf Drive and Oakleaf Drive (angle) Oakleaf Drive (where it
intersects itself at a right)
Pulaski Boulevard and Cala Breeze Way Pulaski Boulevard
Revere Drive and Jefferson Lane (east) Jefferson Lane
South Captains Drive and Playhouse
Drive
South Captains Drive
Stage Road and Otis Bog Road [Added
10-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-19]
Stage Road (both sides) and
Otis Bog Road (both sides)
Staysail Drive and North and South
Binnacle Drive
Staysail Drive
§ 323-39. Schedule VII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-12, the following intersections
are designated as yield intersections:
§ 323-38 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 323-39
309:644
Intersection Yield Sign Location
Twin Lakes Boulevard Where northbound entrance road to
WaWa from northbound Twin Lakes
Boulevard intersects the southbound
Twin Lakes Boulevard Lane
§ 323-40. Schedule VIII: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-17, the following speed limits
shall be established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Speed
(mph) Location
Frog Pond Road
[Added 7-11-2013
by Ord. No.
2013-12]
Both 40 Entire length (except in front
of school when children are
present, then the limit is 25
mph)
Nugentown Road Both 35 Between 900 feet west of
John Street and 1,000 feet
east of Forest Edge Drive
Nugentown Road Both 40 Between 1,000 feet east of
Forest Edge Drive and Otis
Bog Road
Oak Lane Both 35 Entire length
Otis Bog Road Both 45 Between US Route No. 9 and
Nugentown Road
Stage Road Both 45 Between the Bass River
Township/Little Egg Harbor
Township line and Otis Bog
Road
Stage Road Both 40 Between Otis Bog Road and
Sandy Court
Stage Road Both 35 Between Sandy Court and US
Route No. 9
US Route No. 9
Zone 1 Both 50 Between the Bass River
Township corporate line/and
280 feet south of Wisteria
Lane (approximately mile
post 59.89 to 61.59); thence
§ 323-39 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-40
309:645
Name of Street Side
Speed
(mph) Location
Zone 2 Both 40 Between 280 feet south of
Wisteria Lane and the Little
Egg Harbor Township
corporate line/Tuckerton
Borough corporate line
(approximately mile post
61.59 to 62.14)
§ 323-41. Schedule IX: No Left Turn.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-20, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 323-42. Schedule X: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-21, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
(Reserved)
§ 323-43. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-22, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained along the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Calabreeze Way Both Entire length
§ 323-44. Schedule XII: Bus Stops. [Amended 3-12-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-03]
In accordance with the provisions of § 323-23, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
§ 323-40 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 323-44
309:646
Name of Street Side Location
Radio Road East Intersection of Gaskill Drive, near side,
beginning at the southerly curbline of
Gaskill Drive and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom
Radio Road West Intersection of Gaskill Drive, far side,
beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Gaskill Drive and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom (at the Parish of Saint
Theresa)
§ 323-44 TOWING AND STORAGE § 323-44
309:647
Chapter 324
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 323.
§ 324-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to set standards for the operation
of motorized off-road vehicles within the Township so as to improve the
standards of safety as well as to minimize the impact of the operation of
such vehicles on residents of the Township and the environment.
§ 324-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — A motorized or motor-driven vehicle designed
primarily for transportation of the driver, including minibikes, trail bikes,
snowmobiles, unlicensed motorcycles, motor scooters, motorbikes, gocarts,
dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles or other recreational vehicles
designed primarily for transportation of the driver on other than the public
or private roadway. This definition does not include lawn mowers, tractors
or farm, lawn, garden or similar equipment when used for the purposes for
which it was designed.
§ 324-3. Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to operate any off-road vehicle within the Township:
A. On the private property of another person or party unless the operator
of the vehicle has express written permission of the owner or legal
occupant of said property to operate the vehicle thereon, which
permission must be exhibited to police officers on request or produced
at headquarters of the Police Department within 48 hours.
B. On any public street, sidewalk or bike path within the Township unless
the operator is fully dismounted.
C. On public grounds unless permission for operation of such vehicles on
said grounds has been specifically given by the proper public authority.
D. In a manner creating loud or unusual noise so as to interfere with the
peace and quiet of other persons.
§ 323-44 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 324-4
309:648
§ 324-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as determined
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
Chapter 326
VEHICULAR SOUND REPRODUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 242.
§ 326-1. Vehicular sound reproduction equipment during night
time.
Vehicular sound reproduction equipment may not be plainly audible at a
residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
If a motor vehicle's sound reproduction equipment is plainly audible at a
residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., the
operator of the vehicle shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 326-2. Vehicular sound reproduction equipment during day time.
Vehicular sound reproduction equipment may not be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. If a motor
vehicle's sound reproduction equipment is plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., the operator of the
vehicle shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 326-3. Acts declared nuisances.
The acts enumerated in §§ 326-1 and 326-2 above are declared to be
nuisances and a violation of this chapter.
§ 326-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as
§ 324-4 VEHICULAR SOUND REPRODUCTION § 326-4
326:649
Chapter 328
VITAL STATISTICS
§ 328-1. Birth, death, marriage, civil union and domestic
partnership certificates.
A fee of $10 shall be payable to the Registrar of Vital Statistics in the
Township of Little Egg Harbor for the issuance of each certified copy of
a birth certificate, death certificate, marriage certificate, civil union or
domestic partnership certificate.
§ 328-2. State-mandated fees.
At such time as said fee is payable, the Registrar shall also collect any fee
mandated to be collected by the State of New Jersey for any such license or
certificate.
§ 328-3. Search fees.
The Registrar shall be entitled to and collect a search fee of $10 for
each such certificate of birth, death, marriage, civil union or domestic
partnership requested.
§ 328-4. Refund.
There shall be no refund of fees paid for any services performed by the
Registrar.
Chapter 333
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 282.
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting
the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 326-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 328-4
333:650
ARTICLE I
Water Use Emergencies
§ 333-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a means of regulating the use of
water when, in the opinion of the Township Committee, a serious problem
exists as to the adequacy of the water supply and pressure within the
Township.
§ 333-2. Essential and nonessential water use.
§ 333-3. Violations and penalties.
Anyone found in violation of regulations imposed by the Township
Committee may be liable for a fine not to exceed $100 for each violation.
A. In the event of such a situation, the Township may convene in special
emergency session and, by resolution, enact regulations of the use of
water in the Township to essential purposes only, which for purposes of
this article shall be defined as cooking and sanitary needs.
B. The Township Committee may prohibit the use of nonessential uses,
which for purposes of this article shall include, but not be limited, to the
filling of swimming pools, the washing of automobiles, the watering of
gardens and lawns, and the use of water in general outdoor
maintenance.
§ 333-1 WATER § 333-3
333:651

ARTICLE II
Water Connections
§ 333-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes or occupancy by persons,
whether temporary or permanent, or in which water is used for human
consumption or otherwise.
CONNECTION DATE IN AREAS WHERE DECLARATION OF HAZARD OR
POTENTIAL HAZARD HAS TAKEN PLACE — When used with respect to a
building constructed prior to the date of initial operation of a water line
available to serve said building which is owned or operated by the Township
or by a private utility authorized to do business in the Township of Little
Egg Harbor, shall mean the 180th day next ensuing after the water line is
available to serve said building. Any building built after the date when a
water line is available to serve said building shall connect to such water line
at the time such construction is completed and prior to occupancy.
CONNECTION DATE IN ALL OTHER AREAS OF THE TOWNSHIP — All new
construction inclusive of homes or buildings moved on to a site or lot shall
connect to the municipal water supply system within 45 days after notice
that such water supply system is available to the premises. All existing
homes or structures for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued
prior to the adoption of this article shall connect to the municipal water
supply system within two years of the date of the adoption of this article.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Little Egg Harbor.
WATER LINE — Any pipe or conduit designed or used for the transmission
of potable water within the Township, whether owned and operated by the
Township itself or any regulated public utility authorized to supply water for
domestic and other purposes within the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
§ 333-5. Mandatory connection and capping and filling of wells.
The owner of any building or lot which the Department of Environmental
Protection has declared in writing to the Township of Little Egg Harbor
to have been adversely affected by hazardous substances emanating from
toxic spill and which has upon it, for use in connection with domestic or
nondomestic purposes, a well or wells, the water of which either has been
contaminated or is exposed to a high potential of contamination, shall do
the following when a public water supply is made ready and available for
hookup in the street upon which said lot or building in the designated area
fronts or within any distance of said lot or building in the designated area:
A. Cap and fill, so as to permanently destroy any water-producing capacity
of any well located upon said premises, whether used for domestic or
nondomestic purposes, within 30 days after such time as public water,
§ 333-4 WATER § 333-5
333:653
§ 333-6. Mandatory connection of all new or existing homes or
structures.
The owner of any new home or building containing public facilities, either
constructed or moved to a new lot within the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
shall connect to the municipal or public water supply system within 45 days
after notice that such water supply system is available to the premises. All
existing homes or structures for which a certificate of occupancy has been
issued prior to the adoption of this article shall connect to the municipal
water supply system within two years of the date of the adoption of this
article. This shall not affect or apply to any property being covered by the
conditions described in § 333-5 above.
§ 333-7. Connection specifications.
Every connection required by this article shall comply in all respects to
the Plumbing Code of the Township of Little Egg Harbor, the Uniform
Construction Code or such other code, ordinance or statute as shall be in
force and effect at the time connection is required.
§ 333-8. Notice of availability of water; order to connect.
Upon receipt by the Township Committee or its designee of notification from
the Little Egg Harbor Township MUA or any private utility authorized to do
business in the Township that any water line is available to serve building on
any properties in the Township as described in § 333-5 above, the Township
Committee or its designee shall order each owner of a building or of a lot to
connect each building on such property and the lot, or either, with the said
water line in accordance with the terms of this article.
as referred to in Subsection B below, has been hooked up to said
building or within 60 days of notice received to hook into said public
water supply as hereinafter set forth, whichever first occurs. All wells
shall be permanently disconnected from all houses, buildings and uses.
The NJDEP and the Township of Little Egg Harbor shall determine
which wells will solely be sealed so that access is available for future
monitoring of the water. Property owners shall not have any discretion
or ability to influence which wells are selected. The owner of any
building which has been hooked up to a public water supply prior to the
effective date of this article shall comply with the terms and conditions
of this article within 30 days of the effective date, unless the time is
otherwise expended in writing by the Township.
B. Hook into the public water supply so that said public water supply shall
be used for all domestic purposes, dwelling purposes or for any other
purpose within 60 days of notice being given to said owner. Nothing
contained in this subsection shall prevent the use of said public water
supply for uses other than domestic.
§ 333-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 333-9
333:654
§ 333-9. Service of notice to connect.
The Township shall designate one of its proper officers to give notice to
the owner of property with respect to which an order is issued pursuant to
§ 333-8. Such notice shall be addressed to the owner of said property as the
name of the owner appears in the last tax duplicate of the Township of Little
Egg Harbor and shall describe the property by lot and block designation as
the same appears in the tax map of the Township and by the street address if
a street address exists. The notice shall state that by order of the Township
the owner is required to connect each building on said property with the
water line and cap and fill any well located on the property in accordance
with the terms of this article on or before the connection date with respect
to such building, or if such connection date shall have passed, within 30
days after service of such notice has hereinafter provided, and said notice
shall also describe the penalty which may be imposed hereunder for failure
to comply with said notice and order in accordance with the terms of this
article. Said notice may also be served within or without the limits of the
Township by mailing the same by certified mail to the last known post office
address of said owner as the same appears on the last tax duplicate of the
Township. Said notice may be served on the owner personally or by leaving
it at his usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age of
18 years.
§ 333-10. Violations and penalties.
A. In the event any person, corporation, partnership or other entity
(hereinafter "person") shall not have connected the building or
buildings on his or its property to an available water line after the
connection date and after the thirty-day notice sent to such person
under § 333-9 of this article, such person shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined $250; plus an additional fine of $25 shall be imposed for each
day the violation shall have existed per the terms of this article.
B. In the event any person shall not cap and fill or permit the Township or
its duly authorized agency to cap and fill so as to permanently destroy
any water-producing capacity of any well located upon private premises
as otherwise required in this article, such person shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined $250; plus an additional fine of $25 shall be imposed
for each day the violation shall have existed for the term of this article.
C. In no event shall either Subsection A or B above be construed so as to
preclude the Township, the State of New Jersey or any of their duly
authorized subdivisions, agents, servants or employees from seeking
appropriate administrative and/or other legal remedy which would
require the owner to comply with this article and/or to seek such other
relief as the ordinances of the Township, the statutes of the State of
New Jersey or the case law of the State of New Jersey may permit,
including reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses and reasonable
attorneys' fees.
§ 333-9 WATER § 333-11
333:655
§ 333-11. Enforcement.
The Little Egg Harbor Municipal Utilities Authority shall have the authority
to enforce all the provisions of this article. This power shall include but not
be limited to the authority to enforce the requirements for connection to the
municipal sewer as well as the municipal water system.
§ 333-11 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 333-11
333:656
Chapter 338
WILDLIFE FEEDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 134. Pet waste — See Ch. 271.
§ 338-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park, beach, place or resort, or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 338-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 338-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park, beach, place of resort, or on any
other property owned or operated by the Township of Little Egg Harbor, any
wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos,
parks, or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers).
§ 338-4. Enforcement.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting, or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Little Egg Harbor.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 333-11 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 338-5
338:657
§ 338-5. Violations and penalties.
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 345
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Township
Committee — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Board of Health — See Ch. 55.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of no less
than $100 and no more than $1,250, by imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service, as
determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 338-5 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 338-5
338:658
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[The adoption of this Part III of the Township Code is covered by the
Code Adoption Ordinance adopted by the Township Committee. See
Ch. 1, Art. I.]
§ 345-1. through § 345-12. (Reserved)
§ 345-1 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 345-1
338:659

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
§ 345-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Maximum penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any
chapter adopted by the Board of Health of the Township shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500
for each offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Township or before another judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The Court shall have the power to
impose other and additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and
N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by
the Board of Health exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Collection of fees and penalties. All fees and penalties collected by the
Board of Health under any provision of any chapter adopted herein
shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Township.
§ 345-13 WILDLIFE FEEDING § 345-13
338:661
Chapter 352
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 352-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) established by ordinance of the
Board of Health of the Township of Little Egg Harbor effective July 11, 1972,
without having procured a license from the local Board of Health to do so
or without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation
and maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned Retail
Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965).
§ 352-2. Fees.
The fees shall be as follows:
§ 352-3. Health and disease control.
The licensee-employer shall be responsible for the health and disease
controls of every one of their employees. If the licensee-employer has
reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any disease in a
communicable form which could result in foodborne disease or has become
a carrier of such disease, he shall advise the employee to contact his
physician for treatment and shall relieve him of duties relating to food
handling or food contact surfaces.
§ 352-4. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing;
reinstatement.
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of the Township for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) or whenever it shall appear that
the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or
corporation, to whom such license was issued, is conducted in a disorderly
or improper manner, or in violation of any law of the United States, the State
of New Jersey or any ordinance of this municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character to
conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been issued
A. Retail food establishments, including seasonal, permanent and mobile
food establishments: $50 per year.
B. Temporary food establishments, not to exceed a period of five days: $25
per day or any part thereof.
C. Nonprofit organizations and state-licensed veterans: no fee.
§ 345-13 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 352-4
352:662
is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
§ 352-5. Conspicuous posting of license.
Any license issued hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
such establishment. However, all mobile food establishments shall have a
decal issued by Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health, which shall set
forth in writing that the licensee possesses a certified license issued by the
Township Board of Health, and in addition, said decal shall be displayed and
maintained by the licensee on the exterior right side of the mobile vehicle
and shall be visible at all times.
§ 352-6. Application for yearly or seasonal license; renewal;
expiration.
A. Hearing; notice. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this
chapter shall not be revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing
thereon shall have been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at
least three days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall
also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for
revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or be
deposited in the United States post office in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the
governing body concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel, or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
B. Approval required to reinstate revoked license. If any such license shall
have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person acting for
him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to carry
on the business within the Township unless the application for such
license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
A. Licenses issued or approved under the provisions of this chapter shall
be either a seasonal business license or a yearly business license.
Applications for seasonal licenses and renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee 30 days prior to the
commencement of business of each year. Application for a yearly
business license and renewal thereof shall be submitted together with
the required fee prior to December of each year. Seasonal business
licenses shall expire annually upon the termination of the season. Yearly
business licenses shall expire annually on the first day of January of
each year.
§ 352-4 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 352-6
352:663
§ 352-7. Food handler's certificate required.
The licensee and any and all persons employed or permitted to work for any
person or any body corporate to whom a license has been issued shall have
obtained a food handler's certificate issued by the Board of Health of the
Township. Such food handler's certificate shall evidence that such person
has been medically examined, including tuberculosis tests, and presents no
evidence of any communicable disease. Proof of such examination shall be
submitted to the Board of Health or its designated representative by a duly
licensed physician of the State of New Jersey on forms or blanks which may
be obtained without cost from the Secretary of the Board of Health or his or
her authorized representative.
§ 352-8. Application of chapter shall not impose burden.
No provisions of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 352-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
345, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 352-10. Adoption of standards by reference.
B. "Seasonal" or "season" shall mean that period of time in each year
which is generally from May 15 to September 15.
A. Regulations adopted. Regulations 1 through 9, inclusive, under Chapter
12, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food
Establishments, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code and fixing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the regulations is annexed hereto and
made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
B. Title of regulations. The regulations established and adopted by this
section are commonly known as "Chapter 12, Construction, Operation
and Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments" under the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code.
C. Public copies. Three copies of the regulations relating to the
Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food
Establishments under the New Jersey State Sanitary Code have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
will remain on file for the use and examination of the public.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, firm or corporation
violating or neglecting to comply with any provision of this section or
Regulations 1 through 9, inclusive, under Chapter 12, Construction,
§ 352-6 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 352-10
352:664
Chapter 358
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 148.
Littering — See Ch. 222.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 273.
§ 358-1. Adoption by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.49 A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 358-2. Title of adopted code.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 358-3. Public copies.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the local Board of Health
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 358-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating or neglecting to comply
with any provision of this chapter or the Public Health Nuisance Code of
New Jersey (1953) made a part hereof or notice issued pursuant thereto
Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments, of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code made a part hereof or notice issued
pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty
established in Chapter 345, Article II, General Penalty.
49.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 352-10 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 358-4
358:665
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
345, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 363
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees of the Township — See
Ch. 86.
§ 358-4 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 358-4
363:666
ARTICLE I
Secretary
§ 363-1. Duties.
The Secretary to the Board of Health shall attend and take minutes of
the meetings of the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health; type
minutes of meetings and mail to Board members and Attorney; receive calls
concerning health problems, record same, and turn such calls over to the
Ocean County Health Department for action; receive and file inspection
reports; receive, file, and present to the Board of Health correspondence;
send correspondence or make contracts as directed by the Board of Health;
coordinate rabies clinics; keep records of animal bites reported; coordinate
flu immunization clinic; and perform such other services consistent with the
position and as directed by the Board of Health.
§ 363-2. Hours.
The Secretary to the Board shall work 12 hours per week in addition to
attending the scheduled meetings of the Board of Health. In no event shall
the total hours of employment exceed 640 hours per year.
§ 363-3. Compensation.
The annual salary for the Secretary to the Board shall be set by the Board
at its first meeting of each year and be effective as of the first day of that
year. Such salary shall be paid at the same time as other employees of the
Township, but in no event, less than bimonthly.
§ 363-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 363-3
363:667

ARTICLE II
Attorney
§ 363-4. Duties.
The Attorney for the Board of Health shall attend the meetings of the
Township Board of Health to provide professional, legal advice as needed;
prepare all notices, contracts, resolutions, ordinances, and other documents
as required; interpret and advise the Board of Health concerning its legal
responsibilities under the laws of the United States, the State of New Jersey,
and Little Egg Harbor Township; send correspondence or make contacts
as directed by the Board of Health; conduct such litigation as may be
necessary; and perform such other professional services consistent with the
position and as directed by the Board of Health.
§ 363-5. Hours.
The Attorney for the Board shall work such hours as are necessary to
perform the foregoing services.
§ 363-6. Compensation.
The Attorney for the Board shall be compensated per meeting of the Board
of Health, which amount shall be set by the Board at its first meeting of
each year and be effective as of the first day of that year. In addition, the
Attorney for the Board shall be compensated at an hourly rate to be set by
the Board at its first meeting for legal services performed, which rate shall
be effective as of the first day of that year. The Attorney for the Board of
Health shall be required to periodically submit vouchers for approval by the
Board of Health detailing the services performed.
§ 363-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 363-6
363:669

ARTICLE III
Recorder
§ 363-7. Duties.
The Recorder shall attend and electronically record all meetings of the
Township Board of Health and preserve the recordings thereof.
§ 363-8. Hours.
The Recorder shall work such hours as are necessary to perform the
foregoing services.
§ 363-9. Compensation.
The Recorder shall be compensated for each meeting attended and
recorded, which amount shall be set by the Board at its first meeting of
each year and be effective as of the first day of that year. The Recorder shall
be required to periodically submit vouchers for approval by the Board of
Health.
§ 363-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 363-9
363:671
Chapter 367
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 159.
§ 367-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 367-2. Fees for master plumbers.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted as a part hereof, the following fees shall be
charged and received:
§ 367-3. Payment of fees.
All fees, penalties and monies collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
paid to Little Egg Harbor Township, except that all fees pertaining to
licensing or examinations shall be paid to the Board of Health.
A. Adopted by reference. A code regulating the installation, maintenance,
repair and control of the plumbing of buildings and the connection
thereof with outside sewers, cesspools, or other receptacles, regulating
the practice of plumbing and the issuance of licenses to practice
plumbing is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
275, P.L. of 1948.50 A copy of this code is annexed hereto and made part
hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
B. Title of code. The code established and adopted by this chapter is
described and commonly known as the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey
(Revised 1964)."
C. Public record. Three copies of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey
(Revised 1964), similarly marked, have been placed on file in the office
of the Township and will remain on file in such office for the use and
examination of the public.
A. For the examination of any applicant for license as master plumber:
$25.
B. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license as master plumber:
$75.
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.1 et seq.
§ 363-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 367-4
367:672
§ 367-4. Licensed master plumber required.
No person other than a licensed master plumber shall be allowed to carry
on or engage in the business of plumbing in the Township; nor shall any
person expose a sign advertising his services in the practice of plumbing
or house drainage, potable water service or any advertisement pertaining
thereto unless he or they shall have first secured a license or certificate and
shall have been licensed by the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health
or State of New Jersey; nor shall any person other than a licensed master
plumber, or persons in his or their employ or under his or their supervision,
be allowed to alter, repair or make any connection with any drainage, soil,
waste, or vent pipe, or any pipe connected thereto.
§ 367-5. Change of address.
Every licensed master plumber, firm, or corporation shall give immediate
notice of any change in his, their, or its place of business; upon his, their or
its retirement from business shall surrender his, their, or its certificate of
license to the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health. Every person,
firm or corporation on registering shall give the full name or names of the
person, firm or officer's names of the corporation for which he or they shall
register.
§ 367-6. Expiration of master plumber license; renewals.
At the expiration of each calendar year, the certificate or license shall be
null and void. A licensed master plumber, desiring to continue in or work at
the business of plumbing and house drainage and potable water service for
the ensuing year, shall between the 1st and 31st days of December of each
year renew the certificate or license for the current year to the Little Egg
Harbor Township Board of Health.
§ 367-7. Board of Examiners.
The Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health shall appoint a Board of
Examiners each year for the purpose of examining applicants for licenses,
and the Board shall serve for a period of one year. This Board of Examiners
shall consist of Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health plumbing
subcode official, a licensed master plumber who is in no way connected
with the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health, and a journeyman
plumber.
§ 367-8. Application for examination.
A. Persons desiring to be examined for license as master plumber shall
make application on forms supplied by the Little Egg Harbor Township
Board of Health and shall pay an examination fee of $25, which shall
accompany the application. Applicants for examination as master
plumber shall have had at least four years' combined satisfactory
experience as helper, apprentice and journeyman, which experience
§ 367-4 PLUMBING § 367-8
367:673
§ 367-9. Suspension or revocation of certificate or license.
Any certificate or license granted under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health when a master
plumber or journeyman plumber, firm, or corporation, or the licensed
representative thereof, shall violate any of the rules and regulations
adopted by the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health within a
reasonable time after notification thereof, or who shall permit the use of
his, their, or its name by a person or persons for the purpose of obtaining
a permit or permits to do plumbing and drainage work and potable water
service and for good cause shown upon 10 days' written notice and
reasonable opportunity to be heard.
§ 367-10. Violations; notice; hearing.
shall be duly certified in a form acceptable to the Little Egg Harbor
Board of Health.
B. Examinations shall be held on the fourth Wednesday in January and July
of each year. Applicants shall file a notice of intention to appear for an
examination not less than three days prior thereto.
A. Whenever the Little Egg Harbor Township Board of Health and
plumbing subcode official determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or code or of any rule or regulation adopted by the Little
Egg Harbor Township Board of Health, they shall give notice of such
alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent; or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof
is sent by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the
notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state. Such notice
may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect
compliance with the provisions of the code or ordinance and with
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued, in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
§ 367-8 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 367-10
367:674
§ 367-11. Emergency situations.
Whenever the plumbing subcode official finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of the code or
this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition
to the Board of Examiners shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Examiners; provided that
such persons shall file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of
Health a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth
a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after the
day of notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the Board of
Health shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice therefor. At such hearing the petitioner shall
be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided
that, upon application of the petitioner, the Board of Examiners may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such tenday
period if, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
C. After such hearing the Board of Examiners shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon the finding as to whether the
provisions of the code or this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of
Examiners sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice served pursuant to Subsection A(4) and shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Board of Health within 10 days after such notice
is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any
permit required by this chapter or code or by any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the
Board of Examiners, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked.
Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed
to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the
office of the Secretary of the Board of Health within 10 days after such
notice is served.
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Examiners, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Board of Health.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board of Examiners may seek relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
§ 367-10 PLUMBING § 367-11
367:675
After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether the provisions
of this chapter or code and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Board of Examiners shall continue
such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 367-12. Term of permit; extensions.
All permits issued hereunder shall be valid for one year from the date
thereof. Such permits may only be extended by the plumbing subcode
official when good cause can be shown. If permits are extended past the
original limit of their duration, repayment of fees will be required for
renewal of the permit, except in the event that a court of competent
jurisdiction shall issue an injunction effecting the property described, then
the permit shall be extended the same length of time as the injunction is in
effect.
§ 367-13. Verbal approval not permitted.
No verbal approval shall be given. Under no circumstances shall a verbal
approval or permission given by anyone be considered a justification for any
deviation from the approved plans or the violation of any of the rules or
regulations governing house drainage.
§ 367-14. Inspections.
No drainage work shall be covered or concealed in any way until after it has
been examined and approved by the inspector of plumbing. A notice must be
sent to the Little Egg Harbor Township plumbing subcode official in writing
when the work is sufficiently advanced for an inspection, giving the location
of the property, plan number, and connection of work to be inspected over
the signature of the master plumber. Immediately upon the completion of
the work, application for final inspection must be made. When work is ready
for inspection, the plumbing contractor shall make such arrangements as
shall enable the proper officer to reach all parts of the plumbing easily and
readily.
§ 367-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
or with any of the provisions governing house drainage, the procuring of a
license to, engage in or work at the business of plumbing, house drainage
plumbing, sewer connections, or any person who shall violate any of the
rules, regulations or requirements made by Little Egg Harbor Township
regarding the construction of plumbing, house drainage or cesspools, shall
be liable for every such offense to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than
$500, and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 367-11 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § 367-16
367:676
§ 367-16. Regulations to continue in effect.
All regulations incorporated in any act, ordinance or code of the State of
New Jersey, or of the Township of Little Egg Harbor presently in effect,
or validly promulgated or enacted by any board, department, commission
or agency thereof shall continue in effect until such time as any such
regulation is superseded by appropriate regulations promulgated pursuant
to the State Uniform Construction Code Act,51 at which time they shall be
deemed repealed and superseded, and of no further force and effect.
Chapter 374
(RESERVED)
Appendix
Chapter A380
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A380-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system. Construction pursuant to said consent is conditioned upon prior
approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A380-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
APPLICATION — The Company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 367-16 PLUMBING § A380-2
367:677
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this chapter and is known as
Comcast of Toms River.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
Company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Little Egg Harbor, County of
Ocean, State of New Jersey.
§ A380-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing conducted by the municipality concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the Company was held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearing no comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A380-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A380-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the Company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A380-2 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § A380-6
367:678
§ A380-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A380-7. Extension of service.
The Company shall be required to proffer service along the public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of
the primary service area as set forth herein. Any extension of the cable
television system beyond the PSA will be made in accordance with the
Office of Cable Television's ("OCTV") Line Extension Policy ("LEP"). For
purposes of the LEP, the minimum density of homes-per-mile shall be 30.
§ A380-8. Construction requirements.
§ A380-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
A. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow for the moving of
buildings, and machinery, or in other similar circumstances. The
expense shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except
when requested by the municipality, in which case, the Company shall
bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
§ A380-6 PLUMBING § A380-9
367:679
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
§ A380-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A380-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A380-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the Company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A380-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
A. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state
and federal statues and regulations regarding the availability of devices
for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A380-9 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § A380-14
367:680
§ A380-14. Commitments by the company.
§ A380-15. Local access.
The Company shall provide access time to noncommercial public,
governmental and educational ("PEG") entities and shall provide and
maintain one full-time dedicated system-wide PEG channel for use of the
Township.
§ A380-16. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the Company for the purpose of providing
two-way or interconnection services, the Company shall be required to
apply to the BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and
conditions of such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall
be borne by the municipality.
A. The Company shall provide total preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials-plus-labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
B. The Company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management facility
and public library in the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets.
C. One free Internet connection to one non-network computer in each
school and library in the Township.
D. A one-time technology grant of $40,000 to be paid within 12 months of
the BPU issuing the certificate of approval.
E. The Company representatives shall appear at least once annually, upon
written request of the Township, at a public hearing of the governing
body or before the Township's Cable Television Advisory Committee, to
discuss matters pertaining to the provision of cable service to the
residents of the Township and other related issues as the Township and
Company may see fit.
F. The Company shall give a one-time technology grant of $20,000 to the
Pinelands Regional High School if the Township of Little Egg Harbor,
the Borough of Tuckerton and the Township of Eagleswood each adopt
a renewal ordinance of 15 years.
§ A380-14 PLUMBING § A380-17
367:681
§ A380-17. Emergency uses.
§ A380-18. Liability insurance.
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A380-19. Incorporation of the application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A380-20. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this chapter
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A380-21. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
A. The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statues and
regulations.
B. The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A380-17 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § A380-22
367:682
§ A380-22. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-08 5-10-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2007-18 9-13-2007 Cable television franchise Ch. A380
2007-28 12-13-2007 Department of Community
Development amendment
Ch. 18
2008-08 7-24-2008 Code amendments Chs. 5; 130, Art.
III; 134; 145; 191;
217; 290
2008-13 12-22-2008 Municipal Utilities Authority
amendment
Ch. 71
2009-01 1-22-2009 Officer and employees
amendment (Municipal
Housing Liaison)
Ch. 86
2009-03 3-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 323
2009-04 3-12-2009 Certificates of occupancy:
rental units amendment
Ch. 156, Art. I
2009-07 4-9-2009 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 159
2009-09 5-28-2009 Senior Citizens Advisory
Board amendment
Ch. 110
2009-10A 10-8-2009 Solid waste amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2016-06
2010-02 2-11-2010 Snow emergencies Ch. 287
2010-03 3-11-2010 Refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 278
2010-08 5-13-2010 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 86
2010-09 5-13-2010 Qualified private communities Ch. 277
§ A380-22 PLUMBING § DL-1
367:683
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-11 5-27-2010 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 86
2010-13 6-10-2010 Hospitalization plan
amendment
Ch. 65
2010-14 6-10-2010 Vital statistics Ch. 328
2010-15 6-24-2010 Inspection of public records
amendment
Ch. 276
2010-19 11-8-2010 Inspection of public records
amendment
Ch. 276
2010-21 1-27-2011 Grading and drainage
amendment
Ch. 194
2011-01 3-10-2011 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 159
2011-05 5-12-2011 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 159
2011-06 4-28-2011 Special event permits Ch. 294
2011-07 4-28-2011 Parks amendment Ch. 261
2011-09 9-8-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 273
2011-10 9-22-2011 Licensing amendment Ch. 217
2011-11 9-22-2011 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 234
2011-12 10-13-2011 Drug and Alcohol Testing
Policy
Ch. 170
2012-01 1-26-2012 Board of Health amendment Ch. 55
2012-02 2-9-2012 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Ch. 305
2012-05 4-12-2012 Claims approval amendment Ch. 14
2012-06 5-10-2012 Smoking Ch. 286
2013-06 3-14-2013 Robin Hood Sandy Relief
Fund Committee
Ch. 100
2013-07 3-28-2013 Flood hazard areas Ch. 185
2013-08 4-11-2013 Super Storm Sandy Recovery
and Reconstruction Task
Force
Ch. 118
2013-09 4-11-2013 Temporary street occupation Ch. 299, Art. III
2013-11 7-11-2013 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 185
§ DL-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § DL-1
367:684
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-12 7-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 323
2013-16 11-14-2013 Off-road vehicles Ch. 324
2013-17 12-12-2013 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 130
2013-18 12-12-2013 Bulkhead construction
amendment
Ch. 151
2014-02 2-27-2014 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 299
2014-06 4-10-2014 Licensing amendment Ch. 217
2014-08 5-8-2014 Littering: Do Not Deliver
Registry
Ch. 222, Art. II
2014-11 7-10-2014 Abandoned property Ch. 123
2014-14 9-11-2014 Registration of property
pending foreclosure
Ch. 274
2014-15 9-25-2014 Green Team Advisory
Committee
Ch. 50
2014-18 10-23-2014 Registration of property
pending foreclosure
amendment
Ch. 274
2014-19 10-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 323
2014-20 11-13-2014 Soil removal, excavation and
mining amendment
Ch. 290
2014-21 12-11-2014 Unified electronic reporting
system for dealers in precious
metals and other secondhand
goods
Ch. 318
2014-22 12-11-2014 Unified electronic reporting
system for dealers in scrap
metal
Ch. 319
2015-01 2-12-2015 Floodplain Management Plan
Committee
Ch. 49
2015-04 3-26-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 93
2015-05 5-28-2015 Certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 156
2015-06 7-9-2015 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 185
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
367:685
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-08 9-10-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 93
2015-09 9-10-2015 Refuse containers and
dumpsters amendment
Ch. 278
2015-10 9-10-2015 Animals: dog tethering Ch. 134, Art. II
2016-04 8-11-2016 Property maintenance:
control of invasive plants
Ch. 273, Art. II
2016-06 9-8-2016 Solid waste and recycling
collection; solid waste
collection repealer
Ch. 293; Ch. 374,
reference only
2016-07 9-8-2016 Property maintenance:
property maintenance
standards amendment
Ch. 273, Art. I
2016-09 10-13-2016 Property maintenance:
property maintenance
standards amendment
Ch. 273, Art. I
2016-10 10-13-2016 Portable toilets Ch. 272
2017-02 1-26-2017 Bulkhead construction
amendment
Ch. 151
2017-03 1-26-2017 Community Advisory Board Ch. 16
2017-09 8-10-2017 Property Maintenance:
Property Registration
Ch. 273, Art. III
2017-10 11-9-2017 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 269
2017-11 9-28-2017 Grading and Drainage
Amendment
Ch. 194
2017-12 10-12-2017 Economic Development
Advisory Board Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2018-01
2018-01 1-11-2018 Economic Development
Advisory Board Repealer;
Commercial Revitalization
Advisory Board
Ch. 29, reference
only; Ch. 15
2018-03 4-26-2018 Solid Waste and Recycling
Collection Amendment
Ch. 293
2018-07 5-24-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 93
2018-09 6-14-2018 Certificates of Occupancy
Amendment
Ch. 156
2018-10 6-14-2018 Construction Codes, Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 159
§ DL-1 LITTLE EGG HARBOR CODE § DL-1
367:686
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-11 6-14-2018 Rental Property Amendment Ch. 279
2018-15 11-8-2018 Green Team Advisory
Committee Amendment
Ch. 50
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
367:687