Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [1990 Code § 1-1; New]
The book shall be known and may be cited as the "Lambertville City Code,
2014" and may be cited as the "City Code" or the "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1990 Code § 1-2; New]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the definitions contained in this section shall apply:
CHARTER — Shall mean the Small Municipality Plan of the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws of 1950, as
amended and supplemented, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-139 through 143, and any and
all general laws as therein defined which are or may be applicable to the
City.1
CITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville in the County of Hunterdon,
State of New Jersey.
CITY COUNCIL — Shall mean the elected Council of the City of
Lambertville.
CITY OFFICER — Shall mean any person elected to, appointed to or
employed in any position defined by this Code.
CLERK OR CITY CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Hunterdon.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organization unit or group of organization
units of the administrative branch of the City government so designated by
the Administrative Code.
1. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:69A-139 through 143 repealed. See now N.J.S.A. 40:69A-115
through 69A-117.3 and N.J.S.A. 40:16-5. N.J.S.A. 40:69A-208.1 provides for the
continuance of the Mayor-Council Plan.
AO:1
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Lambertville.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MAINTAIN — Shall mean to file, codify, index or preserve.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville, County of
Hunterdon, State of New Jersey.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — As applied to buildings or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words of the City of Lambertville followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
of any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the City.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
RESOLUTION — Shall mean and include any act or regulation of the Mayor
and City Council required to be reduced to writing, but which may be finally
passed at the meeting at which it is introduced.
§ 1-2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 1-2
AO:2
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
SIGNATURE AND SUBSCRIPTION — Shall mean and include a mark when
the person cannot write.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STREET — Shall include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with the
apparent intent.
TENANT — As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
is the lessee of the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1990 Code § 1-3]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day is Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are closed, that day shall
be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, type-writing and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of this Code identified by
Arabic numbers and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
§ 1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3
AO:3
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1990 Code § 1-4]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29; N.J.S.A. 40:49-5]
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty.
The City Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at
an amount not exceeding $100. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.3. Powers of the Court.
The Court before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance
or Code provision shall have power to impose any fine, term of
a. For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City
of Lambertville unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by the City for
the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding 90 days; or by a
fine not exceeding $2,000; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
b. Unlawful Solid Waste Disposal. The City Council may prescribe that for
the violation of an ordinance or Code provision pertaining to unlawful
solid waste disposal at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed which
shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$2,500 or a maximum penalty by a fine not exceeding $10,000.
§ 1-3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 1-5.3
AO:4
imprisonment, or period of community service not less than the minimum
and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or in such ordinance.
(N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.4. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders.
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who has paid the fine for the previous
violation shall be subject to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision and shall be calculated separately and in addition to the fine
imposed for violation of the ordinance or Code provision.
If the City Council chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a person
for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance or Code provision,
the City Council may waive the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
(N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.5. Default of Payment of Fine.
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned
in the County Jail or place of detention provided by the City, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.6. Violations of Housing or Zoning Codes; Time Permitted to
Abate Condition; Hearing.
If the City Council chooses to impose a fine in an amount greater than
$1,250 upon an owner for violations of housing or zoning codes, the City
shall provide a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the
opportunity to cure or abate the condition which is in violation and shall
also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent
jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning the violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than
$1,250 may be imposed if a Court has not determined otherwise or, upon
reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not
been substantially completed. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.7. Separate Violations.
If provided by specific ordinance or in the Code, each and every day in
which a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of
the City of Lambertville exists shall constitute a separate violation. (N.J.S.A.
40:49-5)
§ 1-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-5.8
AO:5
§ 1-5.8. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-6. CONTINUATION OF PRIOR ORDINANCES. [New]
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are in substance the same
as those ordinances existing on the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
§ 1-7. MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing "The Lambertville City Code, 2014" required to be filed
in the Office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in the Code
and all ordinances adopted by the City Council subsequent to the adoption
of the Code, which the City Council shall adopt specifically as a part of
the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included herein by reference until
such change or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Code, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
The Code, when so published and certified to by the seal of the City of
Lambertville shall be received in all courts of this State as evidence of the
ordinances contained in such compilation and revision as fully as if the
original ordinances were produced. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-4)
§ 1-8. ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [New]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Lambertville City
Code, when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention
of the City Council for them to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code, so that reference to the "Lambertville City
Code," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Lambertville City Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided herein, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code,
as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. CODE SUPPLEMENTATION. [New]
The City Council may arrange, by resolution, for the procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Lambertville City Code.
§ 1-5.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 1-10
AO:6
§ 1-10. ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE PROVISIONS.
[New]
It shall be unlawful for any person to improperly change, amend or alter this
Code, without authorization as provided by law, for the purpose of causing
the law of the City of Lambertville to be misrepresented by such action.
Any person violating this provision shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Editor's Note: Chapter 2, Administrative Code was established in the
1990 Code and superseded 12-20-2010 by Ordinance No. 2010-28.
Amendments noted where applicable.
§ 1-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-10
AO:7

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 2-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Administrative Code
of the City of Lambertville" and is herein referred to as the "Code."
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1
AO:9

ARTICLE II
Definitions, Word Usage
§ 2-2. DEFINITIONS; WORD USAGE.
§ 2-2.1. Definitions and Usage. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 2-2.2. Prior Ordinances. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
All ordinances and resolutions heretofore adopted by the City and in force
and effect on January 1, 1983, shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that they are not inconsistent with the Charter or with this Code.
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter and in the interpretation
and application of all other ordinances and resolutions heretofore or
hereafter adopted by the City, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGENCY — Shall mean any Agency authorized to conduct business on
behalf of the City of Lambertville.
CHARTER — Shall mean the Small Municipality Plan of the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws of 1950, as
amended and supplemented, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-139 through 143, and any
and all general laws as therein defined which are or may be applicable
to the City.2
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organization unit or group of
organization units of the administrative branch of the City government
so designated by this Code.
MAINTAIN — Shall mean to file, codify, index or preserve.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR CITY OFFICER — Shall mean any person
elected to, appointed to or employed in any position defined by this
Code.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville in the County of
Hunterdon, State of New Jersey.
OFFICE — Shall mean any office or place in the City of Lambertville in
which the functions of a public officer are performed and who has been
assigned a specific duty, task or role by the Mayor, which includes, but
is not limited to the Office of the Municipal Clerk, etc.
PERSON — Shall mean and include corporations, firms, organizations,
companies, associations or any group acting as an individual or as a
unit.
b. Usage. The masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and
firms, bodies corporate, associations and other artificial persons, where
appropriate.
2. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:69A-139 through 143 repealed. See now N.J.S.A. 40:69A-115
through 40-69A-117.3 and N.J.S.A. 40A:16-5.
§ 2-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.3
AO:11
§ 2-2.3. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
a. All ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore enacted which are
inconsistent with any provision of the Charter or of this Code are, to the
extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed.
b. The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof by the Charter or by this
Code or by any other ordinance shall not revive any former ordinance or
part thereof which may have been repealed by such repealed ordinance
or part thereof.
§ 2-2.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-2.3
AO:12
ARTICLE III
City Council
§ 2-3. CITY COUNCIL.
§ 2-3.1. Legislative Power. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
All legislative power of the City will be exercised by the City Council
pursuant to the Charter. The City Council, in addition to such other powers
and duties as may be conferred upon it by the Charter or otherwise by
general law, may require any municipal officer to prepare and submit sworn
statements regarding his official duties and the performance thereof, and
may investigate the conduct of any department, office or agency of the
municipal government.
§ 2-3.2. Organization; President of Council. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Council will organize annually during the first seven days of January, at
which time it will select a President of the Council from among its members.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council. In the absence
of the Mayor, the President shall preside. In the absence of the Mayor and
the President, the Council shall select a temporary presiding officer from
among its members.
§ 2-3.3. Absence from Meetings Policy. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The absence at three sequential regularly scheduled sessions of an elected
or appointed official may constitute grounds for removal by the Governing
Body requiring a roll call vote of 2/3 of the majority of the members present.
§ 2-3.4. Clerk of Council. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The City Clerk, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council, shall maintain, prepare and sign the minutes of the Council,
maintain the records of the Council and perform such other duties as shall
be assigned. At public meetings of the Municipal Council, the City Clerk
shall, in the proper order of business, announce the subject and author of
all correspondence on the agenda. At the request of any member, any item
of correspondence shall be read in full.
§ 2-3.5. Agenda. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The agenda for each regular meeting of the Council shall be prepared by
the Clerk and made available to the Councilmen 24 hours prior to the
opening of the meeting. Written notice of changes in the agenda shall be
made available to each Councilmember prior to the convening of a meeting.
Additional copies of the agenda shall be available to the public, posted on
the bulletin board at City Hall and on the website.
§ 2-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.6
AO:13
§ 2-3.6. Vacancies in Council. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Vacancies in the Council shall be filled by election for the remainder of
the unexpired term at the next general election to be held not less than
60 days after the occurrence of the vacancy. Council shall fill the vacancy
temporarily by appointment to serve until the qualification of a person so
elected. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be a member of the
same political party as the prior incumbent.
§ 2-3.7. Meetings of Council. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 2-3.8. Roll Call Votes; Minutes. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken at the
direction of the officer presiding by either voice vote or roll call vote. The
vote shall be "aye" or "nay" or words to the effect of affirmative or negative
by each member. There shall be no further discussion once the question
has been called. Any member of the Council may abstain from voting at
any time. When a roll is called on any question, the silence of a Council
member present shall constitute an affirmative vote unless he states that he
abstains. The question shall be determined by a majority of those members
voting unless otherwise provided by law. The minutes of each meeting shall
be signed by the City Clerk.
§ 2-3.9. Ordinances and Resolutions. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
a. Regular Meetings. The Council shall hold its reorganization meeting
annually as set forth in subsection 2-3.2. The Council shall meet
regularly thereafter on the third Monday of each month at 7:30 which
will be set at the annual reorganizational meeting of Mayor and Council
and shall be held at the Justice Center located at 25 South Union Street
in the City of Lambertville. When the time for any regular meeting of
the Council falls on a legal holiday, as prescribed by law, such meeting
shall be rescheduled, if necessary.
b. Special Meetings. Special meetings, emergency meetings, executive
sessions and special public hearings, when necessary, will be held in
accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, et seq.).
a. Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or
typewritten form and shall be read and considered as provided by
general law. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall
be taken by roll call and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be entered into the
minutes.
b. Except as may be otherwise provided in the Optional Municipal Charter
Law, all ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared by the City
Attorney, the City Clerk or the Mayor's designee and shall only then be
adopted and published in the manner required by general law.
However, any ordinance may incorporate by reference any standard
§ 2-3.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-3.9
AO:14
§ 2-3.10. Rules and Procedure. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
technical regulations or code, official or unofficial, which need not be
so published whenever three copies of such regulations or code have
been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the
body or department charged with the enforcement of said ordinance
for the examination of the public so long as said ordinance is in effect.
Prior to its introduction before the Council, the City Clerk shall give
each Council member a copy of each ordinance. After first reading
and approval of any ordinance, said ordinance shall be published as
required by law in at least one newspaper having circulation within the
City. Such publication of the ordinances shall be at least 10 days prior
to the time of final reading. The public shall have the opportunity to
speak on the ordinance at the time of final reading prior to its adoption.
c. Unless otherwise provided by law, ordinances shall take effect not less
than 20 days after final passage by Council. All ordinances and
resolutions shall require an affirmative vote from a majority of the
Council for adoption unless specified otherwise.
d. The City Clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions adopted by
the Council and, at the close of each year, shall compile or codify all the
ordinances and resolutions, or true copies thereof, of the City which
then remain in effect. The City Clerk shall also properly index the
records books, compilation or codification of ordinances and
resolutions.
e. Prior to introduction, any proposed ordinances permitting or requiring
administrative action shall be submitted to the Mayor and to the
department head concerned.
f. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Council. The City Clerk shall forthwith provide each member of the
Council with a copy thereof and shall provide the City Attorney with a
copy. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single subject
(object), which shall be clearly expressed in its title.
g. Except as may otherwise be provided by the Charter, all ordinances
shall be adopted and published in the manner required by general law.
h. The ordinance providing compensation for the Mayor, Councilmembers
and department heads shall be adopted by Mayor and Council every
three years. A resolution of salaries and benefits shall be adopted
immediately after the adoption of the budget and shall take effect
immediately as provided by law.
a. Order of Business. Promptly at the hour designated, all regular and
special meetings of the Council shall commence. Unless otherwise
authorized by resolution of Council, all business coming before the
Council shall be heard and voted on in the following order: [Amended
5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
§ 2-3.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.10
AO:15
Statement of Compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act
Roll Call
Pledge of Allegiance
Moment of Silence
Approval of Minutes
Administrative Reports
Approval of the Bills List
Resolutions
Ordinances - First reading
Ordinances - Final reading
Correspondence
Ongoing Projects
Constituent Concerns
Announcements
Public Participation
Adjournment
b. Call to Order. The Mayor shall call each meeting to order. In his
absence, the President of the Council shall call the meeting to order and
shall preside during the absence of the Mayor. The Mayor shall assume
the chair as soon as he is in attendance at any meeting which may have
been called to order in his absence and the President of the Council
shall thereupon relinquish the chair.
c. Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall:
1. State the question and announce the result on all matters upon
which Council may vote.
2. Rule on all questions of order, subject to appeal to Council.
d. Quorum Call. At the opening of each meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall call the roll and the names of those present shall be recorded in
the minutes. Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum
for the conduct of business, but no ordinance shall be adopted except
by affirmative vote of three members of the Council. If a quorum is not
present 1/2 hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the meeting
shall be deemed adjourned.
e. Distribution and Reading of Minutes. The Clerk shall, insofar as is
practicable, prepare and distribute to the Council the minutes of each
meeting within 10 days of the meeting. The minutes of any meeting may
be approved without reading whenever they have been distributed at
least 24 hours prior to the time of approval. The Clerk shall promptly
post a copy of the approved minutes in a public place in the Municipal
Building and leave such copy posted for 30 days.
§ 2-3.10 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-3.10
AO:16
f. Committees. The rules of the Council shall, insofar as applicable,
govern meetings of the committee of the whole and other committees of
Council which may be appointed from time to time. Special committees
of Council for legislative purposes may be appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to resolution. No special committee shall proceed to the
consideration of any matter referred to it unless a majority of the
members of that committee shall be present. No special committee
shall report on a matter referred to it at the same meeting at which
reference is made, except by unanimous consent of the members of that
committee.
g. Nominations and Appointments. Nominations submitted by the Mayor
shall be considered and may be confirmed at the regular meeting at
which they are submitted or may be acted upon at the next regular
meeting. Any member of the Council may move a nomination. With
respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member of the
Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to be
filled. The Council shall consider such nominations.
Where there is a single office to be filled, the sense of the Council on the
appointment shall be taken as to each nominee in alphabetical order,
and the first nominee to receive a majority shall be deemed appointed.
Where there is more than one office to be filled, such as a board,
commission or authority, the same procedure shall be followed with
respect to each office separately until the total number of appointments
to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the chair, a group
of nominations may be considered at once where there is no apparent
division in the Council as to the nominees included in the group.
h. Rules of Debate.
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in these rules, the
proceedings of Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of
Order.
2. The presiding officer shall have all of the rights, powers and duties
of a Councilmember, as elsewhere provided within this Code.
3. A member of the Council shall be entitled to the floor only upon
recognition by the chair. Once a member has been recognized and
has taken the floor, he shall not be interrupted for any reason other
than a call to order, and in such case the chair shall promptly rule
on the point of order and the speaker shall be allowed to continue if
he is in order.
4. A motion to reconsider may be made by a Councilmember on the
prevailing side. Such motion may be made only at the same
meeting or at an adjournment thereof at which the action was
taken.
5. A Councilmember shall be entitled to have his remarks included in
the minutes, with the consent of Council.
§ 2-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.10
AO:17
6. The Mayor, with the consent of Council, may direct a synopsis of
the debate on any question to be included in the minutes.
i. Addressing the Council.
1. Persons other than Councilmembers may be permitted to address
the Council in the proper order of business. A person present may,
upon recognition by the chair, be heard in the order of petitions of
citizenry and public discussion. A person present may, upon
recognition by the chair and with the consent of a majority of the
Councilmembers present, be heard at any other time. No person
shall address any remark or question to any specific
Councilmember nor to any other person present except by
permission of the majority of the Council. A Councilmember may,
through the chair, respond to any communication or address
received pursuant to this section.
2. Except upon consent of the Council, each person addressing the
Council pursuant to this section shall be required to limit his
remarks to five minutes and shall at no time engage in any
personally offensive or abusive remarks. The chair shall call any
speaker to order who violates any provision of this rule.
j. Decorum.
1. Each member of the Council shall cooperate with the chair in
preserving order and decorum, and no member shall, by
conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings of
the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or fail to abide
by the orders of the Council or its presiding officer except as
specifically permitted by rules.
2. Any person who shall disturb the peace of the Council, make
impertinent or slanderous remarks or conduct himself in a
boisterous manner while addressing the Council shall be forthwith
barred by the presiding officer from further audience before the
Council, except that if the speaker shall submit to proper order
under these rules, permission for him to continue may be granted
by a majority vote of Council.
3. The Police Department shall designate a member of the
Department to serve as Sergeant at Arms at Council meetings. He
shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding
officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at such
meetings. He shall not be required to be in attendance at the
meeting, provided that he is present in the Municipal Building
during the time of the meeting whenever possible.
k. Filing of Reports, Petitions and Resolutions. All reports to the Council
and all resolutions and all petitions shall be filed with the Clerk and
referenced in the minutes of the Council.
§ 2-3.10 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-3.10
AO:18
l. Adjournment. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be
decided without debate.
§ 2-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.10
AO:19

ARTICLE IV
Mayor
§ 2-4. MAYOR.
§ 2-4.1. Election. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Mayor shall be elected at large by the voters of the City as provided by
the Charter.
§ 2-4.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 02-2013; Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Mayor shall be the chief executive of the City. He shall:
a. Enforce the Charter and all laws and ordinances in effect within the
City.
b. Supervise all of the departments of the City government.
c. Ensure the efficient and effective operation of all of the departments of
the City government in accordance with general law, the Charter, this
Code and other municipal ordinances.
d. Ensure that all inquiries to the City government are promptly assigned
to the appropriate department for action.
e. Appoint a City Clerk with the advice and consent of Council. The Clerk
shall be the Director of the Administration Department and shall be
qualified by previous training and experience to perform the duties of
his office.
f. Appoint a Municipal Treasurer with the advice and consent of Council.
The Treasurer shall be the Chief Finance Officer of the City and the
Director of Finance. He shall be qualified by previous training and
experience to perform the duties of his office.
g. Appoint such other committees of Council as he may deem necessary.
h. Appoint all department Directors, with the advice and consent of
Council.
i. Appoint such other officers, with the advice and consent of Council, and
employees for whose election or appointment no other provision is
made by Charter, by this Code or by general law.
j. Require each department head to make monthly reports to the Mayor
and Council. Additionally, to require boards, commissions and other
municipal bodies to make an annual report and such other reports of its
work as the Mayor may deem necessary.
k. Report annually, within the first 60 days of the year, to the Council and
to the public on the condition and on the requirements of the City and
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.2
AO:21
§ 2-4.3. Participation in Council Meetings. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Mayor shall be a member of the Council. He shall:
§ 2-4.4. Delegation of Powers. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
All of the administrative functions, powers and duties of the City shall
be allocated and assigned among and within departments established or
constituted by this Code or any amendments and supplements thereto. The
Mayor may delegate to other officers of the City such functions powers and
duties as he may deem appropriate, except for the duties required by the
Charter to be performed by the Mayor.
upon its problems of government; notice of such report shall be
published.
l. Make such other reports to Council and to the public and such
recommendations to Council for action as he may deem in the public
interest.
m. Provide liaison with agencies of the State of New Jersey and with
official bodies of other municipalities on matters affecting the City and/
or its citizens.
n. Prepare the annual budget with the assistance of the Treasurer and
with the cooperation of department directors and of other members of
the Council, and present the budget to the Council for consideration no
later than 30 days after the State Aid numbers have been determined
and notification has been made to the City of Lambertville.
o. Call special meetings of the Council as provided by the Charter.
p. Cause the Clerk to prepare an annual directory of City officials and
employees, time and place of meetings of all City boards, agencies or
commissions having regular meetings, office hours of officials and
including such other information as he deems appropriate, which
directory shall be available in the office of the Clerk.
a. Participate in meetings of the Council and vote as other Council
members.
b. Preside over the meetings of the Council.
c. Designate the President of the Council to act as Mayor whenever the
Mayor shall be prevented, by absence from the City, due to disability or
other causes, from attending to the duties of his office.
d. While presiding over meetings of the Council, have the right to move,
second and to debate from the chair, and he shall not be deprived of any
right to vote or of any other rights, powers or duties of a
Councilmember by virtue of his presiding over the meeting.
§ 2-4.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-4.5
AO:22
§ 2-4.5. Acting Mayor. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The President of the Council shall serve in place of the Mayor in the event
of the absence of the Mayor or his disability or refusal to act. When serving
as Acting Mayor, the President of the Council shall have all of the rights,
powers and duties of the Mayor.
§ 2-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.5
AO:23

ARTICLE V
Administration, Departments
§ 2-5. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-5.1. Departments. [Ord. No. 2010-28; New]
Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor as chief executive, there
shall be such departments, not exceeding nine in number, as established by
this Code or by amendments or supplements thereto. Each department shall
have, exercise and discharge such functions, duties and powers as may be
provided by the Charter, this Code or by other ordinances. The following
departments are hereby established:
§ 2-5.1.1. City Business Administrator. [Added 3-21-2019 by Ord.
No. 03-2019]
a. Department of Administration.
b. Department of Public Safety.
c. Department of Public Works, Parks and Public Property.
d. Department of Health, Welfare and Housing.
e. Department of Finance.
a. Appointment and Compensation. The Administrator shall be appointed
by and to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Administrator shall
receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the Salary
Ordinance. The Administrator need not be a resident of the City of
Lambertville.
b. General Powers and Duties. Under the direction and supervision of the
Mayor, the Administrator shall be the administrative officer of the
municipality. The Administrator shall serve as the Personnel Officer and
shall have the authority, except for the Police Department, to hire,
transfer, promote, demote and discharge any employees, subject to
approval of the Mayor. The Administrator shall have the authority to
impose lesser forms of discipline than demotion or discharge without
the approval of the Mayor and City Council, subject to any applicable
ordinances of the City or laws of the state. The Administrator shall
serve as the Purchasing Agent of the municipality, unless and until the
City Council shall authorize the appointment of a Purchasing Agent.
The Administrator shall, to the extent permitted by law:
1. Keep the Mayor advised of the financial condition of the
municipality and make reports to the governing body as requested
by the Mayor or Council.
2. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs
of the municipal government and prepare and recommend to the
§ 2-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.1.1
AO:25
§ 2-5.2. Department Heads and Subordinates. [Ord. No. 2010-28;
amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
Mayor and Council necessary and desirable plans and programs to
meet present and foreseeable needs.
3. Any time he or she deems, investigate, at the direction of the Mayor
or Council, the affairs of any office or department of the
municipality.
4. Manage and resolve inquiries and complaints concerning affairs
affecting the City government, provide information and assistance
and remedy or cause to be remedied the source of any just
complaint.
5. Perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
c. Administrative Supervision and Direction. The Administrator, to the
extent permitted by law, shall be empowered to:
1. Direct and supervise the office of Administration, Finance and
other departments or offices that may be created by the governing
body, and have consultation with and input from those departments
for the sound personnel policies and administrative practices.
2. Audit all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final approval by
the City Council.
3. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services.
4. Establish for working personnel vacation and sick leave schedules
and appropriate records and reports in accordance with any
applicable ordinances of the City or laws of the state.
5. Recommend, implement and enforce the procedures and policies of
the Department of Administration, Finance and other departments
or offices that may be created by the governing body.
a. The head of each department, with the exception of the Department of
Public Safety, shall be a Director appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of Council.
b. The head of the Department of Finance shall have the title of Chief
Financial Officer, and the City Business Administrator, Director of the
Department of Administration.
c. The Mayor shall recruit, select and appoint persons qualified by
training and experience for their respective office as department heads.
§ 2-5.1.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-5.2
AO:26
§ 2-5.3. Interim Appointments. [Ord. No. 2010-28; amended
3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the Charter or by this
Code to be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council
and there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may temporarily fill such
vacancy, in the absence of any contrary provision in the Charter or in this
Code, by appointing an acting officer, including the designation of him/
herself as an acting department head in the event of a vacancy in such
office. Such appointee shall have all of the functions, powers and duties of
the office until it shall be permanently filled. Any such appointment shall
terminate not later than 60 days after the date of the appointment, unless
d. Each department head shall serve during the term of the Mayor
appointing him/her, unless removed from office by the Mayor, and shall
continue to serve until a successor is appointed and qualified.
e. Each department head shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
f. Personnel subordinate to the Director of a department shall be
appointed by the Director with the approval of the Mayor, except as
otherwise provided by this Code, and shall serve during the term of the
Mayor by whom they are appointed, unless otherwise provided by the
Charter, general law, this Code or other ordinances.
g. Personnel subordinate to the Director of a department may be removed
by the Director with the approval of the Mayor, unless otherwise
provided by the Charter, general law, this Code or other ordinances.
h. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the Mayor from
appointing to any position for which the Mayor has the responsibility of
making appointments, any otherwise qualified person, including him/
herself, Council members or other municipal officers, except as
specifically prohibited by the Charter, general law or this Code.
i. The Mayor shall send to Council the names of his or her appointees to
the position of department heads within 45 days of assuming office.
j. Council shall act when required by the Charter, this Code or general
law, on appointments of department heads within 15 days of assuming
office.
k. No new department, division, office, officer or employee position shall
be created except by action of the Council, and no existing department,
division, office, officer or employee position shall be abolished except by
action of the Council; the creation and/or the abolition of any position
by Council shall be specifically noted as appropriate in the annual
budget; and any ordinance establishing a new department, division,
office, officer or employee position shall include a statement of the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the function therein created, and
this Code shall be appropriately amended.
§ 2-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.3
AO:27
the Council shall by resolution authorize one or more extensions of such a
period.
§ 2-5.4. Powers and Duties of Department Heads. [Ord. No.
2010-28; amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
The head of each department, under the supervision of the Mayor and
subject to the Charter and to this Code, shall:
a. Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
subordinate officers and employees within the department with the
approval of the City Business Administrator, except as provided by the
Charter, this Code or by ordinance.
b. Ensure that all powers, functions and duties assigned to the department
are carried out with diligence.
c. Operate his or her department in an efficient and effective manner.
d. Report in writing to the Mayor and City Business Administrator
recommendations for improving departmental performance,
requirements of the department and the results of the assignments
made to the department.
e. Report promptly to the Mayor, City Business Administrator and to the
Chief Financial Officer projected deviations in the financial
performance of the department.
f. Report at least monthly to the Mayor and Council, in such form as shall
be approved by the Mayor, on the work of the department during the
preceding month.
g. Cooperate with the Mayor, City Business Administrator, Chief Financial
Officer and Council in the preparation of the annual budget, providing
supporting information for all budgetary requirements and explanation
of all deviations from previous budgets.
h. Assign, with the City Business Administrator's approval, functions,
powers and duties to subordinate officers and employees within the
department and modify such assignments as need appears.
i. Assign priorities to the conduct of the functions, powers and duties
allocated to the department.
j. Supervise the work of the department through the divisions established
by this Code and supervise and direct the work of the employees of the
department.
k. Delegate to other officers or employees of his or her department such of
his or her powers as he or she may deem necessary for efficient
administration and operation.
§ 2-5.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-5.4
AO:28
§ 2-5.5. Surety Bonds. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Chief Financial Officer, the Municipal Tax Collector and the Municipal
Court Judge and Administrator shall each give bond, at the expense of the
City, in accordance with general law.
§ 2-5.6. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
No officer or employee elected or appointed in the City shall engage in
any type of activity which could be considered to be a conflict of interest
and which would be incompatible with the proper discharge of his official
duties in the public interest or would intend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
§ 2-5.7. Disclosure of Personal Interest. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Any official or employee who has or may have any interest, direct or
indirect, in any measure, indebtedness or action, and who participates
in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the Council or to any
municipal agency with respect thereto, shall disclose on the records of the
Council or agency the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 2-5.8. Pensions. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Pension fund membership and rights of any officer or employee shall not be
adversely affected due to the adoption of this Code or of any amendments
or supplements thereto. In the event of the termination of employment
of any officer or employee prior to his retirement for whom funds have
been set aside for a pension or for retirement benefits during the period
of his employment, such funds shall be paid to such officer or employee in
accordance with State Law.3
§ 2-5.9. Tenure. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Any officer or employee of the City who has acquired tenure in his position
through any provision of law or of ordinance shall retain said tenure in the
same position without effect due to the adoption of this Code.
l. Prohibit the expenditure of municipal funds or the commitment of
municipal funds by the department except as provided by law.
m. Provide liaison with other departments, divisions, boards, etc., as
required for the efficient and effective operation of the administrative
branch.
n. Familiarize him/herself with general law affecting his or her
department and with funds available for the performance of the
functions of his or her department from sources outside the City.
3. Editor's Note: See also Chapter 3, Section 3-32.
§ 2-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.10
AO:29
§ 2-5.10. Independent Annual Audit. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Council shall have an annual audit made of the City accounts and
financial transactions as required by law. Such annual audit shall be made
by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey, appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council.
§ 2-5.11. Administrative Regulations. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority
of the City, except such as relates to the organization or internal
management of the City government or a part thereof, shall take effect until
it is filed with the City Clerk. The Council shall provide for the prompt
publication of such regulations and rules.
§ 2-5.12. Public Records. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 2-5.13. Delivery of Funds and Records. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Upon termination of the term of office of any officer or the employment
of any employee, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor, or if there
be no successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated
by the Council to receive same, all moneys, papers, books, memoranda,
accounts and data of any nature whatsoever pertaining to his office or to his
employment.
§ 2-5.14. Public Office Hours. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The public, administrative and executive business offices of the City shall
be open for the transaction of public business on a regular schedule as
prescribed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, except as
otherwise provided by law. Notice of the regular office hours of all officials
shall be posted on the City bulletin board and the City's website.
a. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any department shall
be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved and shall be and
remain the sole property of the City and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such department except when required for
use in official business and shall then be returned to such office without
delay. Each department head shall be responsible for enforcing the
requirements of this section in his department. This section shall be
subject to the provisions of Destruction of Public Records Law (1953)
(N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.) and the Division of Records Management,
State of New Jersey.
b. In accordance with the Open Public Records Act of July 1, 2001, the City
of Lambertville appoints the City Clerk as the person responsible for
processing of all requests for copies of public records. All requests shall
be documented and recorded as prescribed in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.
§ 2-5.10 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-5.15
AO:30
§ 2-5.15. Hiring Policy. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Whenever addition of personnel within any department shall be authorized
by ordinance, or whenever vacancy shall exist in a previously authorized
position, such position being that of department Director or one for which
monetary compensation is authorized, the vacancy shall be announced in
a public meeting of the Council and shall be advertised once in the official
newspaper of the City. Such announcement shall specify the nature of
the position, the person to whom applications shall be submitted and the
date by which applications are due. At least seven days shall be provided
between appearance of the advertisement and closing of applications.
§ 2-5.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.15
AO:31

ARTICLE VI
Statutory Agencies
§ 2-6. STATUTORY AGENCIES.
§ 2-6.1. Supervision of Statutory Agencies; Enumeration. [Ord. No.
2010-28]
The administrative functions, powers and duties of statutory and other
agencies of the City government not otherwise allocated and assigned
by this Code shall be subject to the supervision of the Mayor except as
otherwise specifically required by law, and for this purpose such statutory
and other agencies are allocated and assigned to the Office of the Mayor.
a. Planning Board. The Planning Board, as heretofore established by
ordinance and empowered pursuant to law, is continued and the
members shall be appointed by the Governing Body, as provided by law.
b. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
heretofore established by ordinance and empowered pursuant to law, is
continued and the members shall be appointed by the Governing Body,
as provided by law.
c. Municipal Court.
1. The Lambertville Municipal Court, previously established under
the power and authority granted to the governing bodies by
Chapters 264 and 394 of the Laws of 1948, and any amendments or
supplements thereto, shall be continued.
2. The Mayor shall provide for the appointment of a Municipal Court
Judge, whose salary shall be fixed by the Governing Body, who shall
also provide for the costs of operating said Court.
§ 2-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.1
AO:33

ARTICLE VII
Department of Administration
§ 2-7. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-7.1. Administrative Divisions. [Ord. No. 2010-28; amended
3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
§ 2-7.2. Division of Municipal Operations. [Ord. No. 2010-28;
amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Municipal Operations,
the head of which shall be the City Business Administrator. The Division
shall include such other personnel as shall be authorized by ordinance.
a. Under the supervision of the Mayor as chief executive, there shall be a
Department of Administration, the head of which shall be the City
Business Administrator. Within the Department there shall be the
following divisions:
1. Division of Municipal Operations.
2. Department of Finance.
3. Office of the City Clerk.
4. Division of Law.
b. Departmental Powers and Duties Generally. The Department shall
assist the Mayor in the direction and supervision of the departments
established by this Code; coordinate the operation and administration
of the various departments, divisions and agencies of the City
government; conduct the business operations of the City and perform
such other duties as the Mayor may designate. With respect to the
statutory agencies herein designated, the Department shall have the
authority of overseeing such agencies and the departments herein
established.
a. Powers and Duties. Under the supervision of the Business
Administrator, the Division shall:
1. Maintain operating reports of the various departments, divisions,
offices and agencies of the municipal government.
2. Collect, report upon and turn over to the Chief Financial Officer all
fees for which no other collection procedures are established by
general law or by this Code.
3. Maintain financial records of City operations.
4. Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the City government, subject to the Charter and to
this Code.
§ 2-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.2
AO:35
5. Develop and enforce sound personnel and purchasing practices
and procedures for all of the departments, divisions, offices and
agencies of the City government.
6. Assist the Mayor in coordinating the operation and administration
of the departments herein established.
7. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services, including an
inventory and depreciation schedule of all property owned by the
City.
8. Have custody of all City property, real or personal, not assigned in
other departments, and assign such property within the
departments.
9. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
b. Preparation of Budget. The Division shall prepare the budget
document.
1. On or before November 1 of each year, each department head shall
submit to the Department of Administration requests for
appropriation for the ensuing budget year, including a statement of
departmental programs, expenditures and employees for the lastcompleted
fiscal year as estimated, together with the departmental
request for the ensuing fiscal year. Significant deviation of the
requested amount from the amount currently budgeted shall be
accompanied by explanatory information. In a separate capital
section, the departmental requests shall also set forth the
estimated capital needs and appropriation requests for capital
purposes of the department for the then-current fiscal year and for
the two ensuing fiscal years.
2. The Division of Municipal Operations shall compile and evaluate
the requests for appropriations received from the department
heads, for consideration by the Mayor. During the month of
November, each department head shall appear before the Mayor
and the Finance Committee of Council for hearings on the various
requests.
3. On or before December 15 of each year, the Chief Financial Officer
shall prepare estimates of property and nonproperty tax revenues
which may be anticipated for the support of the budget for the
ensuing fiscal year.
4. On or before the 31st day of January, the Mayor shall submit the
proposed budget to the Council. After consideration by the Council,
there shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all
items of expenditure and revenue. Said analysis shall include for
each line item a comparison of the amounts budgeted for the
§ 2-7.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-7.2
AO:36
current year and the amounts budgeted and expended in the
previous year.
5. There shall be appended to the budget document a capital section
which shall include a budget of capital projects proposed or
continued for the current budget year, together with a forecast of
capital needs for the ensuing year.
c. Adoption of Budget. The budget shall be considered, approved and
adopted after public hearing and certification by the Director of Local
Government Services in accordance with Local Budget Law.
d. Operation of Budget.
1. The Mayor and City Business Administrator, as head of the
Department of Administration, shall supervise the administration of
each annual budget. Quarterly, or such other periodic allotments of
appropriations as may be deemed desirable, shall be established.
Each department shall administer its expenditures within the limits
of such allotments.
2. No deficits may be incurred within a department. However, upon
consultation with the Finance Committee and approval of Council,
priorities and allotments may be shifted within the confines of an
annual budget.
e. Purchasing. All purchases of any supplies, materials or equipment or
contractual services for a department shall be made by the Department
of Administration pursuant to a written request from the head of the
department whose appropriation will be charged and the certification
of the Chief Financial Officer that a sufficient unencumbered balance of
appropriation is available to pay therefor. All such purchase contracts
shall conform to applicable requirements of state statutes for
competitive bidding. Except as the City Council may authorize in case of
emergency, no purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher
shall be approved unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to
this Code have been followed.
1. Award of Contracts. Where contracts are let to public bidding the
Council may, upon recommendation from the head of the
department whose appropriation will be charged, let the contract
in the manner prescribed by law. Any such contract shall be
executed in the manner provided by this Code and by general law.
2. Purchase by Quotation. Where purchases in excess of $1,000 are
made without competitive bidding, the department head shall
obtain, wherever possible, at least three price quotations for the
items to be purchased and shall attach them to the voucher
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer for approval as required by
Subsection 3-11.1. Wherever circumstances permit, the purchase
shall be made from the lowest of such quotations.
§ 2-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.2
AO:37
§ 2-7.3. Finance Department. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department of Administration there shall be the Department
of Finance, headed by the Chief Financial Officer, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The office of Chief
Financial Officer shall be governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1
et seq. as well as this Administrative Code.
3. Emergency Purchases. The City Business Administrator shall
establish a procedure for the purchase of any item or items
required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety or
welfare, which will permit such emergency purchases to be made
for specific purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this
article.
4. Acceptance of Material. Upon delivery of materials purchased, the
receiving department shall immediately inspect said materials as to
quantity, quality and condition in accordance with the purchase
order and shall immediately notify the Department of
Administration.
5. Purchasing of Capital Items. All requisitions for capital items shall
include references to the appropriate line item in the budget.
f. Personnel. The Division shall supervise the hiring policy of the City as
herein established and shall receive and distribute applications for
employment, schedule interviews and maintain personnel files and
records for all employees of the City.
a. Composition. The Department of Finance shall consist of the Revenue
Section, the Assessment Section and the Chief Financial Officer.
b. Powers and Duties. The power and duties of the Chief Financial Officer
shall be as provided by law and local ordinance and shall include, but
shall not be limited to:
1. Maintaining and operating the City's bookkeeping and accounting
records in accordance with requirements of the Director of the
State Division of Local Government Services.
2. Maintaining custody of all public moneys of the City and providing
proper bank accounts to protect and separate funds.
3. Control of all receipts and disbursements of the municipal
government and of each of its departments and pre-audit all bills,
claims and demands against the City, including payrolls.
4. Report when required to City Council.
5. Arrange for the conduct of the annual audit by the City Auditor,
who shall be appointed annually by the Mayor, and shall cooperate
with the auditor in the performance of his duties in accordance
with State law for municipal audits.
§ 2-7.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-7.3
AO:38
§ 2-7.4. Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. No. 2010-28; amended
3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
Within the Department there shall be the Office of the City Clerk, the head
of which shall be the City Clerk, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council. The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the
Council, perform such functions as may be required by law of municipal
clerks generally and perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
Clerk of the Council by Article III of this chapter and have such other
powers and duties as Council may prescribe, including:
c. Revenue Section. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a
Revenue Section, the head of which shall be the Municipal Tax Collector
who shall perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general
law.
d. Assessment Section. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be
an Assessment Section, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council, and
who shall be qualified by both training and experience to perform the
duties of a Municipal Tax Assessor in accordance with State law.
e. Finance Committee. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a
Finance Committee consisting of the Mayor and two members of
Council selected by the Mayor. The Mayor may also appoint a citizen of
the City who is qualified by training or experience in financial matters
to serve as advisor of the committee.
f. Disbursements. Vouchers for salaries and wages and for goods and/or
services shall be prepared in accordance with State law.
a. Maintaining records of ordinances and resolutions of the Council.
b. Receiving and replying to inquiries and complaints concerning affairs
affecting the City government in coordination with the City Business
Administrator.
c. Serving as Clerk of the Council. He or she shall attend all meetings of
the Council and shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of the
Council.
d. Ensuring the custody of and shall safely keep all records, books and
documents of the City, except those committed by Charter or ordinance
to any other office or transferred thereto by the Business Administrator.
He or she shall, upon request and upon the payment of the fees
prescribed therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of the City,
furnish a certified copy of any such paper in his or her custody.
e. Be the depository and custodian of all: official surety bonds furnished
by or on account of any officer or employee, except his or her own bond
(which shall be placed in the custody of the CFO); insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the City or to
§ 2-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.4
AO:39
§ 2-7.5. City Attorney. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department there shall be the City Attorney, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council for the
term of one year. The City Attorney shall represent the City in routine legal
matters and shall advise and assist the Mayor and Council as required in
the administration of the City Government. The Mayor with the advice and
consent of Council may contract for specialized legal services as needed.
protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; formal
contracts for work, labor services, supplies, equipment and materials to
which the municipality may be a party; be the depository for and have
custody of all performance bonds running to the City as obligee, or any
other form of security given by any contractor, subdivision developer
or other persons on account of work done or to be done in or for the
City; and have custody of all leases of property owned by the City. The
Clerk shall also report to the City Business Administrator, at such time
as the Administrator may require, on the coverage, expiration date and
premium of each surety bond and contract of insurance, the nature
and terms of outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their
respective expiration dates.
f. Administer the provisions of the City ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
g. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey) and any other law or ordinance.
h. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him/her by
the City Administrator.
§ 2-7.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-7.5
AO:40
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works, Parks and Public Property
§ 2-8. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, PARKS AND PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
§ 2-8.1. Department Established. [Ord. No. 2010-28; amended
3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
§ 2-8.2. City Engineer. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department there shall be a City Engineer, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. He shall
meet all qualifications as may be established by law for municipal engineers
and may provide engineering services required by any department, division,
office or agency of the municipal government. For special projects, the
Mayor and Council may contract for additional engineering services.
§ 2-8.3. Parks and Recreation Commission. [Ord. No. 2003-03; Ord.
No. 2010-28; amended 7-23-2020 by Ord. No. 08-2020]
a. Appointment of Director; City Business Administrator to Supervise this
Department. Under the supervision of the City Business Administrator
there shall be a Department of Public Works, Parks and Public Property,
the head of which shall be the Director, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
b. Department Powers and Duties Generally. This Department shall
provide for the proper and efficient conduct of all public works'
functions of the municipal government and shall provide technical
advice and assistance to other departments and agencies as needed. It
shall administer and control the following functions and the
construction, operation and maintenance of public works,
improvements, facilities and services relating thereto:
1. Storm sewers and drains.
2. Streets, bridges, roads and sidewalks.
3. Rivers, streams, waterfronts and flood damage control and
reduction.
4. Traffic engineering and streetlighting.
5. Public buildings.
6. Parks, greens, trees and recreational facilities.
7. Garbage and recycling.
a. Within the Department there shall be a Parks and Recreation
Commission consisting of seven members and two alternates in
§ 2-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.3
AO:41
§ 2-8.4. Environmental Commission. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq. and who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council.
b. The functions of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be to:
1. Plan and develop public recreational areas and facilities within the
City;
2. Sponsor and administer the operation of playgrounds, facilities for
indoor and outdoor sports, athletic and recreational programs and
activities for children and adults, social centers, community
centers and cultural programs and activities as may be established
by the governing body;
3. Coordinate with the Mayor and Council and with Planning Board to
determine future requirements for parks, natural areas and other
recreational facilities;
4. Control and care for all lands, playgrounds and recreation places in
a safe and wholesome condition for use and adopt suitable rules,
regulations and bylaws for the conduct of all persons while using
such property.
a. Established. Within the Department there shall be an Environmental
Commission established pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968
(N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq. as amended).
b. Members. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, one of whom
shall also be a member of the Planning Board and all of whom shall be
residents of the City of Lambertville. The members shall serve without
compensation, except as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall
designate one of the members to serve as chairman and presiding
officer of the Commission. The commissioners shall be appointed for
terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors.
The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at
which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
c. Powers of Commission. The Commission is established for the
protection, development or use of natural resources, including water
resources located within the territorial limits of the City of
Lambertville. The Commission shall have power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the City and may
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
§ 2-8.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-8.4
AO:42
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas,
publicly or privately owned, including open marsh lands, swamps or
other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of
such areas and may from time to time recommend to the Planning
Board plans and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the
development and use of such areas.
d. Acquisitions by Commission. The Commission may, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council, acquire property, both real and
personal, in the name of the City by gift, purchase, grant, bequest or
lease for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such
purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an
acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement (including conservation easement),
covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas in the City.
e. Records and Annual Reports. The Environmental Commission shall
keep records of its meeting and activities and make an annual report to
the Mayor and Council.
f. Appropriations. The Mayor and Council may appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the Environmental Commission. The Commission
may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from time to
time require, providing the same shall be within the limits of funds
appropriated to it.
g. Studies and Recommendations. The Environmental Commission shall
have power to study and make recommendations concerning open
space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, marine resources, and protection of flora
and fauna.
§ 2-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.4
AO:43

ARTICLE IX
Department of Health, Welfare and Housing
§ 2-9. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, WELFARE AND HOUSING.
§ 2-9.1. Board of Health. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville shall be the Board of
Health.
§ 2-9.2. Powers and Duties of the Board of Health. [Ord. No.
2010-28; amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
The Board of Health shall have all the functions, powers and duties of a local
Board of Health under Title 26 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
§ 2-9.3. Construction Official. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department there shall be a Construction Official who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council, and who
shall have such powers and duties as provided for in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq.
§ 2-9.4. Local Public Assistance Board. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
A Local Public Assistance Board is hereby established to be composed of
five members and to be organized and operated in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 44:8-107 et seq.
§ 2-9.5. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Ord. No. 2009-5 §§ 1, 2, 3, 5;
Ord. No. 23-2018]
See Land Development Review Ordinance, Article XII, Affordable Housing.
§ 2-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.5
AO:45

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Safety
§ 2-10. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
§ 2-10.1. Department of Public Safety Established. [Ord. No.
2010-28; amended 3-21-2019 by Ord. No. 03-2019]
Under the supervision of the City Business Administrator, there shall be
a Department of Public Safety composed of a Police Director, the Police
Department and the Office of Emergency Management.
§ 2-10.2. Police Director. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department there shall be a Police Director who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and the advice and consent of Council, and who
shall have such administrative powers and duties as provided for in New
Jersey Statutes Annotated and the Code of the City of Lambertville.
§ 2-10.3. Police Department. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 2-10.4. Office of Emergency Management. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be an Office of
Emergency Management, the head of which shall be the Municipal
Coordinator of Emergency Management and who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Council and who shall have such powers and duties as set
forth in N.J.S.A. Appendix A:9-30 et seq., and the rules and regulations as
promulgated by the Governor of the State of New Jersey.
a. Composition. The Police Department shall consist of such personnel as
have been heretofore or may be hereafter authorized by the Mayor and
Council.
b. Powers and Duties. The Police Department shall perform such duties
and have such other authority as prescribed by general law for
municipal police departments.
§ 2-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.4
AO:47

ARTICLE XI
Transitional Provisions
§ 2-11. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
§ 2-11.1. Prior Ordinances. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
All references in any prior ordinances or resolutions of the Board of
Commissioners or to any board, body, committee, commission, department
or office shall be taken and constructed to mean such board, body,
committee, commission, department, office or officer to which the
respective functions, powers and duties are allocated and assigned by this
Code.
§ 2-11.2. Transfer of Functions, Powers and Duties. [Ord. No.
2010-28]
On the effective date of this Code, the functions, powers and duties of
personnel engaged therein and all records and property of the City relating
thereto, except as otherwise specifically provided by this Code, are
transferred to the respective departments, offices and agencies to which
they are allocated and assigned by this Code.
§ 2-11.3. Continuation of Actions. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive or judicial character
which are pending upon the effective date of this Code are continued and
the appropriate officer or employee under this Code shall be substituted for
the officer theretofore exercising or discharging the function, power or duty
involved in such action or proceedings.
§ 2-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11.3
AO:49

ARTICLE XII
Defense and Indemnification of City Employees
§ 2-12. REQUEST FOR DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
§ 2-12.1. Duty to Defend. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
Except as provided below, the City shall, upon a request of an employee of
the City, provide for the defense of any action brought against such City
employee on account of an act or omission in the scope of his employment
or official City duties. For purposes of this section, the City's duty to defend
shall extend to counterclaims or cross claims against an employee.
§ 2-12.2. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
The City may refuse to provide for the defense of an action referred to in
this section if it determines that:
§ 2-12.3. Punitive Damages. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
Nothing in this section requires the City to pay for punitive or exemplary
damage or damages resulting from the commission of a crime. The City
may indemnify a City employee for exemplary or punitive damages resulting
from the employee's civil violation of State or Federal law if, in the opinion
of the Governing Body, the acts committed by the employee upon which the
damages are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or an intentional wrong.
§ 2-12.4. Notice. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
It shall be the duty of the employee to immediately notify the City Clerk in
writing as to any action threatened against the employee.
§ 2-12.5. Exclusive Control as a Condition for Such Defense. [Ord.
No. 2003-01]
The City shall have exclusive control over the representation of such person
defended and such person shall cooperate fully with the City, provided,
however, that such person may at any time and at such person's option take
control over representation by waiving all rights to indemnification and all
rights to payment for costs of defense.
a. The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; or
b. The act or the failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice; or
c. The action is brought by the City itself against the employee; or
d. The employee acted in violation of the Local Government Ethics Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:9:22.1, et seq.
§ 2-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.6
AO:51
§ 2-12.6. Representation. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
The City may provide for the defense pursuant to this section by authorizing
the City Attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended, or by
employing other counsel for this purpose, or by asserting the City's right
under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the insurance to
provide the defense. Except as provided in subsection 2-12.7, the City shall
not reimburse the employee for any legal costs incurred that were not
authorized by the City in writing.
§ 2-12.7. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
If the City refuses to provide for the defense of an employee as required
above, the employee shall be entitled to indemnification from the City if he
establishes that the act or omission upon which the claim or judgment was
based occurred within the scope of his duties as an employee of the City and
if he proves that the act or omission was not the result of fraud, malice or
willful misconduct.
§ 2-12.8. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2003-01]
For purposes of this section:
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean an officer, employee or servant of the City,
whether or not compensated or part-time, who is authorized to perform
any act or service, provided, however, that the term shall not include an
independent contractor. Other terms shall have the meanings set forth in
the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
§ 2-12.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 2-12.8
AO:52
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS; PROCEDURES; DEPARTMENTS,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 2-12.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.8
AO:53

ARTICLE I
Officers and Employees
§ 3-1. POLICE DIRECTOR. [1990 Code §§ 3-5.1—3-5.5; Ord. No.
2009-01 § 1 — 2; amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 25-2019]
§ 3-1.1. Establishment.
There is hereby established the administrative position of Police Director,
which individual shall be charged with the duties of supervising and
directing the Police Department and such other duties and responsibilities
as established by the Mayor and Council.
§ 3-1.2. Appointment: Removal from Office.
§ 3-1.3. Qualifications.
The person appointed to the position of Police Director shall be qualified by
training and experience for the duties of his position, but in no event shall
a person be appointed unless such person meets the following minimum
qualifications:
§ 3-1.4. Duties and Responsibilities.
a. The Police Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
b. The Police Director shall be appointed for a period of one to three years
from date of appointment.
c. The Police Director may be removed from office for cause defined as:
1. Failure or neglect to perform the duties of Police Director as
defined in this article.
2. Mental and/or physical incompetence to perform the duties of the
position.
3. Conviction of a felony.
d. In the event of a vacancy in the position of Police Director, the Officer in
Charge (OIC) of the Police Department shall perform the
responsibilities of the Police Director until appointment of a successor.
a. Citizen of the United States.
b. Resident of New Jersey.
c. A minimum of 10 years' experience as a member of a law enforcement
agency, five years of which shall have been in a supervisory and
administrative capacity.
§ 3-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.4
AO:55
a. The Police Director shall be the chief administrative and executive
officer in the Police Department. He shall be responsible for the
protection of lives and property in the City and for the organization and
direction of all Police Department activities. He shall organize and
direct the Police Department and issue such orders and give such
instructions as he may deem necessary or proper from time to time in
the administration and management of the Department. He shall
coordinate efforts between the Police Department and the Municipal
Court in their administrative and reporting functions. His work shall
extend to planning, directing and controlling, through subordinates, the
police patrol traffic functions. He shall have direct responsibility for
activities in police investigation, vice control and internal security
within the Police Department. The Police Director shall be responsible
for recruiting and disciplining members of the Police Department and
for counseling and training Police Department employees.
b. The Police Director shall further specifically:
1. Plan, organize, direct, supervise and review all activities of the
Police Department.
2. Coordinate the efforts of the Police Department with the court
system.
3. Prepare annual budget requests and recommendations for the
Police Department and review all requests for expenditures.
4. Plan and implement an ongoing program of training and education,
subject to the approval of the appropriate authority, and may
participate in the training of subordinates in the law and in the
technique and procedures of the various functions, with particular
attention to personnel at the supervisory level so that they will be
fully apprised of current developments in law enforcement.
5. To keep abreast of the public safety requirements of the City and
formulate policies, procedures, written manuals and instructions
for the Police Department responsive to determined needs.
6. Supervise and direct all of the operations of the Police Department
utilizing supervisory personnel in the Police Department.
7. Establish work schedules, determine beats and shifts and make
work assignments.
8. Plan, organize, assign and direct all public safety operations with
respect to personnel, equipment and buildings.
9. Respond to the scene of major criminal activity and other major
conditions that affect public safety, oversee Police Department
operations and render technical and other support as appropriate.
§ 3-1.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-1.4
AO:56
10. With recommendation of subordinate supervisors or on his own
initiative, take or recommend disciplinary action in accordance
with statutory provisions.
11. Establish performance criteria for the Police Department as a
whole, as well as its individual members, and to conduct periodic
evaluations to assure compliance with those criteria.
12. Recruit, examine and recommend candidates for positions in the
Police Department in reference to appointments and promotions.
13. Shall prefer charges against and, in his discretion, pending a final
hearing on the charges, suspend any officer or member of the
Department and otherwise exercise control over all subordinates
subject to law.
14. Attend meetings and public gatherings to explain the safety
activities and functions and to elicit citizen support of police
objectives.
15. Plan and supervise programs of crime and accident prevention for
the community.
16. Work with community groups to foster community action related to
public safety activities.
17. Establish and maintain relations with school, civic and private
organizations to assure a full understanding of the public safety
effort.
18. Provide technical public safety information to the Mayor and City
Council, the City Clerk, Zoning Officer or other department heads
when required.
19. Supervise effective programs for streetlighting, signing and traffic
control to ensure vehicle and pedestrian safety.
20. Take an active part in any land use proposals or studies which are
or might be conducted for the City, so that adequate consideration
is given to the present and future needs of the Police Department
as well as to facilities and programs incidental to the function of the
Department and the implementation of a program of preventative
law.
21. Promote a close liaison with the various agencies of the City and to
attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council when necessary to
better coordinate the functioning of the Police Department with the
work of all municipal agencies.
22. Regularly review the ordinances of the City dealing with public
safety to assure their propriety with the prevailing public safety
needs of the residents of the City.
§ 3-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.4
AO:57
§ 3-2. through § 3-4. (RESERVED)
23. Assist and cooperate with the Construction Office, Code
Enforcement Officer, Board of Health, Public Works Director, City
Clerk and Emergency Management Coordinator in the reporting
and investigation of any alleged or possible violation of statute,
municipal ordinance and/or lawful rule, regulation or order
promulgated by those officers and prepare detailed investigation
reports and testimony in connection with such alleged violations
for use by these bodies and officials in persecutory or enforcement
proceedings.
24. Meet, when requested, individually or jointly with the Construction
Official, Code Enforcement Officer, Health Officer, Public Works
Director, City Clerk or Emergency Management Coordinator for
the purpose of discussing existing or anticipated problems and
exchanging ideas concerning proposed solutions and keep himself
informed about the current activities of these bodies which may
involve his office.
25. Submit monthly reports to the appropriate authority, summarizing
police activity, crime and enforcement statistics and other relevant
information impacting public safety. Periodically review existing
policies and procedures, revise as necessary and implement new
policies, procedures, general orders and other directives as
required due to changing conditions and best operational or
administrative practices.
26. Coordinate, wherever possible, all facets of municipal government
concerned with the public safety; strengthen the lines of
communication between the local, county and state bodies
concerned with law enforcement and public safety.
27. Perform related work as required.
§ 3-1.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-2
AO:58
ARTICLE II
Departments Established
§ 3-5. DEFINITIONS. [Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 25-2019]
As used in § 3-1 and this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY — Business Administrator of the City of
Lambertville.
§ 3-6. POLICE DEPARTMENT. [1990 Code §§ 3-6.1—3-6.10; Ord. No.
91-14; Ord. No. 96-02; Ord. No. 2009-01 § 3; amended 10-17-2019
by Ord. No. 25-2019]
§ 3-6.1. Creation of Department.
There is hereby created in the City a Police Department which shall consist
of a Police Director, and such regular full-time or part-time members as
will, from time to time, be deemed necessary and which the appropriate
authority may appoint, to properly preserve peace and good order within
the City of Lambertville. The City Business Administrator, or in the event
of a vacancy, the Mayor, shall be designated as the appropriate authority
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The appropriate authority shall be
responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department and
adoption and promulgation of rules and regulations governing the Police
Department and the discipline of its members.
a. Acting Appointment. In the event that the appropriate authority
determines the need to fill a supervisory position in either the rank of
Lieutenant, Sergeant First Class or Sergeant, due to either an open
vacancy or establishment of a new position by the Mayor and City
Council, he or she may appoint an Acting Lieutenant, Acting Sergeant
First Class, or Acting Sergeant.
1. The acting appointee shall assume all of the duties and obligations
of the acting supervisory position and shall receive the established
compensation for said supervisory position.
2. The acting appointee may serve in the acting position until a
regular competitive appointment can be accomplished through the
Police Department's established promotional policy and procedure;
but in no event shall an acting appointment exceed one year. In the
event the acting appointee obtains a passing score on the formal
promotional examination they may be permanently appointed to
the respective supervisory position.
3. Acting Lieutenants, Sergeants First Class and/or Sergeants are
considered probationary appointments and may be rescinded by
the appropriate authority for any lawful reason. If such acting
position is so rescinded the appointee will revert back to his
previously held title in the Police Department.
§ 3-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.2
AO:59
§ 3-6.2. Duties of Members.
Duties of the members of the Police Department shall be those prescribed
by the Laws of the State of New Jersey, the ordinances of the City of
Lambertville and the Rules and Regulations which may be established by
the appropriate authority of the Department.4
§ 3-6.3. Qualification for Members of Police Department.
No person shall be appointed a member of the Police Department unless he
or she has the following qualifications:
§ 3-6.4. Rules and Regulations.
a. Is a citizen of the United States;
b. Is sound in body and in good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Public Employees Retirement System of New Jersey as
to his eligibility for membership in the Retirement System;
c. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
d. Is of good moral character, and has not been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude; and
e. Shall meet the age, residence and other requirements as established by
law.
a. A Police Department has been established pursuant to municipal
ordinance pursuant to authority vested in the governing body as stated
in the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 40A.
b. The appropriate authority shall establish and may, from time to time,
amend and repeal such rules and regulations as deemed necessary for
the governance and efficient working of the Police Department. These
rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of police officers and
contain policies to be followed by police officers in responding to the
general public, criminal activities and related matters.
c. The rules and regulations, as currently in force, shall be posted
permanently on a bulletin board in the Police Headquarters and at least
two copies shall be filed with the City Clerk and be available for public
inspection. A copy of these rules and regulations shall be issued to all
employees of the Police Department.
d. Any amendment to the rules and regulations shall be filed with the City
Clerk. The appropriate authority shall also distribute notice of such
amendment to the members of City Council, however, any new or
amended rules and regulations shall be effective upon their filing with
the City Clerk. A copy of any amended rules and regulations shall be
4. Editor's Note: See Subsection 3-6.4.
§ 3-6.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-6.4
AO:60
§ 3-6.5. (Reserved)
§ 3-6.6. Probationary Period; Permanent Appointment; Removal or
Suspension.
A police officer shall be deemed to be a probationary employee for the
first 12 months of his appointment, during which time he or she may be
terminated without cause or hearing. Upon satisfactory completion of 12
months of employment and successful completion of a police training course
at an approved school, the police officer shall be deemed a permanent
member of the Lambertville Police Department. Except as otherwise
provided by law, all persons appointed to positions in the Police Department
shall hold office during good behavior and efficiency and no permanent
officer of the Department shall be removed or suspended from office or
employment, or fined, or reduced in rank, for any cause other than
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of the Rules and Regulations
established for the management of the Police Department, and then only
upon a written complaint setting forth the charge or charges against such
member or employee and a hearing as prescribed by law.
§ 3-6.7. Vacancies.
Any vacancies existing in the Police Department shall be filled at the
discretion of the appropriate authority. Procedures for appointment shall
be in accordance with appropriate state statutes and the Rules and
Regulations of the Police Department of the City of Lambertville. The
appointment or termination of all Police Department employees shall be the
prerogative of the appropriate authority. The eligibility list resulting from
the appointment procedures, in the discretion of the appropriate authority,
shall be active for a period of two years and subsequent vacancies shall be
filled from that list.
posted on the bulletin board in Police Headquarters, available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office and issued to each member of the
Department within five days after adopted.
e. Members of the Police Department shall at all times observe the rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant to this subsection. Such rules
and regulations shall be dispositive of all matters not set forth in this
Code in relationship to incapacity and misconduct of members as well
as all other areas of behavior, procedures and organization. Any action
taken against any officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 et seq. shall
be based on the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this
subsection. No charge shall be brought against any officer for violation
of any rule or regulation or amendment thereto which has not been duly
promulgated, posted and delivered as herein required.
§ 3-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.8
AO:61
§ 3-6.8. Special Officers.
The appropriate authority may appoint special officers in accordance with
the Laws of the State of New Jersey and for term not exceeding one year.
They shall have and exercise all powers as provided by the law during
the performance of their duties, but shall not be considered as regular/
permanent members of the Police Department and shall not be entitled
to tenure or other benefits of the Department. They may be suspended
or recommended for dismissal from the Department at any time at the
discretion of the Police Director and they shall receive such compensation
as may be fixed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 3-6.9. Promotional Testing.
Promotional testing shall be administered in accordance with appropriate
state statutes and procedures established in the Rules and Regulations of
the Lambertville Police Department.
§ 3-6.10. Decrease in Personnel for Economy Purposes.
When the Mayor and Council shall, for reasons of economy, find it necessary
to decrease the number of members of or employees in the Police
Department or of any grade or rank thereof, the Mayor and Council shall
proceed in the following manner:
a. If the governing body shall determine to decrease the number in any of
the higher ranks or grades of the Police Department it shall provide
such instruction by resolution to the appropriate authority who shall as
necessary demote such member or employee, or members or
employees, of such higher rank or ranks to the next rank below. It shall
not remove any such member or employee from such Department for
reasons of economy except as hereinafter provided, and in any such
demotion from the higher rank or grade, the member or employee to be
demoted shall be the last one so appointed to such higher rank or
grade. All dismissals or removals from the Department for reasons of
economy shall be made from the last person or persons appointed to the
Department, regardless of the rank of such person at the time of
decreasing the number of employees.
b. If any officer, employee or member of the Police Department shall be
demoted to a lower rank or grade for reasons of economy, such member
or employee shall be carried on a special list, and when promotions are
made to such higher rank or grade, the person demoted on the ground
of economy shall be the first to be restored to the rank from which he
was demoted.
c. If any member of or employee in the Police Department of the City of
Lambertville has been, since January 1, 1986, demoted or removed on
the ground of economy and for no other reason, in the case of new
appointments to the Department, the person so demoted or removed on
the ground of economy shall be the first to be reinstated to such
§ 3-6.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-6.10
AO:62
§ 3-7. PROCEDURES FOR EMPLOYMENT OF OFF-DUTY POLICE
OFFICERS. [1990 Code § 3-7; Ord. No. 2003-05; Ord. No. 2005-14;
Ord. No. 2009-09; Ord. No. 2009-20; Ord. No. 20-2014; amended
10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 25-2019]
Department and to the rank from which he or she was removed, if
such rank is retained in the Department in the order of his seniority of
service when of equal rank.
a. Any person or entity wishing to receive police services which the City of
Lambertville is not obligated or expected to provide as part of the
regular plan of police services or pursuant to its normal provisional
services for traffic control at special events may arrange to receive such
services through the Office of the Police Director. Any person or entity
disturbing the streets or roadways or altering the normal pattern of
traffic within the City of Lambertville shall obtain a certificate from the
Office of the Police Director noting that police services have been
arranged or in the alternative that such services are not required. The
opinion of the Director of Police shall be final.
b. Except for unusual circumstances, all requests for such services shall
be made at least 15 days in advance and in writing citing the nature of
the duties to be performed, the location thereof, the dates and hours of
service, the basis of payment for such service and payment in advance
for the requested time.
c. The Office of the Police Director shall administer all activities pursuant
to this section.
d. All officers of the Lambertville Police Department are authorized to
perform police-related services for private persons or entities on offduty
hours subject to the terms of this section. All assignments for
outside services shall be on a voluntary basis.
e. The party who made arrangements for such services shall notify the
Lambertville Police Department a minimum of two hours in advance of
the scheduled start time or the party will be responsible for a minimum
charge of two hours' service per individual.
f. The charge for such services shall be based on the hourly rates as
established annually by the current collective bargaining agreement.
Such rate shall include the hourly rate of the officer working plus a sum
representing a reasonable approximation of the administrative cost,
overhead and out-of-pocket expenses for equipment and supplies to the
City of providing the service and shall be equal to 30% of the hourly
rate established. All payments for such services shall be made to the
City of Lambertville. The fee for services of off-duty officers shall be $55
per hour with $45 to be paid to the officer.
§ 3-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7
AO:63
§ 3-8. through § 3-9. (RESERVED)
g. Payment to the officer shall be made by the Chief Financial Officer
pursuant to the contract with the Lambertville Police Department
(Hunterdon County Police Benevolent Association Local Number 188).
§ 3-7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-8
AO:64
ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedures
§ 3-10. PERSONNEL PRACTICES.5
§ 3-10.1. Adoption of Personnel Policies and Procedures. [Ord. No.
24-2016]
§ 3-10.2. Adoption of Certain Policies.
§ 3-11. PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
§ 3-11.1. Purchase Order Required. [1990 Code § 3-11.1]
Any purchase of goods or services shall first be requested by an official
or properly designated employee of the City of Lambertville upon which a
purchase order shall be prepared and signed by the official or employee.
a. The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville shall by ordinance
establish titles for public employment by the Mayor and Council of the
City of Lambertville and salary ranges for City employees.
b. The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville shall by resolution
adopt and amend from time to time personnel policies and procedures
including rules concerning the hiring and termination of employees,
terms and conditions of employment, and regulations required to
comply with applicable Federal and State employment related law. The
personnel policies and procedures adopted pursuant to said
resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees, employees,
prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors of the
(local unit type).
c. As per the Lambertville City Code, 2014, Chapter 2, Administrative
Code, the Mayor shall be responsible to implement and enforce the
personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel
practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining
agreement, personnel services contract or Federal or State law, the
terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other
cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this ordinance shall prevail.
a. The Staff Handbook adopted by Ord. No. 02-2012 was repealed by Ord.
No. 24-2016 on September 20, 2016.
b. Policies Adopted:
1. Ordinance No. 16-2014 Leave of Absence.
2. Ordinance No. 27-2014 Donation of Sick Leave Policy.
5. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 02-2012 which adopted a Staff Handbook was repealed by Ord. No.
24-2016.
§ 3-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.1
AO:65
Such purchase order shall not be processed unless it is determined through
the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Lambertville that funds are
available to commit such funds.
§ 3-11.2. Statement Required. [1990 Code § 3-11.2]
Any person claiming payment from the City of Lambertville shall first
submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made up, with the
certification of the party claiming payment that is correct.
§ 3-11.3. Certification Required. [1990 Code § 3-11.3]
No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless the voucher
has attached to it or includes a certification of some officer or duly
designated City employee having personal knowledge of the facts that the
goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the City of
Lambertville.
§ 3-11.4. Approval Officer. [1990 Code § 3-11.4]
The City Clerk is hereby designated as the certifying and approval officer
of the City of Lambertville, and his duties shall include the making of
certifications required by subsection 3-11.3 above, ascertaining the
existence of proper and sufficient appropriations for the payments to be
made and determining that there is legal authority for the payments
evidenced by action of a purchasing department or agent or officer in
respect to the goods or services ordered and the incurring of the expense
therefor.
§ 3-11.5. Presentation of Claims. [1990 Code § 3-11.5]
All bills or claims duly certified shall be presented to the City Clerk not
later than seven days prior to the meeting of the Mayor and Council at
which the same will be considered. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk
to examine all bills or claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain
if proper administrative procedures have been followed. All claims or bills
to be considered by the Governing Body shall be listed systematically and
without preference, and this list shall be made available to every member of
the Mayor and Council prior to formal action by that body.
§ 3-11.6. Approval. [1990 Code § 3-11.6]
The Mayor and Council shall approve or disapprove all claims in the manner
prescribed in this section and in accordance with the law. If the Mayor and
Council shall reject any claim presented to it, it shall state the reason for
such rejection, and the disapproved claim shall be referred back to the City
Clerk with such instructions as the Mayor and Council may give at the time
of disapproval.
§ 3-11.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-11.7
AO:66
§ 3-11.7. Actions Withheld Pending Further Study. [1990 Code
§ 3-11.7]
If it appears to the Mayor and Council that any claim requires further study
or investigation, the Mayor and Council may withhold action on the claim
for a reasonable period of time pending further study or investigation.
§ 3-11.8. Records. [1990 Code § 3-11.8]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to record all items in the official minutes
or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that the Governing
Body has by formal action approved the same with appropriate records as
to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records pertaining to approved or
disapproved bills or claims shall be available for public inspection.
§ 3-11.9. Chief Financial Officer to Make Disbursements. [1990
Code § 3-11.9]
The Chief Financial Officer shall make disbursements upon receipt of an
order by the Mayor and Council, attested by the City Clerk.
§ 3-11.10. Procedure for Disbursements. [1990 Code § 3-11.10]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer who shall forthwith
prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, and checks shall
be signed by the Mayor or President of the City Council, and by the Chief
Financial Officer or Deputy Financial Officer and by the Clerk or Deputy
Clerk. In the case of salaries, wages and other compensation to individual
for services where remuneration has been set by municipal ordinance or
resolution, payment may be made by check drawn by any one of the
following officers: the Mayor, President of City Council, City Clerk or Deputy
City Clerk, and countersigned by the Chief Financial Officer or Deputy
Financial Officer. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, the
Chief Financial Officer shall record them in proper books of accounting. The
City Clerk shall mail or deliver the checks to the claimants.
§ 3-12. PROOF OF PAYMENT OF TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND
SEWERAGE FEES REQUIRED TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATIONS FOR
PERMITS OR APPROVALS. [1990 Code § 3-12]
a. Any applicant for a permit or approval in connection with a designated
parcel of real property located in the City of Lambertville shall submit
proof with such application that all real estate taxes, assessments and
sewerage fees assessed against such real property have been paid
through the quarter in which the application is filed.
b. No permit or approval in connection with a designated parcel of real
property located in the City of Lambertville shall be issued by any
board, body, officer or employee of the City of Lambertville unless all
real estate taxes, assessments and sewerage fees assessed against such
§ 3-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12
AO:67
§ 3-13. FEES CHARGED BY VARIOUS CITY DEPARTMENTS,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS. [1990 Code § 3-13; Ord. No. 2007-11;
Ord. No. 2007-23; Ord. No. 2010-04; Ord. No. 2010-14; Ord. No.
08-2012; New; Ord. No. 19-2017; Ord. No. 2010-25]
real property have been paid through the current quarter pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
a. Lambertville Municipal Court.
1. A person applying for representation by the Public Defender shall
pay to the Municipal Court Clerk an application fee of not more
than $200, but only in an amount necessary to pay the costs of the
municipal public defender services.
2. The Municipal Court may waive, in whole or in part the application
fee if, upon review of application, it is determined that the full fee is
a burden upon the applicant.
b. Lambertville Police Department.
1. Fingerprinting except for employment at the Lambertville Public
School or South Hunterdon Regional High School or applicants for
membership in the
Lambertville Fire Department or the Lambertville-New Hope
Ambulance and Rescue Squad $35.
2. Report of accident $0.05 page, no fee under $1.
3. (a) Preparation of discovery $0.05 page, $0.25 DVD, no fee under
$1.
(b) Audiotape transcription and tape $0.05 page, $0.25 copy of
tape
(c) Copy of DVD $0.25
4. (a) Contractor's sign in a non-metered area $4 per day.
(b) Contractor's sign in a metered area $8 per day.
c. Returned Check Service Charge.
1. A $20 fee, pursuant to P.L. 1990, Chapter 105, shall be charged per
check or other written instrument returned for insufficient funds.
2. This service charge shall be in addition to any interest or late
penalties that may continue to accrue from the time of initial
payment until final satisfaction.
3. Future payment from individuals writing such check or instrument
shall be made in cash or certified funds for a minimum of one year
at the discretion of the Department Head.
§ 3-12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-13
AO:68
4. This fee can be waived upon submission of a letter from the bank
that a bank error had occurred.
d. Planning Board. The fee for copies of the Master Plan including Natural
Resource Inventory, the Waterfront Plan, and the Land Use Plan
Element shall be as follows:
1. $0.05 per letter size page;
2. $0.07 per legal size page;
3. Or the actual cost charged to the City. The City provides the above
listed documents on the City website.
e. Tax Collector.
1. A fee of $5 shall be charged for the initial duplicate copy of a tax
bill.
2. A fee of $25 shall be charged for each subsequent copy of a tax bill
for the same tax year requested by the same person or organization
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64.
3. A fee of $100 shall be charged for each duplicate tax sale certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-52.1.
4. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall provide
to any person entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-54, two calculations of the amount required for redemption
within a calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent calculation
requested from the Tax Collector there shall be a fee of $50. A
request for a redemption calculation shall be made in writing to the
Tax Collector.
5. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1, the Tax Collector may charge
a lien holder of a tax lien $50 for the calculation of the amount due
to redeem the tax lien as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1.
Neither the Tax Collector nor the City shall be liable for an
incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the City shall not become part
of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled to
redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
f. City Clerk.
1. Vital Records:
(a) Certified Copies of Birth, Marriage, Civil Union and Domestic
Partner Licenses shall be charged a fee of $15 per certified
copy.
(b) Certified Copies of all Death Certificates shall be charged a fee
of $25 for the first certified copy and $2 for each additional
copy for each order placed.
§ 3-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13
AO:69
§ 3-14. NON-DISCRIMINATION BY CITY CONTRACTORS AGAINST
THEIR EMPLOYEES, CITY EMPLOYEES OR APPLICANTS FOR
EMPLOYMENT.
§ 3-14.1. Equal Opportunity Requirements. [Ord. No. 28-2015 § 1]
All contractors bidding on contracts or doing business with the City of
Lambertville shall complete the Affidavit of Compliance agreeing to adhere
(c) Corrections shall be charged a fee of $10 per correction filed.
2. The fee for Wedding and Civil Union Ceremonies shall be $100.
(a) This fee shall be deposited into the Official Ceremony Trust,
which purpose shall be for recreational and cultural use.
g. Fees for OPRA Request or Photo Copying pursuant to N.J.S.A.
47:1A-5(b):
1. The fee for in-house copying shall be determined by calculating the
actual number of copies per month, including the monthly fee for
the copier, fees for the paper, staples and envelopes are based on
actual fees paid to venders and are set as follows:
(a) Copier fee is estimated at $0.03 per page.
(b) Paper fee is estimated at $0.005 per page.
(c) Staples are estimated at $0.009 per staple.
(d) Nine by 12 envelopes are estimated at $0.07 per envelope.
2. This paragraph g shall become effective July 1, 2010.
3. This paragraph g shall be revisited each May to ensure that the
requirements of the OPRA law are met and that charges are based
on the actual cost associated with reproducing of paper.
4. As per N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(c), the special service charge when the
duplication of a record involves an extraordinary expenditure of
time and effort shall be set for services sent out to a vendor for
copying and shall be the same rate/fee assessed to the requestor.
h. Tax Map Revision Fees: shall be as stated in the Zoning Ordinance,
§ 800.
i. City Owned Property and Parks:
1. Nonrefundable Fees and Clean-Up Deposit. All requests for the use
of City Owned Properties and/or Parks shall be required to pay a
nonrefundable fee and a clean-up deposit which shall be set by
resolution annually by the Governing Body.
2. This is not intended to be used for Block Parties.
§ 3-13 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-14.1
AO:70
to the City's Non- Discrimination Policy for Contractors. The Affidavit is
hereby made part of this section and the Mayor shall be the only person
authorized to waive the submittal of all or any part thereof the Affidavit of
Compliance.
a. It is declared to be the policy of the City of Lambertville that any person
contracting for building and construction projects or furnishing
supplies or services to the City of Lambertville, and to which any funds
of the City of Lambertville are expended, shall establish equal
employment opportunities for all individuals so that no individual shall
be excluded from employment by such person because of actual or
perceived age, race, creed, color, national origin, nationality, ancestry,
sex/gender (including pregnancy), marital status, civil union status,
domestic partnership status, height, HIV status, familial status,
religion, affectional or sexual orientation, source of income, gender
identity or expression, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait,
genetic information, political beliefs, religion, liability for service in the
Armed Forces of the United States, or disability, victim of domestic
violence or stalking, or weight.
b. Any person so contracting for building and construction projects, or
furnishing supplies or services to the metropolitan government,
wherein any funds of the City of Lambertville may be appropriated or
expended to such person, shall not subscribe to any personnel policy
which permits or allows the promotion, demotion, employment,
dismissal or laying off of any individual due to his actual or perceived
age, race, creed, color, national origin, nationality, ancestry, sex/gender
(including pregnancy), marital status, civil union status, domestic
partnership status, height, HIV status, familial status, religion,
affectional or sexual orientation, source of income, gender identity or
expression, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic
information, political beliefs, religion, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, or disability, victim of domestic violence or
stalking, or weight, or which is in violation of applicable laws
concerning the employment of individuals with disabilities.
c. It is further declared to be the policy of the City of Lambertville that any
person entering into any agreement for the use of any government
property or facility with a lease term of greater than six months shall
establish equal employment opportunities for all individuals so that no
individual shall be excluded from employment, discharged, demoted, or
refused a promotion by such person because of actual or perceived age,
race, creed, color, national origin, nationality, ancestry, sex/gender
(including pregnancy), marital status, civil union status, domestic
partnership status, height, HIV status, familial status, religion,
affectional or sexual orientation, source of income, gender identity or
expression, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic
information, political beliefs, religion, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, or disability, victim of domestic violence or
§ 3-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-14.1
AO:71
§ 3-14.2. Affidavit of Compliance — Contract Requirements. [Ord.
No. 28-2015 § 2]
§ 3-14.3. Affidavit of Compliance. [Ord. No. 28-2015 § 3]
The contractor agrees:
stalking, or weight, and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws
concerning the employment of individuals with disabilities.
d. The foregoing provisions of this subsection prohibiting employment
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity shall
not apply to the following: religious entities, organizations, or
institutions where employment discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation or gender identity is in furtherance of the organization's
religious mission or beliefs, as such prohibition is not intended to
interfere with the free exercise of religion or the freedom of expressive
association guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution
a. The Purchasing Agent of the City of Lambertville shall include in all bid
specifications or invitations to bid a provision to the effect that no
contract shall be entered into for building and construction projects, or
supplies, or services unless the successful bidder submits an affidavit to
the City of Lambertville stating that his employment and personnel
policies, standards, and practices do not permit or allow for the
promotion, demotion, employment, dismissal or laying off of any
individual due to race, creed, color, national origin, sex, gender identity,
or sexual orientation, and that he is not in violation of, and will not
violate, any applicable laws concerning the employment of individuals
with disabilities.
b. The Purchasing Agent, or other agency of the City of Lambertville
under whose jurisdiction such work is to be performed, shall include in
the specifications to bidders or in the invitations to bid, a clause
prohibiting the successful bidder from discriminating against any
individual due to his/her race, creed, color, national origin, sex, gender
identity, or sexual orientation, and from violating applicable laws
concerning the employment of individuals with disabilities.
c. The foregoing requirements of this subsection pertaining to
employment discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender
identity shall not apply to the following: religious entities,
organizations, or institutions where employment discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity is in furtherance of the
organization's religious mission or beliefs, as such prohibition is not
intended to interfere with the free exercise of religion guaranteed by
the U.S. Constitution.
(a) To comply with the terms of the City of Lambertville's Non-
Discrimination Ordinance and contract compliance administrative
§ 3-14.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-14.3
AO:72
§ 3-15. CREDIT CARD PROCESSING FEES FOR PAYMENT FOR CITY
SERVICES AND PROPERTY TAXES. [Ord. No. 09-2016]
policy, including but not limited to an acceptable affirmative action
program, if applicable.
(b) To post the City of Lambertville's Non-Discrimination Ordinance Notice
in every work place or other location in which employees or other
persons are contracted to provide services under a contract with the
City.
(c) To provide documentation within the specified time frame in connection
with any workforce verification, compliance review or complaint
investigation.
(d) To permit access to employees and work sites to City representatives
for the purposes of monitoring compliance or investigating complaints
of non-compliance.
The undersigned states that he/she has the requisite authority to act on
behalf of his/her employer in these matters and has offered to provide
the services in accordance with the terms of the City of Lambertville's
Non-Discrimination Ordinance. The undersigned certifies that he/she
has read and is familiar with the terms of the Non-Discrimination
Ordinance, obligates the Contractor to those terms and acknowledges
that if his/her employer is found to be in violation of Ordinance it may
be subject to civil penalties and termination of the awarded contract.
_______________________________________
Company Name
_______________________________________
Signature of Authorized Representative Date
_______________________________________
Print Name and Title
_______________________________________
Address, City, State, Zip Code
_______________________________________
Phone/Email address
a. The City of Lambertville will offer the convenience of paying for
property taxes and City services by credit card and echecks conditioned
upon all fees associated with the transaction be paid in full by the user.
b. Annually or when rates with the vender providing the service change,
the Governing Body will adopt the fees by resolution.
§ 3-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-15
AO:73

ARTICLE IV
Boards, Committees, Commissions
§ 3-16. SHADE TREE COMMISSION. [1990 Code §§ 3-16.1—3-16.7;
Ord. No. 10-2018; amended 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 17-2019]
§ 3-16.1. Members; Appointment.
§ 3-16.2. Statutory Authorization.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to 40:64-14 as amended wherein the
amendments apply to a municipality shall be part of this section.
§ 3-16.3. Purpose.
a. The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint seven persons to act and be
known as the Shade Tree Commission for the City of Lambertville, New
Jersey. In the event of a vacancy, the appointment of the new member
shall be made to complete the unexpired term. All appointments, except
to fill vacancies, shall take effect on January 1, and shall be for five
years.
b. Ord. No. 10-2018 creates two additional positions on the Shade Tree
Commission, changing the board from a five-member to a sevenmember
board. For the first year of the appointment, the first position
shall be for five years, expiring on December 31, 2023, and the second
position shall be for a four-year appointment expiring on December 31,
2022.
a. The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville have determined that
the preservation of shade trees and shrubs within the City is
beneficially linked to the health, safety, and well-being of the City's
inhabitants, and enhances the aesthetic and historic character of the
City. It is also recognized that trees perform beneficial ecological
functions related to air quality, temperature and noise modulation as
well as control of stormwater runoff. This section provides for the
protection of trees and shrubs within the Shade Tree Commission's
Jurisdiction Zone from indiscriminate destruction, harm to, or removal
as set forth below.
b. The establishment of standards for the removal and maintenance of
trees and shrubs existing on private property, that also share space
within the Commission's Jurisdiction Zone, is in keeping with the
recognition that actions undertaken on individual properties can have
significant impact on neighboring properties. Land use and zoning
regulations provide the framework for establishment and preservation
of beneficial standards of environmental, social, economic and aesthetic
land use management, which benefit the maintenance of a healthy
urban forest and tree canopy.
§ 3-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.4
AO:75
§ 3-16.4. Authority.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have authority over policy, planning,
management and maintenance of any and all trees, shrubs and vegetation
that exist wholly within or whose dripline extends from private property
into the Shade Tree Commission's Jurisdiction Zone. This authority will
include but not be limited to entering onto private property for the purpose
of inspection, advising, planting, removal, bracing, shaping, trimming,
watering, fertilizing and treatment for disease.
§ 3-16.5. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The person submitting shade tree action request form to the
Commission.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Any employee of City law
enforcement, streets department or any member of the Shade Tree
Commission.
CALIPER — The measurement of the diameter of a shade tree at 12 inches
above the ground. This measurement is used to determine the shade tree
size for planting.
COMMISSION — The Lambertville Shade Tree Commission.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of the main stem
of a tree or the combined diameters of a multistemmed tree measured 4.5
feet above the surface of the uphill side of the shade tree. Where roots have
girdled upward, the measurement shall be taken from the beginning of the
clearest uphill vertical trunk line. The top diameter of a stump less than 4.5
feet tall shall be considered the "DBH" of an illegally destroyed shade tree
for the purpose of calculating recompense.
DRIPLINE — The radius of the tree or shrub extending from the trunk to
the tip of the outermost branch.
JURISDICTION ZONE — The area or space required or used for any public
street, sidewalk or pedestrian walkway. The Jurisdiction Zone shall extend
from the outer edge of the sidewalk or walkway to the outer edge of the
opposite sidewalk or walkway. Where no opposite sidewalk or walkway
a. Private Property within the Jurisdiction Zone. Property owner is
responsible for all matters pertaining to shade tree planting, removal,
disease control and maintenance subject to Commission review and
approval pursuant to terms and conditions set forth herein at the
property owner's sole expense.
b. City/Public-Owned Property. The Shade Tree Commission is responsible
for all matters pertaining to shade tree planting, removal, disease
control and maintenance at the City's sole expense.
§ 3-16.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-16.5
AO:76
exists, the Jurisdiction Zone shall extend to eight feet beyond the edge of
the street.
LETTER OF APPROVAL — An official letter from the Commission which
grants approval and/or sets conditions for actions applied to a specific
shade tree.
ROOT BARRIER — A physical barrier that is designed to redirect root
growth down and away from sidewalks and other infrastructure.
SHADE TREE — Any tree located wholly or in part within the Jurisdiction
Zone, or on private property, which has a dripline or roots extending into
the Jurisdiction Zone.
SHADE TREE ACTION REQUEST FORM — A standardized form available
from the Commission that shade tree owners must submit to request
approval for any Commission-regulated action within the Jurisdiction Zone.
SHADE TREE SAFETY HAZARD — A shade tree that requires immediate
removal or other mitigating actions to reduce the level of risk posed to
persons or property that could potentially be damaged or injured should a
failure occur.
SHRUB — A woody plant of relatively low height, having several stems
arising from the base and lacking a defined single trunk which has a dripline
or roots extending into the Jurisdiction Zone.
STUMP — The part of the tree and its surface roots remaining after felling.
TREE — A woody perennial plant having a singular usually elongated main
stem generally with few or no branches on its lower part.
§ 3-16.6. Tree Maintenance Regulations.
a. The maintenance, care or removal of any existing or newly planted
shade tree or shrub as defined herein, which requires compliance with
any provision of this section shall be the responsibility of the property
owner on whose property the shade tree or shrub is located or whose
property abuts the Jurisdiction Zone in which the shade tree is located.
When a shade tree trunk is on a property line, the responsibility for
compliance shall be with the person whose property contains the
largest percentage of shade tree trunk circumference.
b. All mature shade trees shall be kept trimmed to a minimum branching
height of 10 feet over streets and seven feet over sidewalks, except
where the Commission may require greater height clearances to
eliminate traffic and other hazards. Shrubbery and any vegetation shall
be trimmed back behind the edge of the sidewalk.
c. Whenever, in the opinion of the Commission, safety hazard is caused by
a shade tree or shrub, whether dead or alive, the Commission may issue
a written order to the responsible property owner to take action to
correct the condition. If, after 30 days from the date of receipt of
written notification from the Commission, the responsible property
owner fails to take corrective action, the City may have the
§ 3-16.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.6
AO:77
§ 3-16.7. Acts Requiring Permission from Commission.
No person shall do, or cause to be done, any of the following acts within the
Jurisdiction Zone without the written approval of the Commission pursuant
to the shade tree action request procedures detailed in Subsection 3-16.9
below.
§ 3-16.8. Conditions Applicable to Shade Tree or Shrub Removal.
The removal of a shade tree or shrub, if approved by the Commission, shall
be conditioned upon the following:
recommended work accomplished to address the safety hazard and may
bill the responsible property owner for the completed work.
a. Plant any tree or shrubbery.
b. Remove any tree or shrubbery.
c. Cut or trim branches greater than seven feet above a walkway or
greater than 10 feet above a street.
d. Install or repair a sidewalk within four feet of an existing shade tree or
shrub. (Ord. 9/21/53, § 3)
e. Install plants, or place planting containers, edging borders, structures,
brick, stone, concrete, or any other hard material or surface about the
base of shade trees or anywhere within the Jurisdiction Zone.
f. Fasten or attach any sign, notice, rope, wire, electric attachment or any
item to a shade tree.
g. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base or within the
dripline of a shade tree.
h. Engage in any actions, which, in the opinion of the Commission, might
cause harm or death to a shade tree or shrub.
a. Planting of Replacement Shade Trees or Shrubs. The size and number
of replacement shade trees shall be consistent with the approved Shade
Tree Replacement Schedule per Subsection 3-16.10 and planted at the
direction of the Commission, within one year of tree removal.
b. Contribution in Lieu of Tree Replacement. Alternatively, upon approval
of the Commission, a contribution shall be made to the Shade Tree
Trust Fund within 30 days of the approval date, the amount being based
on the Shade Tree Replacement Schedule in Subsection 3-16.10.
Failure to submit the contribution will constitute a violation of this
section and be subject to the same penalty as if the shade tree in
question had been removed without approval.
c. Stump Removal. The stump of any shade tree or shrub shall be removed
or ground down to 20 inches below grade. Failure to remove the stump
§ 3-16.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-16.8
AO:78
§ 3-16.9. Shade Tree Action Request Procedures for Property
Owners.
within one year of shade tree removal may result in the City
undertaking the stump removal process with the property owner being
responsible for reimbursement to the City for any and all associated
costs incurred.
a. Submission of Shade Tree Action Request Form. Persons wishing to
undergo any of the above-regulated activities must first submit a shade
tree action request form via the City's website or by hard copy with the
Commission. No request will be considered without a shade tree action
request form. All requests will be reviewed and considered at the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission occurring at least
seven days after the submission of the shade tree action request form.
b. Applicant Attendance at Commission Meeting. Applicants are
encouraged to attend the Commission meeting to present supporting
documentation for their requests and to provide clarification where
necessary, but attendance is not mandatory.
c. Commission Determination.
1. The Commission shall review each shade tree action request form
and shall grant or deny said request within 90 days of first review.
If the request is granted, it shall state in a letter of approval the
type or species of shade tree to be planted or removed, cut,
trimmed or pruned or other action involving a shade tree and may
set forth specifications for doing the same. It shall then be unlawful
to take any action contrary to any and all specifications set forth in
the letter of approval. Applicants will be notified in writing by
regular mail of the Commission's decision.
2. The Commission may determine to waive or modify the
requirements set forth herein where it finds that the site
constraints impose significant limitations to the chances of survival
or the long-term health of a replacement shade tree or of
interference with utilities or pedestrian accessibility to the
sidewalk.
d. Duty to Post Authorization During Approved Shade Tree Work. Persons
issued a letter of approval by the Commission are required to post a
copy of said letter in a visible location or present it upon request to any
authorized representative of the City while work is being done by a
contractor or by the property owner. Failure to produce a letter of
approval upon request will be cause for the authorized representative
to direct that all work being performed on the shade tree is to
immediately cease. Until such time that a letter of approval is
presented, this directive shall remain in effect.
§ 3-16.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.9
AO:79
§ 3-16.10. New and Replacement Shade Tree Requirements.
e. Duty to Comply with Commission Conditions and Requirements. Failure
to comply with any or all conditions set forth in the letter of approval by
the Commission may result in enforcement action by the Commission as
if none of the conditions were met and the shade tree action had taken
place without any prior approval.
a. Replacement Shade Tree Size and Number. The Shade Tree
Commission shall require that all new and replacement shade trees be
of a size of a minimum of 2 1/2 inch caliper and be planted in
accordance with accepted planting practices as directed by the
Commission. Any replacement shade tree must be provided in
accordance with the following Shade Tree Replacement Schedule:
Shade Tree Replacement Schedule
Live Regulated
Tree(s) Removed/
Destroyed
(DBH in inches)
Required No. of
Replacement
Tree(s) (2 1/2 inch
caliper) per Tree(s)
Removed/Destroyed
Replacement Fee per
Tree in Lieu of
Planting
1 to 4.99 1 $400
5 to 10.99 2 $800
11 to 16.99 3 $1,200
17 or greater 4 $1,600
b. Annual Adjustment of Replacement Fees. The shade tree replacement
fees contained in the Shade Tree Replacement Schedule may be
reviewed annually and adjusted to reflect current pricing.
c. Shade Tree Selection and Placement. The Shade Tree Commission
approval is required for determining the species, size and planting
location of any new or replacement shade tree or shrub within the
Jurisdiction Zone.
d. Shade Tree Replacement Deadline. The property owner shall be
required to replace any replacement shade tree or shrub within one
year from date of notification of approval. Any replacement shade tree
or shrub must survive in good health for a period of two years from the
date of planting. If, in the opinion of the Commission, the replacement
shade tree or shrub dies or fails to thrive before two years, that shade
tree or shrub must be replaced by the property owner. Any replacement
shade tree or shrub will be subject to the same conditions as contained
in the original approval, for a period of two years from the date of
replanting.
e. Payment in Lieu of Shade Tree Planting. When tree removal permission
is granted and the space on the property is inadequate for planting any
or all of the new or replacement trees required, the applicant shall
§ 3-16.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-16.10
AO:80
§ 3-16.11. Shade Tree Planting Trust Fund.
There is hereby established a "trust fund" account, which shall be known
and designated as the "Shade Tree Planting Trust Fund."
§ 3-16.12. Protection of Shade Trees and Shrubs.
make a monetary contribution to the City's Shade Tree Planting Trust
Fund in lieu of planting. This contribution must be made within 30 days
of receiving permission for removal in the amount as defined under
this section and pursuant to the Shade Tree Replacement Schedule in
Subsection 3-16.10.
f. Installation of Root Barrier. Whenever a new shade tree is planted
within five feet of the Jurisdiction Zone, a root barrier of a type and size
approved by the Commission may be required.
a. Funds from this account shall be separate and distinct from the
Commission's annual budget and shall only be used for the purchase
and planting of trees and/or shrubs for planting within the Jurisdiction
Zone.
b. Contributions or donations from individuals, groups or businesses, for
memorial purposes or any other reason, may be made directly to the
Shade Tree Planting Trust Fund.
a. From Wires.
1. Duty to Protect Shade Trees. Any person, having control over any
wire for the transmission of electric current, telephone, cable or
any other utility service along a public street, highway or
Commission Jurisdiction Zone, shall at all times guard all shade
trees and shrubs from injury caused by the wires or from the
current carried by them.
2. Duty to Provide Notice. Prior to undertaking any work on the utility
affecting any such shade tree or shrub, the utility company shall
provide at least 10 days' prior written notice to the Zoning Officer,
Shade Tree Commission, and abutting property owner. The device
or means used shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer
and/or Commission.
b. From Injurious Chemicals. No person shall permit any brine, gas or
injurious chemicals to come in contact with the stem or roots of any
Shade tree or shrub within the Jurisdiction Zone. (Ord. 9/21/53, § 5)
c. From Actions Likely to Cause Tree Harm or Death. No person shall
perform any intentional or negligent act that will more likely than not
cause a shade tree or shrub harm or death. Negligent damage shall
include, but not be limited to, damage inflicted to the root system by
machinery or cutting tools, storage of materials and soil compaction,
change of natural grade above or below the root system or around the
§ 3-16.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.12
AO:81
§ 3-16.13. Advisory Role of Shade Tree Commission.
The Shade Tree Commission shall be given a minimum of 90 days to make
timely review and determination to the Planning Board, City Council, City
Engineer, and the Director of Public Works, as appropriate, regarding the
following:
§ 3-16.14. Educational Role of Shade Tree Commission.
trunk; damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus, pests or other
infestation; pruning, which is so excessive that it threatens the health
of the tree or thinning leading to the failure to thrive; paving over
the root system with any impervious materials within such proximity
as to be fatally harmful to the shade tree; or application of any toxic
substance, including solvents, oils, gasoline and diesel fuel; trenching
of roots; cutting, girdling or inflicting other severe mechanical injury
to the trunk, roots or other vital sections of the shade tree; removing
in excess of 20% of the live crown of the shade tree; causing damage
by the operation of heavy machinery or vehicles; causing damage by
the storage of materials; and/or deliberately or negligently setting fire
to a shade tree. In addition, topping, tipping, or any similar improper
pruning practices will automatically be deemed as harmful to, or
destruction of, a shade tree.
d. From Tree Climbing and Trimming Practices. No person shall perform
any intentional or negligent act causing damage to a shade tree,
including various tree climbing practices, spiking, trimming, flush
cutting, incursion into a designated root save area, and the use of
climbing spurs or gaffs on trees not subject to removal that exposes the
cambium of a shade tree to insects, decay organisms or damages the
tree bark.
a. The shade tree planting, location, number, species and size or shade
tree removal as part of any City sidewalk and/or street construction
projects.
b. Shade tree planting in connection with the site plan approval process
for private developments.
c. It shall not be necessary for the City to obtain approval to do any shade
tree work on public areas owned in fee simple or rented by it, but no
such work shall be done without consultation with the Commission.
a. Shade Tree Maintenance Information. The Shade Tree Commission
shall provide information about trees to the public. This information will
include, but not be limited to, proper planting and trimming practices,
fertilizing, treatment and prevention of diseases and general
maintenance of shade trees and shrubs.
b. Recommended Shade Tree List. The Commission will also maintain a
publically available recommended shade tree and shrub list. The list
§ 3-16.12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-16.14
AO:82
§ 3-16.15. Interference with Shade Tree Commission Prohibited.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the Commission or its authorized agent.
§ 3-16.16. Penalty.
§ 3-16.17. No Liability for Death or Injury.
Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to make the Shade
Tree Commission or any member thereof, or any volunteer participating in
a community forestry program as provided for by Section 4 of P.L. 1996, c.
135 (N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.4), responsible for the death or injury of any person,
or for an injury to any property or highway tree or shrub. Liability for any
such death or injury shall be governed by the provisions of Section 16 of P.L.
1996, c. 135 (N.J.S.A. 59:4-10) and any other relevant provisions of the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 3-16.18. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this section is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, section or parts of this section.
will identify native species and will recommend their use where, when
or if the species is appropriate, available and best for a particular
location.
c. Interagency Coordination. The Commission may also participate in and
coordinate with other agencies, Commissions, and organizations
regarding the raising awareness of the importance of supporting an
ecologically sensitive and biodiverse community.
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be liable to the penalty in Chapter 1, § 1-5, for each and every such
violation to be recovered as provided by law (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5). The
ordinances shall be enforced by like proceedings and processes.
Enforcement thereof shall be the same as that provided by law for the
enforcement of the ordinances of the City.
b. Any public utility or cable television company that clears, moves, cuts,
or destroys any shade trees, shrubs, or plants for the purpose of
erecting, installing, moving, removing, altering or maintaining any
structures or fixtures, necessary for the supply of electric light, heat,
power, communication, or cable television services upon any lands in
which it has acquired an easement or right-of-way, shall not be subject
to any penalty. This subsection shall not exempt any public utility or
cable television company from any penalty or replacement assessment
imposed for negligent or injurious actions as determined by the
Commission.
§ 3-16.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.19
AO:83
§ 3-16.19. Conflicting Ordinances.
In the event this section conflicts with or overlaps with any other ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall take precedence rendering inapplicable
any conflicting or overlapping ordinance provisions.
§ 3-16.20. When Effective.
The terms and conditions of this section shall take effect upon adoption by
the Lambertville City Council.
§ 3-17. THE CITY OF LAMBERTVILLE HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
(LHRC). [Ord. No. 17-2014; Ord. No. 28-2017; amended 5-16-2019
by Ord. No. 11-2019]
§ 3-17.1. Demographics.
§ 3-17.2. Mission. [Amended 5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
The City of Lambertville Human Rights Council (LHRC) shall promote
education regarding living in a diverse community and address any
problems of intimidating or violent acts, which may be committed because
of the group to which citizens may belong or identify with.
a. At the 2010 United States Census there were 3,906 people, 1,958
households, and 896.8 families residing in the city. The population
density was 3,386.1 inhabitants per square mile. There were 2,075
housing units at an average density of 1,798.8 per square mile. The
racial makeup of the city was 91.30% (3,566) White; 1.95% (76) Black
or African American; 0.20% (8) Native American; 1.31% (51) Pacific
Islander; 4.12% (161) from other races, and 1.13% (44), from two or
more races, Hispanic or Latino of any race 9.75% (381) of the
population. The 2010 United States Census also captured the number of
same-sex couples and unmarried couples in the City of Lambertville. In
fact same sex couples accounted for 53.5% of all unmarried couples.
b. Over the past 20 years, the City of Lambertville has grown to recognize
the positive socio-economic contributions made by members of the
LGBT community. The City of Lambertville's acceptance of diversity and
acceptance regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, gender or disability is widely known throughout the
State of New Jersey. In 2007, the Mayor officiated New Jersey's first
Civil Union. Then in 2013, the Mayor officiated New Jersey's first Same
Sex Marriage and the ceremony was beamed around the world.
c. The national and global recognition of acceptance of people from many
diverse backgrounds comes with responsibility. It is a responsibility to
protect what we have all worked so hard to achieve.
§ 3-16.19 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-17.3
AO:84
§ 3-17.3. Purpose. [Amended 5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
Among its many activities, the City of Lambertville Human Rights Council
(LHRC) will cooperate with, and make recommendations to the Governing
Body, to educate, encourage, develop, promote, and strengthen respect for
the human rights of the citizens of Lambertville no matter their race, color,
religion, national origin, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender or disability,
so they may achieve their highest possible level of success.
§ 3-17.4. Council Established; Appointment; Compensation; Terms;
Vacancies. [Amended 5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
The City of Lambertville Human Rights Council (LHRC) will consist of
a total of 11 members, from both the public and private sector, and is
hereby established in the City of Lambertville. The members of the City
of Lambertville Human Rights Council (LHRC) shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Lambertville City Council.
a. Public Sector Members:
1. The Mayor of the City of Lambertville, or his or her representative,
to run concurrent with the Mayor's three-year term;
2. The President of the Lambertville City Council, or his/her
representative, for a one-year term;
3. The Police Director of the City of Lambertville or his/her
representative, for a one-year term;
4. The Director of Public Assistance of the City of Lambertville, for a
three-year term concurrent with the Mayor's three-year term;
5. The President of Board of Education from the Lambertville-
Stockton-West Amwell unified school district, or his/her
representative, for three-year term concurrent with their term;
6. The Chairperson of the Lambertville Free and Public Library, or his
or her representative, for a one-year term.
b. Private Sector Members:
All members of the LHRC shall serve without compensation.
1. A resident of the City of Lambertville for a two-year term;
2. A resident of the City of Lambertville for a three-year term;
3. A resident of the City of Lambertville for a five-year term.
4. A resident of the City of Lambertville. [Added 5-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 11-2019]
5. A resident of the City of Lambertville. [Added 5-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 11-2019]
§ 3-17.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-17.5
AO:85
§ 3-17.5. Chairman; Officers.
One of said members shall be appointed by the Mayor as Chairperson.
Additional officers shall be elected by the majority of the membership at the
annual reorganization meeting.
§ 3-17.6. Meetings. [Amended 5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
The City of Lambertville Human Rights Council shall meet on the second
Monday following January 1st of each year for purposes of reorganization.
The agenda at this meeting should include election of officers, appointment
of committees, adoption of bylaws or rules of procedure, fixing date and
place of meetings and such other business as shall properly come before the
Lambertville Human Rights Council at the annual reorganization meeting.
The City of Lambertville Human Rights Council (LHRC) will meet a
minimum of two times in any given calendar year, inclusive of the
reorganization meeting.
§ 3-17.7. Records; Annual Report. [Amended 5-16-2019 by Ord. No.
11-2019]
The City of Lambertville Human Rights Council (LHRC) shall keep records
in its meetings, activities and finances and shall make an annual report to
the City of Lambertville Mayor and Council.
§ 3-18. through § 3-20. (RESERVED)
§ 3-17.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-18
AO:86
ARTICLE V
Authorities and Utilities
§ 3-21. THE LAMBERTVILLE MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.6
§ 3-21.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 2009-04 Preamble]
The Lambertville Sewerage Authority (LSA or Sewerage Authority) was
created pursuant to the Sewerage Authorities Law, P.L. 1946, ch. 138, N.J.S.
40:14A-1 et seq., by ordinance dated May 10, 1954.
The New Jersey Legislature has authorized and permitted municipal
sewerage authorities created pursuant to the Sewerage Authorities Law,
P.L. 1946, ch. 138, N.J.S. 40:14A-1 et seq., to be reorganized by ordinance as
municipal utilities authorities under the Utilities Authorities Law, P.L. 1957,
ch. 183 (as amended by P.L. 1977, ch. 384), N.J.S. 40:14B-1 et seq.
§ 3-21.2. Statutory Authority for Reorganization. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Sewerage Authority shall be reorganized as a municipal
utilities authority organized as a public body corporate and existing under
and by virtue of the Utilities Authorities Law, P.L. 1957 ch. 183 (as amended
by P.L. 1977, ch. 384), N.J.S. 40:1B-1 et seq.
§ 3-21.3. Establishment of the Lambertville Municipal Utilities
Authority. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Sewerage Authority shall be renamed and styled the
Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority (LMUA or Utilities Authority).
§ 3-21.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority shall have and enjoy all of the
powers, rights, duties, franchises and obligations conferred on and imposed
upon such utilities authorities by the Utilities Authority Law and any other
statutes heretofore or that hereafter may be enacted affecting or pertaining
to utilities authorities.
§ 3-21.5. Transfer of All Rights, Contracts and Obligations. [Ord.
No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority shall succeed to all of the
property, rights, obligations, contracts, leases, and all other assets and
liabilities held by the Lambertville Sewerage Authority by operation of this
Ordinance No. 2009-04 and without further act or instrument of transfer,
assignment or assumption. Nothing in such transfer shall be construed to
diminish or otherwise affect the rights of, or obligations to, the Lambertville
Sewerage Authority's bondholders.
6. Editor's Note: The Lambertville Sewerage Authority established by Ordinance 5/10/54 and
codified in the 1990 Code as Section 3-21 has been superseded by Ordinance No. 2009-04
establishing the Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 3-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-21.6
AO:87
§ 3-21.6. Lawful Powers. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority may exercise all lawful
powers authorized under the Utilities Authorities Law as currently in effect
or later amended. These powers include, without limitation, authority as
conferred, and subject to the limitations provided, by statue: (1) to supply
water for public and private use within the City; (2) to relieve pollution or
threatened pollution from the City in waters in or bordering the state; (3)
to provide sewage collection and disposal service in the City; (4) to provide
water supply services outside the City; (5) to provide solid waste services
within or without the City; (6) to generate, transmit, and sell hydroelectric
power as wholesale; (7) to operate and maintain utility systems owned
by other units of government; (8) to promote the production and use of
alternative energy; and (9) to establish charges, fees, and rates for services
as provided by statute.
§ 3-21.7. Members and Officers. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The members, alternate members, and officers of the Lambertville
Municipal Utilities Authority shall consist of those members, alternate
members, and officers duly appointed to the Lambertville Sewerage
Authority and serving on the effective date of this section. The terms and
appointments of such members, alternates, and officers shall thereafter be
made in accordance with the Utility Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4b.
§ 3-21.8. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
Members of the Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority may receive
compensation for their services as periodically determined by the
Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority, except that such compensation
may not exceed an annual amount of $1,200. Members of the Lambertville
Municipal Utilities Authority may be reimbursed for expenses reasonably
incurred in the discharge of their duties.
§ 3-21.9. By Laws. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority shall develop and adopt
revised By Laws that conform to this section.
§ 3-21.10. Filing With State. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
A copy of this Ordinance No. 2009-04 shall be duly certified by the City
Clerk and filed with the office of the Secretary of State for the State of New
Jersey.
§ 3-21.11. Severability. [Ord. No. 2009-04]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or other part
is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or void under
any applicable constitution, statute, regulation, or other law, the invalidity
shall not affect the remainder of this ordinance but shall be confined to
§ 3-21.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-21.11
AO:88
the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other part
found to be invalid or void.
§ 3-21.12. Sewerage Authority Ordinance Superseded. [Ord. No.
2009-04]
This Section 3-21 adopted by Ordinance No. 2009-04 shall amend and
supersede the Ordinance of May 10, 1954 entitled "Ordinance Creating
Lambertville Sewerage Authority."
§ 3-21.13. Effective Date; Filing with Secretary of State. [Ord. No.
2009-04]
This Section 3-21 adopted by Ordinance No. 2009-04 shall take effect upon
filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 3-22. through § 3-25. (RESERVED)
§ 3-21.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-22
AO:89

ARTICLE VI
Agreements and Contracts
§ 3-26. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT FOR SUPPLEMENTAL POLICE
PROTECTION.
§ 3-26.1. Preamble. [1990 Code § 3-26.1; New]
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 has been enacted by the Legislature authorizing the
governing bodies of two or more municipalities to enter into an agreement
with each other for municipal police aid in case of emergency; and the
Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville, County of Hunterdon, State
of New Jersey, believes that it would be in the best interests of residents
of said City for the City to enter into such an agreement with other
municipalities located within the County of Hunterdon and with the County
of Hunterdon. A proposed agreement has been submitted between the
Township of Delaware, Township of West Amwell and City of Lambertville,
and the County of Hunterdon, providing for such mutual aid, and the Mayor
and Council of the City of Lambertville desire to enter into such agreement.
§ 3-26.2. Agreement. [1990 Code § 3-26.2; New]
§ 3-27. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED BY
CONTRACT.
§ 3-27.1. Purpose. [1990 Code § 3-27.1]
This section is enacted pursuant to the Interlocal Services Act (N.J.S.A.
40:8A-1 et seq.) to authorize the County of Hunterdon to provide public
health services of a technical and professional nature provided by the
County Health Department, as agent of the City Board of Health in
compliance with the Local Health Services Act, Chapter 329, P.L. 1975
(N.J.S.A. 26:3A-1 et seq.).
§ 3-27.2. Authorization. [1990 Code § 3-27.2]
This City shall enter into a contract with the County of Hunterdon
essentially providing that the County Health Department shall provide
public health services which meet the standards of core and elective
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, the City entered into the annexed
agreement known as Mutual Aid Agreement with some or all of the
municipalities herein- before stated and with the County of Hunterdon.
b. The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute the annexed agreement on behalf of the City of Lambertville.
c. This section shall take effect in accordance with law and after some or
all of the municipalities and the County set forth in the proposed
agreement have adopted ordinances authorizing them to enter into
such an agreement.
§ 3-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-27.2
AO:91
activities enumerated in "Standards of Performance," as promulgated by the
Public Health Council of the State of New Jersey. The public health service
activities are categorized under Administrative and Supporting Services,
Environmental Health, Communicable Disease, Maternal and Child Health
and Chronic Illness and are listed in said Agreement. The Mayor and City
Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute this Agreement on
behalf of this City.
§ 3-28. COOPERATIVE PRICING SYSTEM.
§ 3-28.1. Title. [1990 Code § 3-28.1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the City of Lambertville.
§ 3-28.2. Authority. [1990 Code § 3-28.2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor is hereby
authorized to enter into a Cooperative Pricing Agreement with the Lead
Agency.
§ 3-28.3. Contracting Unit. [1990 Code § 3-28.3]
The Lead Agency shall be responsible for complying with the provisions
of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) in regard to
bidding and all other provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
The City of Lambertville shall be responsible for entering into contracts and
for complying with its responsibilities as set forth in the cooperative pricing
agreement.
§ 3-29. GOVERNMENT ENERGY AGGREGATION PROGRAM.
§ 3-29.1. Program Established. [Ord. No. 19-2013; Ord. No.
16-2017]
The City hereby renews and continues its Government Energy Aggregation
Program ("Program"), originally established by Ordinance No. 19-2013, in
accordance with the provisions of the Government Energy Aggregation Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:3-93.1 et seq.
§ 3-29.2. Authorization. [Ord. No. 19-2013; Ord. No. 16-2017]
The Mayor is authorized to execute and the Clerk to attest to the execution
of any necessary and applicable agreements, in a form acceptable to the
City, in connection with the administration and implementation of the
Program, including but not limited to an Electric Distribution Company
Agreement with Jersey Central Power and Light Company ("JCP&L") and a
master performance agreement with a third party supplier duly awarded a
contract by the City as the result of a Request for Proposals process.
§ 3-27.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-29.3
AO:92
§ 3-29.3. City to Act as Lead Agency. [Ord. No. 19-2013; Ord. No.
16-2017]
The City of Lambertville will act as Lead Agency of the SHREC and, in
that capacity, and consistent with applicable rules, will solicit proposals
for electric generation service and energy aggregation services on behalf
of City residents and (if possible) businesses, as well as the residents
and (if possible) businesses of any surrounding municipalities that pass
an ordinance to form a Government Energy Aggregation Program and to
participate in the SHREC for that purpose, and enter into a contract for
such services provided that the lowest qualified bid price is below the
prevailing price for utility-provided basic generation service.
§ 3-29.4. City Responsibility. [Ord. No. 19-2013; Ord. No. 16-2017]
As Lead Agency the City of Lambertville will execute a master performance
agreement that obligates the participants in the SHREC to purchase
electricity at terms and conditions stated therein with a third party supplier
who has been awarded the contract by the Lead Agency on behalf of
participating members of the SHREC, and provided that such contract shall
be at prices reasonably forecast and estimated by the City of Lambertville
to provide savings to participants relative to the price charged for basic
generation service by JCP&L.
§ 3-29.5. Time Period for Authorization, Expiration Date. [Ord. No.
19-2013; Ord. No. 16-2017]
The authorization provided herein shall be valid until December 31, 2020
(the "Effective Period"), at which time the Program will be subject to
renewal at the discretion of the City of Lambertville.
§ 3-30. through § 3-31. (RESERVED)
§ 3-29.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-30
AO:93

ARTICLE VII
Retirement Program
§ 3-32. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 3-32.1. Positions Eligible to Participate. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program.
§ 3-32.2. Positions Exempt from Participation. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
§ 3-32.3. Exceptions to Participation. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in subsection
3-32.1 and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
subsection 3-32.2 above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
a. Director of Finance.
a. Tax Collector;
b. Chief Financial Officer;
c. Construction Code Official;
d. Tax Assessor;
e. Registered Municipal Clerk;
f. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
g. Principal Public Works Manager.
a. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007 and continuously since that time; or
b. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
c. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring State Certification as set forth in subsection 3-32.2 herein,
and is in pursuit of the required certification; or
d. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the local Finance
Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 3-32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-32.4
AO:95
§ 3-32.4. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
This Section 3-32 adopted by Ordinance No. 2009-10 shall be implemented,
construed and subject to the aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007
(N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from time to time, and any regulations
or guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division of
Pensions and Benefits.
§ 3-32.5. Severability. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
Should any part or parts of this ordinance be held to be invalid by any
competent court of law, such invalidity shall only affect the part or parts
held to be invalid, and all other parts shall remain in effect.
§ 3-32.6. Filing. [Ord. No. 2009-10]
A copy of Ordinance No. 2009-10 shall be filed with the Director of the
Division of Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the
Treasury.
§ 3-32.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 3-32.6
AO:96
Chapter 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 4-1. LITTERING PROHIBITED.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [1990 Code § 4-1.1]
As used in this section.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a litter storage and
collection receptacle provided by the owner or occupier of private premises.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written matter,
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of
literature:
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse or rubbish and all other waste
materials which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create
a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law. Any newspaper duly entered with the post office department
of the United States in accordance with Federal statute or regulation and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
a.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or any activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sale, or
b.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms
of the clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to
such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed
to authorize the holding, giving or taking of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where
such license is or may be required by a law of this State or under any
ordinance of this City; or
c.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the profit, benefit or gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
d.
§ 3-32.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.1
AO:97
general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid
definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — Shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or
any other public area of the City or other public entity devoted to active or
passive recreation by the public.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLURAL — Shall mean and include the singular number and words used in
the singular number shall include the plural number.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and building.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in and upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 4-1.2. Litter in Public Places. [1990 Code § 4-1.2]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the City, except in public receptacles for
collection.
§ 4-1.3. Placing Litter in Receptacles to Prevent Scattering. [1990
Code § 4-1.3]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 4-1.4. Sweeping Litter into Streets Prohibited; Sidewalks to Be
Free of Litter. [1990 Code § 4-1.4]
a. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or public
place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or
§ 4-1.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-1.4
AO:98
§ 4-1.5. Throwing Litter from Vehicles. [1990 Code § 4-1.5]
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 4-1.6. Distribution of Handbills. [1990 Code § 4-1.6]
lawn or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep any sidewalk in front of their
premises free of litter.
b. Litter in Public Places Prohibited. No person owning or occupying a
place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or
public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business within the City shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
a. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill or newspaper in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public
place within the City. Nor shall any person distribute or sell any
commercial handbill or newspaper in any public place, provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other
public place within the City for any person to hand out or distribute
without charge to the receiver thereof any noncommercial handbill or
newspaper to any person willing to accept it.
b. Placing on Vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial
or noncommercial handbill or newspaper in or upon any vehicle,
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a
person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof
a noncommercial handbill or newspaper to any occupant of a vehicle
who is willing to accept it.
c. Uninhabited or Vacant Premises. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper in or upon any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant. Subsection 4-1.7 shall apply hereto.
d. Posted Property. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper upon any private
premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance
thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisements" or any similar notice indicating in any
manner that the occupant of the premises does not desire to have their
right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills or newspapers
left upon such premises. Subsection 4-1.7 shall apply hereto.
§ 4-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.6
AO:99
§ 4-1.7. Mail. [1990 Code § 4-1.7]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States or its agents or legally authorized deliverers.
§ 4-1.8. Litter on Occupied Private Property. [1990 Code § 4-1.8]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried, or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place, or upon any private property.
§ 4-1.9. Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter. [1990 Code
§ 4-9.3]
Person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter. Provided, however that this section shall not prohibit
the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 4-1.10. Litter on Vacant Lots. [1990 Code § 4-1.10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 4-1.11. Violations; Penalties. [1990 Code § 4-1.11]
Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-2. NOISE.
e. Inhabited Private Premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute
any commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting the same directly to the owner, occupant or other person
then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that
in the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as
provided in this section such person, unless requested by anyone upon
the premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill or
newspaper in or upon such inhabited private premises if the same is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the same from being blown
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and
the same is not placed upon the surface of the ground. Mailboxes may
not be used when so prohibited by Federal postal law or regulations,
but private boxes may be used when so provided.
§ 4-1.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-2.1
AO:100
§ 4-2.1. Prohibited Noises. [1990 Code § 4-2.1]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
to make, cause or suffer or permit to be made or caused upon any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him or upon any public street, alley or
thoroughfare in the City, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of
the human voice, or by any other means or methods which are physically
annoying to persons, or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural, or
unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort, or
which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of the City of Lambertville, or any number thereof.
§ 4-2.2. Definition of Noise; Prohibited Noises. [1990 Code § 4-2.2;
Ord. No. 2003-17; Ord. No. 03-2013]
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, namely:
a. Radios, Televisions, Phonographs. The playing of any radio receiving
set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearings of the person playing, using
or operating such instrument or device and any persons who are
voluntary listeners thereto, or in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
b. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The playing, for advertising
purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing
public, or of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound on the streets or public places in the
City or in any place where the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the
streets or public places, or which is so placed and operated that the
sound therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of
travelers upon any street or public place or of persons in neighboring
premises.
c. Sound Trucks. The playing, for advertising purposes or for any other
purpose whatsoever, on or upon the public streets, alleys or
thoroughfares in the City, of any device known as a sound truck,
loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or radio or phonograph with a
loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any other instrument known as a
calliope, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits
therefrom loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any
vehicle operated or standing upon the streets or public places
aforementioned. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any official
agency of the State of New Jersey or its political subdivisions from
operating a sound truck for any official purpose, provided, however,
that the agency desiring to operate such truck shall first notify the Chief
of Police of the times and places of such proposed operation.
§ 4-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.2
AO:101
§ 4-3. REMOVAL OF BRUSH, WEEDS, TRASH AND DEBRIS.
§ 4-3.1. Notice to Remove; Time Allowed. [1990 Code § 4-3.1; Ord.
No. 06-2017]
Whenever the Mayor shall find it necessary and expedient for the
preservation of public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire
hazard, the Mayor shall direct the City Clerk to notice the property owner or
tenant of lands lying within the limits of the City to remove from their lands
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash, or debris within 10 days after notice in writing to remove
the same is sent.
§ 4-3.2. Refuse to Comply. [1990 Code § 4-3.2]
Any person refusing or neglecting to comply with the notice sent to them
and refusing or neglecting to remove the brush, weeds, dead and dying
trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or debris
within the time provided for the notice shall, upon conviction, be liable to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-3.3. Removal by City; Costs to Be Tax Lien. [1990 Code § 4-3.3]
In addition to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, if any owner
or tenant of such lands shall refuse or neglect to comply with the notice
so sent to them and to remove the brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or debris within the
time provided for in the notice, the Director of Public Works shall cause the
same to be removed under his direction. The Director of Public Works shall
certify the costs thereof to the Mayor and Council, who shall examine the
certificate and if found correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to be
d. Horns, Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or warning device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when
required by law or when necessary to give timely warning of impending
danger to persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street;
as well as the sounding of any horn or warning device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicles which shall emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
e. Construction and Utility Vehicles and Equipment. Individuals,
corporations, companies and utilities utilizing vehicles and equipment
in connection with the construction or demolition of buildings,
roadways or other structures or projects shall be limited in the use of
such equipment or vehicles between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. and from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, except in the case of
emergencies to be declared by either the Mayor, Police Director or
Director of Emergency Management. Snow plowing activities are
specifically exempt from this paragraph.
§ 4-2.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-3.3
AO:102
charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a
lien upon the land and shall be added to and form part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon the land, to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 4-4. CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC.
§ 4-4.1. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places. [1990
Code § 4-4.1; Ord. No. 18-2011]
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption, any alcoholic
beverages, on or upon:
§ 4-4.2. Possession of Open Container of Alcoholic Beverage in
Public. [1990 Code § 4-4.2; Ord. No. 18-2011]
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverage in,
on or upon:
§ 4-4.3. Permitted Exceptions. [1990 Code § 4-4.3; Ord. No.
18-2011]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the
Mayor and City Council, may by motion and application being made
therefor, permit the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages
within premises not covered by a plenary retail consumption license, for
special functions or social events. This permission, if granted, shall be
consistent with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law and the regulations
a. Any public street, sidewalk, park, playground or in, on or upon any land
or building owned or occupied by any Federal, State, County or
municipal government.
b. Any place to which the public at large is invited, provided that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of
alcoholic beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail
consumption liquor licensee, or the consumption of wine within a bona
fide restaurant.
a. Any public street, sidewalk, park, playground, or in, on or upon any land
or building owned or occupied by any Federal, State, County or
municipal government unless the same is contained within a closed or
sealed container.
b. Any place to which the public at large is invited unless the same is
contained within a closed or sealed container, provided that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor licensee, or the possession of wine within a bona fide restaurant.
§ 4-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.3
AO:103
enacted pursuant thereto, and such further conditions as may be imposed
by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 4-5. POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BY PERSONS UNDER THE
LEGAL AGE.
§ 4-5.1. Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on
Private Property Prohibited by Persons Under the Legal Age. [Ord.
No. 18-2011]
It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal authority,
knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on private
property.
§ 4-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 18-2011]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's parent, grandparent, aunt
or uncle, sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 4-5.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 18-2011]
§ 4-5.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 18-2011]
a. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
b. This section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who was licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution, however,
this section shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law
against a person that is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
a. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any
subsequent offense. Upon a finding of guilt, the court may also suspend
or postpone for six months the person's driving privileges in addition to
the authorized fine. Upon the conviction of any person and suspension
§ 4-4.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-5.4
AO:104
§ 4-6. TRAILERS, RECREATION VEHICLES AND TRAILER PARKS.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [1990 Code § 4-6.1; Ord. No. 2007-08]
As used in this section:
RECREATION VEHICLE — Shall mean a self-propelled or towed vehicle
equipped to serve as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel purposes and used solely as a family or personal conveyance. This
definition shall include but not be limited to mobile homes, camping and/or
tents cars.
TRAILER — Shall mean every vehicle, with or without motive power,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle. This definition shall include but not be limited to vehicles that tow
other motor vehicles, boats, animals and/or flat-bed, or any enclosed type
vehicle used to transport either persons or property upon public roadways.
Said definition shall also include open or enclosed trailers commonly
or postponement of the person's driver's license, the court shall
forward a report to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission
("Commission") stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a person
at the time of the sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
this sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after
the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the person at the time of
the imposition of the sentence has a valid driver's license issued by
this State, the court shall immediately collect the license and forward
it to the Commission along with a report. If for any reason, the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete
name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension imposed by the Court.
b. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of the
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
c. If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the non-resident
driving privilege for the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of the nonresident convicted under this section.
§ 4-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.1
AO:105
utilized by contractors to store or transport tools, equipment and/or other
materials.
§ 4-6.2. Parking of Recreation Vehicles and Trailers. [1990 Code
§ 4-6.2; Ord. No. 2007-08]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or recreation vehicle
on any street in the City in violation of any section regulating the parking of
vehicles or for any period longer than eight hours.
§ 4-6.3. Storage of Recreation Vehicles and Trailers; Use for
Sleeping Restricted. [1990 Code § 4-6.3; Ord. No. 2007-08]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or recreation vehicle
on any premises within the limits of the City except for the purpose of
repairs, storage or sale, and any such trailer or recreation vehicle shall not,
during any such period of repairs, storage or holding for sale, be used by
any person as a dwelling or sleeping place for a period of longer than seven
days in any one calendar year.
§ 4-6.4. Trailer Parks Prohibited. [1990 Code § 4-6.4]
Trailer parks, tourist camps, camp parks and trailer camps are hereby
prohibited within the limits of the City.
§ 4-7. FIREWORKS.
§ 4-7.1. Fireworks Sales, Use and Possession Prohibited. [Ord. 6/1/
22; Ord. 4/12/82; 1990 Code §§ 4-7.1—4-7.3; New]
The sale, use and possession of fireworks in the City of Lambertville shall
be prohibited pursuant to N.J.S.A. 21:3-2.
§ 4-7.2. Discharge of Explosive Devices Prohibited; Exception for
Public Celebrations. [1990 Code § 4-7.2]
No toy cannon, pistol or other fire arm, instrument, contrivance or device
producing an explosion either by ignition or concussion through the use of
gunpowder or other explosive substance; and no torpedo, firecracker, squib
or fireworks of any character shall be at any time discharged or set off in
the City.
§ 4-7.3. Violation. [1990 Code § 4-7.3]
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person violating this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-6.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-8
AO:106
§ 4-8. INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS. [1990 Code § 4-8]
No person shall resist, obstruct or interfere with any police officer of the
City of Lambertville in the performance of their duty, nor shall any person
disobey the lawful and reasonable order or instructions of any such officer.
§ 4-9. CURFEW.
§ 4-9.1. Findings and Purpose. [1990 Code § 4-9.2]
The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville hereby finds there
has been a significant breakdown in the supervision normally provided by
certain parents and guardians for juveniles under 18 years of age resulting
in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior
including vandalism, noisy and rowdy behavior, breaking and entering,
public drinking and littering, and harassment of residents.
The Mayor and Council further finds that the offensive activities of the
juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances because
the activities are easily concealed whenever police officers are present and
that the establishment of reasonable curfew regulations will enable the
community to better control the free and unobstructed access to the streets
and public places by the majority of residents and will enable the police to
act reasonably and fairly to prevent the violation of laws and ordinances by
juveniles.
The Mayor and Council further finds and has determined that a curfew
meets a very real local need and that curfew ordinances in other
communities have been a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency. A curfew in Lambertville is particularly appropriate in view
of the basic residential nature of the community and the sense of the
community that there is a proper time for the cessation of outdoor activities
of juveniles. That sense of the community is reflected in the curfew hours
declared by this section, which takes into consideration also the danger
hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulations of juveniles with potential
risks incident to immaturity.
The Mayor and Council further finds that the community is not overcrowded
and that there has been a decrease in the school population over the past
years. Commercial recreational facilities are limited and there is little or
nothing for juveniles to do outdoors but roam the streets after the curfew
hours which this section establishes.
Lambertville is basically a family community. Parental responsibilities for
the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm by a substantial majority
of the community. Legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had
a demonstrated effectiveness in many communities over the years. The
Mayor and Council has determined that as parental control increases there
is a likelihood that juvenile delinquency decreases, that there is a need for
nocturnal curfew for juveniles in Lambertville and that the establishment
of a curfew applicable to juveniles will reinforce the primary authority and
§ 4-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.1
AO:107
responsibility of parents and guardians over juveniles in their care and
custody.
§ 4-9.2. Definitions. [1990 Code § 4-9.2]
As used in this section:
Age shall mean years of age continued from one birthday to, but not
including the day of the next such that a person who has not completed 17
years of life is deemed to be 16 years of age.
JUVENILE OR MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of 18 or, in
equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person 17 years of age or
younger.
PARENT — Shall mean any person having legal custody of a juvenile as:
REMAIN — Shall mean to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily
upon the streets, including the congregating of groups, or of interacting
minors, totaling four or more persons in which any juvenile involved would
not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere
passage or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision
and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in this section
so that this is not a mere prohibitory or presence type curfew ordinance.
More and more exceptions become available with increasing years and
advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation.
STREET — Shall mean a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the
case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term street includes
the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic
lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass
plots for other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The
term street shall also include shopping areas, parking lots, public buildings
and similar areas that are open to the use of the public such as bridges,
alleys, parks, recreational and athletic areas.
TIME — Shall mean time of night referred to herein is based upon the
prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
City, prima facie the time then observed in the City administrative offices
and police station.
a. A natural or adoptive parent.
b. A legal guardian.
c. A person who stands in loco parentis.
d. A person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
§ 4-9.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-9.3
AO:108
§ 4-9.3. Curfew Established. [1990 Code § 4-9.3]
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 years of age or younger, under 18, to
be or remain in or upon the streets within the City of Lambertville at night
during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
§ 4-9.4. Exemption to Curfew Restrictions. [1990 Code § 4-9.4]
a. At 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, and
b. At 10:00 p.m. on all other nights.
a. Exemptions. The nocturnal hours proscribed by subsection 4-9.3 is
intended to provide the maximum limits or regulations and a clear
general guide for minors, their parents and their fellow-citizens. A
minor on a City street during the proscribed hours shall not, however,
be considered in violation of this section:
1. Accompanied by Parent. When accompanied by a parent of such
minor.
2. Accompanied by Authorized Adult. When accompanied by an adult
authorized by a parent of such minor to take such parent's place in
accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and
purpose within a specified area.
3. First Amendment Rights. When exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
The juvenile shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by first
delivering to the person designated by the Police Director to
receive such information, at the Police Headquarters, 18 York
Street, a written communication, signed by the juvenile with his or
her home address and telephone number, specifying when, where
and in what manner the juvenile will be on the streets at night,
during hours when the curfew restrictions are otherwise applicable
to the minor, in the exercise of the First Amendment right
described in such communication.
4. Reasonable Necessity. In case of reasonable necessity for a juvenile
remaining on the streets, but only after the juvenile's parent has
communicated to the Police Director to receive such notifications
the facts establishing the reasonable necessity relating to specified
streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including
points of origin and destination. A copy of the communication, or of
the police record thereof, duly certified by the Police Director or his
designee to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the time it
was received and of the names and addresses of the parent and
juvenile, shall be admissible evidence.
§ 4-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.4
AO:109
5. In Front of House. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk of a place
where such juvenile resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door
neighbor not communicating an objection to the police.
6. Returning Home from Authorized Activity. When returning home,
by a direct route from, and within one hour after the termination of
a school or City sponsored activity, or an activity of a religious or
other association, of which prior notice, indicating the place and
probable time of termination, has been given in writing to, and duly
filed for immediate reference by, the Police Director or officer
assigned by him on duty at the police station.
7. Special Permit. When authorized by special permit from the Police
Director carried on the person of the juvenile thus authorized, as
follows:
(a) When necessary nighttime activities of a juvenile may be
inadequately provided for by other provisions of this section
recourse may be had to the Police Director, either for a
regulation as provided in paragraph a,8 or for a special permit
as the circumstances warrant.
(b) Upon the findings of necessity for the use of the streets to the
extent warranted by a written application signed by the
juvenile and by a parent of the juvenile, if feasible, stating:
(1) The name, age and address of the juvenile.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of a parent
thereof.
(3) The height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other
physical characteristics of the juvenile.
(4) The necessity which requires the juvenile to be present on
the public streets, and the beginning and ending of the
period of time involved by date and hour.
The Police Director may grant a permit in writing for
the use by the juvenile of streets at such hours as in
the opinion of the Police Director may reasonably be
necessary. In an emergency this may be accomplished
by telephone or other effective communication, with a
corresponding record being made contemporaneously by
the Police Director, or by the person designated by the
Police Director to act on his behalf in an emergency, at the
police station.
8. Special Regulations. When authorized by regulation issued by the
Police Director in other similar cases of reasonable necessity,
similarly handled but adapted to necessary nighttime activities of
more juveniles than can readily be dealt with on an individual
§ 4-9.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-9.4
AO:110
§ 4-9.5. Parental Responsibility. [1990 Code § 4-9.5]
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to be or remain
upon any City street under circumstances not constituting an exception
to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this section. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that the parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile.
§ 4-9.6. Enforcement Procedures. [1990 Code § 4-9.6]
special permit basis. Such regulation by the Police Director
permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in
advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and
through other agencies such as the schools. It shall define the
activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period
of time involved, not to extend more than one hour beyond the
time for termination of the activity, and the reason for finding that
the regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the
purposes of this section.
9. Employment. When the juvenile carries a certified card of
employment, renewable each calendar month when the current
facts so warrant, dated or reissued not more than 45 days
previously, signed by the Police Director and briefly identifying the
juvenile, the addresses of his home and of his place of employment,
and his hours of employment.
10. Motor Vehicles. When the minor, with parental consent, is traveling
in a motor vehicle or alighting therefrom and proceeding to his
home directly. It is the intention of this provision to clearly exempt
bona fide interstate movements along major routes through the
City of Lambertville and interstate travel beginning or ending in
the City of Lambertville.
11. Medical. When the minor is engaged in an errand involving a
medical emergency.
b. Further Exemptions. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their
several limitations, such as provisions for notification, are severable, as
hereinafter provided but here reemphasized, will be considered by the
City Council as warranted by future experience illuminated by the
views of student government associations, school personnel, citizens,
associations, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned
positively with juveniles as well as with juvenile delinquency.
§ 4-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.6
AO:111
a. Review. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide that the Police Officer may deliver to a
parent or guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances,
for example, a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
b. Reports. A Police Officer discharging an enforcement obligation under
this section shall file a written report with the Police Director or shall
participate to the extent of the information for which he is responsible
in the preparation of a report on the curfew violation. It is not the
intention of this subsection to require extensive reports that will
prevent Police Officers from performing their primary police duties. The
reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible and may be
completed by Police Departmental personnel other than sworn Police
Officers.
c. Released Juvenile. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has
come to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information
has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such
parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the
juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities,
except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations,
approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may
temporarily be entrusted to an adult relative, neighbor or other person
who will, on behalf of a parent or guardian, assume the responsibility of
caring for the juvenile pending the availability or arrival of a parent or
guardian.
d. Notification of Parent; Questioning of Juvenile. If a Police Officer
reasonably believes that a juvenile is on the streets in violation of this
section, the officer shall notify the juvenile that (s)he is in violation of
this section and shall require the juvenile to provide his/her name,
address and telephone number and how to contact his/her parent or
guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and, in the absence of
convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a Police Officer on the
street shall, in the first instance, use his/her best judgment in
determining age. The normal procedure shall then be to take the
juvenile to the police station where a parent or guardian shall
immediately be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment
under constitutional safeguards of relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and
recording, thus making available experience personnel and access to
information and records.
e. Notice of Violation. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the
Police Director shall, by certified mail, send to the parents or guardians
of the minor written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
§ 4-9.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-9.7
AO:112
§ 4-9.7. Penalties. [1990 Code § 4-9.7]
§ 4-10. TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED.
§ 4-10.1. Prohibition of Tobacco Vending Machines, Tobacco
Vending Machine Sales and Self-Service Tobacco Displays. [1990
Code § 4-10.3]
§ 4-10.2. Removal of Tobacco Vending Machines. [Ord. #95-16,
§ 4-10.4]
All tobacco vending machines and self-service tobacco displays made
unlawful by the terms of this section shall be removed within 30 days
from the effective date of Ordinance No. 25-16 establishing the prohibition,
adopted on December 18, 1995.
§ 4-10.3. Definitions. [Ord. #95-16, § 4-10-5]
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the representative of the Hunterdon
Council Health Department assigned to the City of Lambertville.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place or business that sells to
the public at retail.
TOBACCO — Shall mean any product made from the tobacco plant for
the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use including
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Shall mean any person or entity that operates a
store, stand, booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made
a. Parents. If, after receipt of a warning notice, pursuant to subsection
4-9.6e, of a first violation by a juvenile, a parent violates subsection
4-9.5 (in connection with a second violation by the juvenile) this shall be
treated as a first offense by the parent. For the first parental offense a
parent shall be fined $25 and shall perform community service of a
period of five days, and for the second parental offense the fine shall be
$50 and he or she shall perform 10 days of community service. For each
subsequent offense the parent shall perform community service of not
less than 25 nor more than 90 days and shall pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000.
b. Juveniles. Any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section more than three times shall be reported by the Police Director
to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of supervision and the
Police Director may proceed to file charges with the Hunterdon County
Family Court, as he may deem appropriate. The juvenile shall also
perform community service together with the parent.
a. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the City of Lambertville.
b. Self-service tobacco displays are prohibited in all retail establishments.
§ 4-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.3
AO:113
to purchasers for consumption or use. Shall also mean a person or entity
that owns, operates or uses a vending machine and/or a vending machine
location.
VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — Shall mean the room, enclosure, space
or area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
§ 4-10.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #95-16, § 4-10.6]
§ 4-10.5. Severability. [Ord. #95-16, § 10-4.7]
This section shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Lambertville.
§ 4-10.6. Penalties. [Ord. #95-16 § 4-10.8]
a. Whenever the Health Officer or his designee reasonably believes there
exists a violation of this section, he may issue a summons and complaint
not later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity
the nature of violation, including reference to the article and section of
this chapter alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be
delivered or sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
b. The Health Officer, or his designee, or any other person charged with
enforcement of this section, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premises, person, record vehicle, incident or
event as necessary.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or his designee, who
may request the assistance of the Lambertville Police Department, or
other police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or
her official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
d. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the City of
Lambertville or before such other judicial officer having authority
under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. Each sale of tobacco to a person under the age of 19 years of age shall
constitute a separate violation.
c. Any fine imposed as a result of action by the Health Officer shall be paid
to the County of Hunterdon.
§ 4-10.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-10.6
AO:114
§ 4-11. USE OF PUBLIC PARK AREAS AND PUBLIC LANDS.
§ 4-11.1. Hours of Use. [1990 Code § 4-11.1; Ord. No. 2003-10]
Hours of use for all public park areas regulated by the City of Lambertville
shall be as follows:
§ 4-11.2. Requests for Use for Special Events. [1990 Code § 4-11.2]
Persons or organizations must submit a written request for use of the park
no less than 30 days in advance to the Recreation Commission. A copy
of all approvals will be filed with both the Police and the Public Works
Departments.
§ 4-11.3. Waiver of Regulations. [1990 Code § 4-11.3]
The Recreation Commission may waive any regulation above and authorize
use of the park for special events sponsored by a recognized community
group.
§ 4-11.4. Unlawful Feeding of Nondomesticated Animals on Certain
Public Lands. [1990 Code § 4-11.4]
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed nondomesticated animals on any
public lands owned or controlled by the City of Lambertville.
§ 4-11.5. Unlawful Feeding of Nondomesticated Animals on Certain
Private Lands. [1990 Code § 4-11.5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed nondomesticated animals on any
private land which has public access upon the written request of the owner.
§ 4-11.6. Parking of Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2003-11]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in any areas of the City
parks including the designated parking lots for more than 24 consecutive
hours without advanced written permission from the Lambertville Police
Department.
d. The Board of Health may suspend the Retail Food Establishment
License of any person convicted of violation of this section for a period
of not more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the Board of
Health to license and regulate food establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
a. From May 1 to October 31, the park areas will be open from 7:00 a.m.
until 9:00 p.m. prevailing time.
b. From November 1 through April 30, the park areas will be open from
7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. prevailing time.
§ 4-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-12
AO:115
§ 4-12. URINATING IN PUBLIC.
§ 4-12.1. Urinating in Public Prohibited. [Ord. No. 19-2014]
It is unlawful to urinate or defecate in any public area, public place or within
view of the public.
§ 4-12.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 19-2014]
Any person adjudged guilty of a violation of the provisions of this Section
4-12 shall, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community services for not more than 90 days, at the
discretion of the Court.
§ 4-12.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 19-2014]
The provision of this Section 4-12, in addition to other methods of
enforcement provided by law, may be enforced by the issuance of a Notice
of Violation by any member of the Police Department.
§ 4-12.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 19-2014]
The enforcement provisions of this Section 4-12 shall not apply to the
following individuals who may not be able to adequately control the bodily
functions that control urination or defecation:
§ 4-13. ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 4-13.1. Definitions. [1990 Code § 4-13.1]
As used in this section:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle which cannot be started
upon the request of the Zoning Officer or any Police Officer or cannot be
lawfully driven or for any other reason will not run. A vehicle shall also be
considered inoperable if the owner refuses to start it.
PERSON OR OWNER — Shall mean any individual person, group of persons,
partnership, corporation, firm or association or any other entity.
§ 4-13.2. Abandoned Vehicle; Presumption. [1990 Code § 4-13.2]
A vehicle which has remained on or along any highway or other public
property or on private property with or without the consent of the owner or
other person in charge of such private property for a period of more than
48 hours or for any period without current license plates shall be presumed
to be an abandoned motor vehicle.
a. Children 10 years of age or younger;
b. Persons of any age who violate this Section 4-12 due to a verified
medical and/or psychiatric condition.
§ 4-12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-13.3
AO:116
§ 4-13.3. Public Property. [1990 Code § 4-13.3]
No person shall park, leave or store an abandoned, inoperable, unlicensed
or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts on any
public lands or premises except in case of emergency and then for a period
of not more than 48 hours. In any event, the owner or operator of such
motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts shall immediately notify the
Police Department when such emergency exists.
§ 4-13.4. Private Property. [1990 Code § 4-13.4]
No person shall park, leave, store or maintain any abandoned, inoperable,
unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts
upon any private lands or premises.
§ 4-13.5. Exceptions/Exclusions. [1990 Code § 4-13.5]
a. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle, truck
trailer or automotive part that is:
1. Located or stored on lands and premises of a new or used car
dealer or service station while for sale more than six months; or
2. On the premises and associated with the lawful operation of a
commercial garage; or
3. Any motor vehicle which has a current "Antique Motor Vehicle"
license plate issued by the Motor Vehicle Commission; or
4. Vehicles or parts used for farming or agricultural purposes or
industrial or mining purposes; or
5. Located on premises owned or occupied by the owner of the
inoperative vehicle where such vehicle is actually in the process of
being restored and/or repaired in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph b below.
b. Exclusions.
1. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the placing, keeping or
storage of a single unregistered motor vehicle with a valid
certificate of ownership (title), per resident in the rear of the
residential private property.
2. Any residential property owner, or persons having the permission
of a residential property owner, who intends to maintain an
unregistered automobile on his or her property shall apply for a
permit to allow for the placing, keeping and storage of said motor
vehicle.
3. In the case of an individual not owning the residential property in
question, the owner of record of said property must give his or her
permission in affidavit form. The affidavit shall contain the consent
§ 4-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.5
AO:117
§ 4-13.6. Notice of Violation When Abandoned Vehicle Is to Be
Removed. [1990 Code § 4-13.6]
§ 4-13.7. Removal Procedures. [1990 Code § 4-13.7]
of the property owner, the signature of the property owner and
the name, address and phone number of the person to contact in
connection with the permit.
4. No more than one unregistered vehicle at a time shall be allowed
on the residential property.
5. The permit applies to automobiles, pickup trucks and motorcycles
only. No permits will be issued for buses, trailers or commercial
vehicles.
6. Together with the application, the residential property owner or his
designee shall produce a valid certificate of ownership (title) for
said vehicle prior to receiving approval of the permit.
7. This section shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Officer of the City of Lambertville.
a. When a violation of this section is observed on private property or
public property other than a highway, notice shall be sent by certified
mail by the Zoning Officer to the owner and/or occupier of the premises
in the case of private property.
Such notice shall describe the violation and provide the recipient(s)
with 10 days from the date of the notice within which to correct the
violation. After the expiration of the ten-day period, each day that the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. When the
abandoned vehicle is found on a highway, the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-56.1 et seq. shall apply.
b. The notice shall describe, in addition to the violation, any action
necessary to correct the violation. Further, the notice shall state that
each day after the deadline expressed in the notice shall constitute a
separate offense. The notice shall be sufficient in regard to the owner of
an inoperable vehicle where his address is determined from the Motor
Vehicle Commission of the State of New Jersey or any other jurisdiction.
Notice to the landowner shall be sufficient where the name and address
of such owner is determined from the latest tax duplicate of the Tax
Assessor of the City. Notice to the occupier shall be sufficient where a
copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place on the private
property on which the inoperable vehicle is located and a duplicate
copy is sent to the occupier of the private property at this last known
address. Such notices shall be served either personally or by ordinary
mail.
a. If the violation described in the notice is not remedied within the time
period set forth therein, it may be taken into possession and removed
§ 4-13.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-13.7
AO:118
§ 4-13.8. Penalties. [1990 Code § 4-13.8]
§ 4-14. BINGO GAMES ON SUNDAY.
§ 4-14.1. Permitted. [1990 Code § 4-5.1]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law, and particularly
under the authority of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, pertaining to the conduct of the game
of chance commonly known and designated as "bingo," there is hereby
authorized in the City the conduct of bingo games of chance on the first day
of the week commonly known and designated as "Sunday."
§ 4-14.2. Rules and Regulations. [1990 Code § 4-5.2]
The conduct of bingo games on Sunday shall be subject to all provisions
of the Laws of the State of New Jersey applicable thereto and to the rules
and regulations promulgated from time to time by the Legalized Games
of Chance Control Commission and to such other regulatory actions which
may be lawfully taken from time to time by any authorized agency or
political subdivision of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-15. REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT AND
ABANDONED BUILDINGS.
§ 4-15.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 1]
This section authorizes the City of Lambertville to govern the maintenance
of vacant or abandoned property in the City of Lambertville, establishing
from the premises where the vehicle is found to be on public property
or constitutes a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the entry upon private property
for the removal of the inoperable vehicle in question.
b. Within 48 hours of the removal of such inoperable vehicle, notice shall
be given to the owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or
occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed,
that the inoperable vehicle has been impounded and stored as a result
of the violation of this section. Such notice shall give the location of the
inoperable vehicle so removed and the name and address of the
contractor responsible.
c. Any inoperable vehicle taken into possession as provided in this section
shall be disposed of as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., unless the
same is redeemed by its owner prior to any sale under such statute.
a. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this Code.
b. Any vehicle which has been towed and impounded shall not be released
until all fines and towing fees have been paid.
§ 4-13.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.1
AO:119
registration requirements and levying a registration fee on owners of vacant
properties.
§ 4-15.2. Definitions; Conditions for Determination. [Ord. No.
15-2017 § 1]
CREDITOR — Means a State chartered bank, savings and loan association
or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed under the
provisions of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act," P.L. 2009, c. 53
(C.17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to the provisions of
C.46:10B (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17 as amended from time to time) and
any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the debt obligation
including, not limited to, services.
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provision of N.J.A.C. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, section 17)
or any other entity determined by the City of Lambertville.
VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used
for residential or commercial purposes which is not legally occupied or
at which substantially all lawful construction operations or occupancy has
ceased, provided, however, that any property that contains all building
systems in working order, is fully compliant with our property maintenance
codes, and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall
not be deemed vacant.
Property determined to be "abandoned property" in accordance with the
meaning of such term in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act,
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, et seq.; and/or N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73 residential real estate,
where notice of violation has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12s(1)(b); and/or where a mortgaged property is not occupied by a
mortgagor or tenant and at least two of the following conditions exist:
a. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
b.
c. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
d.
e. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
f. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
g. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery person,
or government employees indicating that the residence is vacant and
abandoned;
h.
§ 4-15.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-15.2
AO:120
§ 4-15.3. Requirements for Owners of Property. [Ord. No. 15-2017
§ 1]
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant shall within 30 days:
Window or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
i.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged
or continuously unlocked;
j.
Risk to health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining or
adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
k.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
l.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
m.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
n.
Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
Residential properties shall not be considered "Vacant and
Abandoned" if, on the property:
a. There is an unoccupied building which is undergoing construction,
renovation or rehabilitation that is proceeding diligently to completion,
and the building is in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes,
regulations and statutes;
b. There is a building occupied on a seasonal basis, but otherwise
secure; or
c. There is a building that is secure, but is the subject of a probate
action, action to quiet title or other ownership dispute.
o.
a. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the code of the City of Lambertville.
b. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of the process, and the person responsible for day-today
supervision and management of the building, if such a person is
different from the owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign
§ 4-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.3
AO:121
§ 4-15.4. Administration. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 1]
The Mayor and City Council may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provision of this section.
§ 4-15.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 1]
shall be of a size and place in such a location so as to be legible from
the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is near, but shall be no
smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches.
c. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain a sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete.
d. Post the property with "No Trespassing" signs or a nature sufficient to
give notice to any person entering upon the property that is against the
laws to enter the property without permission of the owner.
e. Ensure that the vacant property is inspected on a monthly basis by the
owner's authorized agent and prepare inspection reports, which shall
be forwarded to the Construction Officer or the Mayor's designee no
later than the last day of each month.
f. Ensure that the vacant property is maintained in accordance with all
property maintenance ordinances of the City of Lambertville.
g. The owner of any vacant building shall acquire and otherwise maintain
liability insurance by procuring a vacancy policy in an amount of not
less than $300,000 for buildings designed primarily for use as
residential units and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building
including, but not limited to buildings designed for manufacturing,
industrial, storage or commercial uses, covering any damage to any
person or any property caused by any physical condition of or in the
building. The owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the
owner's registration statement. Any registration statement submitted
that does not include such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid
registration which shall subject the owner to penalties under this
section.
a. Any Owner who is not in full compliance with this section or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day during which
any violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Fines assessed under this section shall be recoverable
from the owner and shall be a lien on the property.
b. For purpose of this section, failure to file a registration statement on
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to submit inspection reports, failure to comply with
the provisions of this section, or such other matters as may be
§ 4-15.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-15.5
AO:122
§ 4-15.6. Effect on Other Laws; Interpretation of Provisions. [Ord.
No. 15-2017 § 1]
Nothing in this section is intended nor shall be read to conflict or prevent
the City of Lambertville from taking action against buildings found to be
unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in applicable
provides of the Lambertville City Code, 2014.
§ 4-15.7. Excess Funds. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 1]
Any funds collected as vacant property registration fees in excess of the
funds necessary to operate and enforce the provisions of this section shall
be used at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 4-15.8. Creditor Responsibility. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 2]
Pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey Creditor Responsibility Law
(P.L. 2014, c.5), a creditor filing a summons and complaint to foreclose a lien
on a residential property that is vacant and/or abandoned, whether filing
of the summons and complaint is made before or after the determination
that the property is vacant and abandoned, shall be responsible for the
care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the residential
property.
§ 4-15.9. Notice to Creditor; Time to Correct Violations. [Ord. No.
15-2017 § 3]
If the Zoning Officer or other authorized municipal official, determines that
a creditor obligated to care, maintain, secure and keep up a vacant and
abandoned property has failed to do so in violation of the provisions of the
Code, the public officer or other authorized municipal official shall issue a
notice of violation to the creditor that has filed a summons and complaint
to foreclose on the property in question. The notice shall require the person
or entity to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or
within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent
threat to public health and safety. The issuance of this notice shall constitute
evidence that a property is "vacant and abandoned" for purpose of N.J.S.A.
2A:50-73.
§ 4-15.10. Designated Representative of Out-of-State Creditor;
Violation for Failure to Notify Clerk. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 4]
An out-of-State creditor shall include the full name and contact information
of the in-State representative or agent in the notice required to be provided
to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
An out-of-State creditor found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have
established by the rules and regulations of the Construction
Department, Zoning Officer, or the Police Department, or any other
agent as authorized by the Mayor or his designee, shall be deemed to
be violations of this section.
§ 4-15.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.10
AO:123
violated this provision shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of
the violation commencing on the day after the ten-day period set forth in
paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10b-51 with respect to notifying the Municipal
Clerk that an action to foreclose on the property has been filed.
§ 4-15.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 5]
For violation of any provision of this section, the penalty, upon conviction,
shall be a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine not exceeding $2,000,
or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each
day on which such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The
court before which any person is convicted of violating this section shall
have the power to impose a penalty, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-70 et seq. and
the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.(1)), of not more than
$500 nor less than $5. A creditor required to care for, maintain, secure,
and keep up a property under this Section cited in notices issued pursuant
to this Section shall be subject to a fine of $2,000 for each day of the
violation. The penalties set forth in this section are separate and apart from
the remedy provided for in the New Jersey Statutes Annotation, N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.13 and 40:48-2.14. The remedy in this section shall be in addition
to all remedies available to the City in laws or in equity.
§ 4-15.12. Severability. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 6]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
§ 4-15.13. Registration. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 7]
Effective July 1, 2017, the owner of any vacant property as defined herein
shall, within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant property
or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property with the
Municipal Clerk on forms provided by the municipality for such purposes.
Failure to receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute grounds for
failing to register the property.
a. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
b. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number and email address (if applicable) of a person 21 years
or older, designated by the owner or owners as authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceedings on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
§ 4-15.10 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 4-15.13
AO:124
§ 4-15.14. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 15-2017 § 8]
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee for the
first renewal is $1,500, and the fee for the second renewal is $3,000. The
fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is $5,000. The
fee for filing amendments is $50 per amendment.
§ 4-16. PEACE AND GOOD ORDER. [Added 10-17-2019 by Ord. No.
26-2019]
§ 4-16.1. Prohibited Acts.
No person, shall within the City of Lambertville:
applicable code, and the name, street address, telephone number, and
email of the firm and the actual name(s) of the first individual
principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property. The individual
or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property
shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four hour per
day, seven-day per week basis. The two entities may be the same or
different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
c. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall expire
December 31 of the year registered. The owner shall be required to
renew the registration annually as long as the building remains vacant
and/or abandoned property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee
in the amount prescribed in subsection 4-15.14, for each vacant
property registered.
d. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 of each year. The
initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
e. The owner shall notify the Municipal Clerk's Office within 30 calendar
days of any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the City of Lambertville
for such purpose.
f. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
preceding or court proceeding instituted by the City of Lambertville
against the owner or owners of the building.
a. Be loud, unruly, unmanageable, riotous, uncontrollable or disorderly in
any public place or quasi-public place so as to cause a disturbance or
annoyance to neighbors, adjacent property owners or other persons
within a reasonable proximity;
§ 4-15.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.1
AO:125
§ 4-16.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
PERSON — Wherever appropriate in connection with the context, includes
corporation, partnership, association and individual and shall include the
plural.
§ 4-16.3. Violations and Penalties.
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person violating this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
Chapter 5
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 5-1. AUTO CABS, TAXICABS, LIVERIES AND LIMOUSINES.
§ 5-1.1. Auto Cab, Taxicab. [1990 Code § 5-1; Ord. No. 05-2012; Ord.
No. 15-2013; Ord. No. 05-2015]
b. Cause or permit to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating odor;
c. Willfully or maliciously ring or sound or cause to be rung or sounded
any bell, siren or other alarm to give false impression of a fire or
emergency;
d. Appear on any street, road, avenue, park or other parks, including in
vehicles parked on the same in a state of nudity.
e. Remove or interfere with or disturb any lantern, warning signal,
obstruction or barricade lawfully placed in or across any public street
by a public authority, its contractors, agents, servants or employees.
f. Cause damage to public property, including, but not limited to,
playgrounds, government buildings or driving on park property.
a. Definition as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1. Shall mean and include
automobile or motor car, commonly called taxi, auto cab, omnibus, or by
whatever name or designation they may now or hereafter be known or
designated "taxicab", engaging in the business of carrying passengers
for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised to operator run, or
which is operated to run over any of the streets or highways of the City,
and particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer
themselves for transportation from points or places within the City, or
which is hired by charter, or for a particular contract, or by the day or
hour or other fixed period, or to transport passengers to a specified
place or places, or which charges a fare or price agreed upon, in
advance, between the operator and the passenger. Nothing in this
§ 4-16.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-1.1
AO:126
section contained shall be construed to include any motor vehicle by
whatever name or designation used and employed solely in
transporting school children or teachers, or auto buses which are
subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners,
or any motor vehicle owned or operated by the City of Lambertville,
County of Hunterdon, State of New Jersey, or operated by any nonprofit
organization in the business of transporting persons not for profit.
b. License Required; Fees for License. As defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16-2,
necessity of municipal consent before operating auto cab; limited on
license fee. No auto cab shall be operated along any street in any
municipality until the owner thereof shall obtain the consent of the
elective Governing Body or member thereof having control of the public
streets in the municipality. The City of Lambertville, in accordance with
P.L. 2011, c. 135, licenses will be the subject of a public auction for the
license.
c. Issuance of License, Inspection of Taxicabs. In accordance with P.L.
2011, Chapter 135, a municipality shall publish a notice in the
newspaper circulating generally within the municipality stating the
number of new or additional licenses to be authorized and the
application period for the new or additional licenses. The notice shall
specify a time and date after which no further applications will be
accepted. The notice shall be published at least twice and at least one
week apart, with the second notice published at least 30 days prior to
the time and date specified in the notice as the time and date after
which no further applications will be accepted.
The Mayor's designee shall have the power to issue or refuse to issue
a license, in pursuance of the terms of this subsection. The number of
licenses shall not exceed four, one license per vehicle.
Any license hereafter issued may be transferred upon the payment of a
transfer fee of $50 for each and every such transfer, and subject to the
provisions of this subsection, upon obtaining approval, in writing, of the
Mayor's designee.
d. Application Information. Shall include the name, address, phone
number of the owner and each operator, copies of insurance, State of
New Jersey Business Registration, Sales Tax Certificate, fingerprinting
results and any other information as deemed necessary by the Police
Department and/or the City Clerk.
e. Requirements for Applications. No license to operate a taxicab shall be
granted to any person unless he is a citizen of the United States, or shall
have declared his intention to become such a citizen. In the case of a copartnership,
no license shall be granted to operate a taxicab unless
such corporation is either incorporated or is duly authorized to do
business under the laws of this State. All applicants and prospective
taxicab drivers must:
1. Prior to the issuance of a license:
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.1
AO:127
(a) Submit to criminal history checks (fingerprinting) at a
designated Live Scan facility;
(b) Have reached his or her 21st birthday;
(c) Not have had a license revoked in any other state; and
(d) Possess a currently valid, State of New Jersey issued driver's
license.
f. Fingerprinting. No license shall be granted to operate a taxicab to any
person, or to any partnership or corporation who is not, or the members
of or officer of which are not persons of good moral character, or who
has, or if any of the members of the partnership, or officers of the
corporation have been convicted of any following crimes: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering the
welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not armed
with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in subsection r
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly persons or petty
disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2. In any
other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of the United
States, or any country in the world, as a result of a conviction in a court
of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in paragraph
one of the subsection. If a person who has been convicted of one of the
crimes outlined in this subsection or in P.L. 2011, c.135 (A1471 3R), and
can produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:168A-8 or if the criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an
equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal offense
occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant from
operating or driving an auto cab and/or taxicab.
g. Issuance of License; Number Limited; Transfer Fee. The Mayor's
designee shall have the power to issue or refuse to issue a license, in
pursuance of the terms of this section. The number of licenses shall not
exceed four, on per vehicle, four vehicles in total. Any license hereafter
issued may be transferred upon the payment of a transfer fee of $50 for
each and every such transfer, and subject to the provisions of
subsection 5-1.5, upon obtaining the approval in writing of the Mayor's
designee.
h. Inspection Required Before Issuance of License. No auto cab or taxicab
shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected
and examined by the Police Department and found to be in a thoroughly
safe condition for the transportation of passengers. Such licensed
taxicabs shall be clean, fit and of good appearance and well painted and
varnished. Side curtains or shades shall not be permitted on any such
licensed vehicles. The Department shall refuse a license to any
applicant or, if already issued, revoke or suspend the license of any
§ 5-1.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-1.1
AO:128
vehicle found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers. All
reports of such inspections and examinations, after having been
submitted to the Mayor's designee shall be filed with the City Clerk and
become a part of the application filed for the licensing of such vehicle,
as hereinafter provided.
i. Contract Compliance Review Board. The Contract Compliance Review
Board shall consist of the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, the Police
Director and one member of the local Chamber of Commerce. It is the
responsibility of the Contract Compliance Review Board to take
measures to ensure that all provisions of this ordinance have been met.
1. The first complaint or inspection by the Police Department when a
taxicab company is found to be noncompliant will result in the
immediate suspension of services of the taxicab service until the
company can provide the proper documentation or address the
area of concern to the satisfaction of the Contract Compliance
Review Board;
2. The second complaint or documented review where the company is
found to be out of compliance or negligent, a hearing will be
scheduled with the Contract Compliance Review Board. The
Review Board will decide whether to suspend or terminate the
license or to allow the company to continue to provide services
under the license.
3. In the event of a suspension or termination of a license, the City of
Lambertville will not prorate the fee of a license.
j. Display Requirements. Every licensed taxicab shall display prominently
in the interior of the auto/taxicab and in a manner required or approved
by the Mayor's designee, the following:
1. Its City license number;
2. A photo identification of the driver; and
3. A contract compliance placard, provided by the City, which advises
the public on how to submit a complaint to the Contract
Compliance Review Board.
k. Register to Be Maintained. The City Clerk shall keep a register of the
name of each person owning or operating vehicle or vehicles licensed
under this section, together with the license number and the
description, make dimension of such vehicles, with the date and
complete record of inspections made of them. All applications for
licenses shall be filed by the City Clerk and carefully preserved for
reference. All licenses issued shall be recorded in books provided for
that purpose, which shall be in such form as the Mayor's designee shall
prescribe. All such records shall be open to the inspection of the public
at all reasonable times and shall be deemed the official records of the
Department and of the City.
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.1
AO:129
l. Inspection, Written Reports Required. The Police Department shall
maintain a constant vigilance over all taxicabs to see that they are kept
in a condition of safety for the transportation of passengers, and to this
end shall have the right at any and all times to inspect any and all
licensed vehicles, and shall maintain a record, in writing of a report of
such inspections. All taxicabs found to be out of compliance with this
subsection will be given one warning. The second time they are found to
not be in compliance with this subsection will require an appearance
before the Compliance Review Board.
m. Insurance. As defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3, no such consent shall become
effective until the owner of the auto cab shall have filed with the clerk of
the municipality in which such operation is permitted, an insurance
policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of this State conditioned for the payment of business
unless the applicant shall have complied with the provisions of Chapter
231 of the Laws of 1926, embodied in N.J.S.A. 48-16, et seq., N.J.S.A.
39:6B-1 and P.L. Chapter 135, Assembly number 1471 of the State of
New Jersey, and the acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto,
relating to the filing of an insurance policy covering the owner or
operator of such vehicles for damages to person for which he may
become liable by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the
vehicle, not less than $35,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance
coverage, or the rate established and set by State of New Jersey
Statutes. All such insurance policies shall be issued to cover the term of
the license issued by the City.
n. Licenses Revoked or Suspended. Licenses granted under the preceding
subsections may be revoked or suspended at any time after notice and
hearing by the Compliance Review Board if the vehicle shall not be in a
safe condition for the transportation of passengers or not kept in
conformity with the terms of this subsection or if used or its use
permitted for any improper, immoral or illegal business or purpose, or
for the violation of any statute or law of the State of New Jersey or of
the United States, or for the violation of any of the provisions of this
section, or any of the rules and regulations made by the Appropriate
Authority.
o. Mayor and Council to Designate Stand. The Mayor and Council are
hereby authorized to designate such place or places within the Central
Business District or Highway Commercial Zones of the City as public
taxicab stands as the Mayor and Council, in its judgment, may deem
necessary as may be required for the proper transportation of
passengers. The City Clerk is hereby further authorized to grant
permits for the operation of taxicabs from private premises as it may
deem necessary and proper. No taxicab shall occupy any public taxicab
stand unless such taxicab shall have been licensed as provided in this
subsection.
p. Regulations. No taxicab, while waiting for employment by passengers
shall stand on any public street or space other than that at or upon a
§ 5-1.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-1.1
AO:130
§ 5-1.2. Liveries. [1990 Code § 5-1; Ord. No. 05-2012; Ord. No.
15-2013]
taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this section,
nor shall any driver of such taxicab seek employment by repeatedly
and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro in egress from any
theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railroad station or other place of
public gathering, and no driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab
except when sitting upon the driver's seat thereof, nor shall any driver
of a taxicab solicit employment in the transportation of passengers by
driving in or through any public street or public place at a slow rate of
speed, commonly designated as "cruising."
Upon request, no owner or driver of a taxicab or other vehicle regulated
under this section, unless previously engaged, shall refuse or neglect to
carry an orderly person anywhere within the City of Lambertville. Upon
request, every driver of a taxicab is required to provide each passenger
with a receipt indicating the driver's name, fee and description of the
trip.
No person operating a taxicab shall permit or allow any person other
than a passenger being transported for hire in or about such taxicab
when in service as a taxicab.
q. Penalties for Violations. The penalties for violation of this subsection
shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the City of
Lambertville.
r. The City of Lambertville retains the right to accept or reject
applications for taxicab licenses for any reason. Fees will not be
prorated or refunded should the applicant be found to be noncompliant.
a. Definitions. Livery, as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16A-1 et seq. shall mean
and include any horse carriage, horse drawn cart, engaging in the
business of carrying of passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated to run
over any of the streets or highways of the City, and particularly accepts
and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for transportation
from points or places within the City, or which is hired by charter, or for
a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed period, or to
transport passengers to a specified place or places.
b. License Required; Fees for License. The fee for a livery license shall be
no less than the sum of $100 per vehicle/carriage. The license will be
offered annually by application. The City will offer up to five licenses,
one per vehicle or horse drawn carriage. Days of operation are limited
to Friday, Saturday, Sunday and/or holidays.
c. Issuance of License, Inspection of Liveries; Transfer Fee. The Mayor's
designee shall have the power to issue or refuse to issue a license in
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.2
AO:131
pursuance of the terms of this subsection. The number of licenses shall
not exceed five, one license per vehicle.
Any license hereafter issued may be transferred upon the payment of a
transfer fee of $25 for each and every such transfer, and subject to the
provisions of this subsection, upon obtaining approval, in writing, of the
Mayor's designee.
d. Application Information. The application form shall include the name,
address, phone number of the owner and each operator, copies of
insurance, State of New Jersey Business Registration, Sales Tax
Certificate, and any other information as deemed necessary by the
Police Department and/or the City Clerk.
e. Requirements for Applications. No license to operate a livery shall be
granted to any person unless he is a citizen of the United States, or shall
have declared his intention to become such a citizen. In the case of a copartnership,
no license shall be granted to operate a taxicab unless
such corporation is either incorporated or is duly authorized to do
business under the laws of this State. All applicants and prospective
taxicab drivers must first submit to criminal history checks
(fingerprinting) at a designated Live Scan facility prior to the issuance
of a license.
f. Inspection Required Before Issuance of License. No livery shall be
licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined by the Police Department and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers. Such licensed taxicabs
shall be clean, fit and of good appearance and well painted and
varnished. Side curtains or shades shall not be permitted on any such
licensed vehicles. The Police Department shall refuse a license to any
applicant or, if already issued, revoke or suspend the license of any
vehicle found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers. All
reports of such inspections and examinations, after having been
submitted to the Mayor's designee shall be filed with the City Clerk and
become a part of the application filed for the licensing of such vehicle,
as hereinafter provided.
g. Display of License. Every licensed livery shall display in a manner
required or approved by the Mayor's designee, its City license number
upon the issuance of the City license of any livery. There shall be
furnished to the owner a card setting forth the name and address of the
owner and the number of the license which card shall be promptly
displayed in the interior of the livery.
h. Register to Be Maintained. The City Clerk shall maintain a register of
all licenses granted to liveries and the register and application will be
made available to the public upon request.
i. Inspection, Written Reports Required. The Police Department shall
maintain a constant vigilance over all liveries to see that they are kept
in a condition of safety for the transportation of passengers, and to this
§ 5-1.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-1.2
AO:132
§ 5-1.3. Limousines. [Ord. No. 15-2013 § 3]
end shall have the right at any and all times to inspect any and all
licensed vehicles, and shall maintain a record, in writing of a report of
such inspections.
j. Insurance. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16A-2, no vehicle shall be
operated wholly or partly along any street in any municipality until the
owner of the vehicle shall have filed with the Clerk of the municipality
in which such operation is maintained, an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of
this State in the sum of $10,000 against loss by reason of the liability
imposed by law upon the vehicle owner for damages on account of
bodily injury or death suffered by any person with a maximum limit of
$100,000 for more than one person in any one accident, and in the sum
of $1,000,000 against loss by reason of such liability for damage on
account of the injury to or destruction of the property of any person,
with a maximum of $5,000 for more than one person in any one
accident, as the result of an accident occurring by reason of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the vehicle upon any public street.
Such operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy
shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of $105,000. The
insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance and
use of such vehicle or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the
benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
k. Licenses Revoked or Suspended. Licenses granted under this
subsection may be revoked or suspended at any time after notice and
hearing by the Mayor's designee if the vehicle shall not be in a safe
condition for the transportation of passengers or not kept in conformity
with the terms of this subsection or if used or its use permitted for any
improper, immoral or illegal business or purpose, or for the violation of
any statute or law of the State of New Jersey or of the United States, or
for the violation of any of the provisions of this subsection, or any of the
rules and regulations made by the appropriate authority.
l. Penalties for Violations. The penalties for violation of this subsection
shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the City of
Lambertville.
a. Definitions. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a, any person who
owns a limousine service, or any other company or service which pairs a
passenger automobile, as defined In N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, and a driver with a
private customer to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a
premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not
conducted on a regular route, include, but not limited to, the use of
authorized drivers of rental vehicles to provide such passenger
transportation, in no event shall it have a seating capacity of more than
14 passengers, not including the driver, shall require an applicant for
§ 5-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.3
AO:133
employment as a limousine operator or driver, or as an operator or
driver of any other passenger automobile, as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
b. License Required. No limousine shall be operated in the City of
Lambertville without being registered and licensed in accordance with
this subsection and the State of New Jersey.
c. Issuance of License. The Clerk of the municipality in which the owner
has his principal place of business, upon the filing of the required
insurance policy and the payment of a fee shall issue in duplicate a
license to operate showing that the owner of the limousine has
complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
d. Application Information. Application information shall include the
name, address, phone number of the owner and each operator, copies of
insurance, State of New Jersey Business Registration, Sales Tax
Certificate, fingerprinting results and any other information as deemed
necessary by the Police Department and/or the City Clerk.
e. Requirements for Applications. No license to operate a limousine shall
be granted to any person unless he is a citizen of the United States, or
shall have declared his intention to become such a citizen. In the case of
a co-partnership, no license shall be granted to operate a taxicab unless
such corporation is either incorporated or is duly authorized to do
business under the laws of this State. All applicants and prospective
taxicab drivers must first submit to criminal history checks
(fingerprinting) at a designated Live Scan facility prior to the issuance
of a license, be 21 years old and possess a State of New Jersey issued
driver's license which is currently valid.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.2b., any person who owns a
limousine service shall require an applicant for employment as a
limousine operator or driver to be tested, at the applicant's expense, for
dangerous controlled substances as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
f. Disqualification Under Certain Circumstances. No license shall be
granted to operate a limousine to any person, or to any partnership or
corporation who is not, or the members of or officer of which are not
persons of good moral character, or who has, or if any of the members
of the partnership, or officers of the corporation have been convicted of
any following crimes: aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape,
extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault,
sexual assault or endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or having in his possession any
weapon enumerated N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2. In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the world, as a result
of a conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
§ 5-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-1.3
AO:134
enumerated in this paragraph. If a person who has been convicted of
one of the crimes outlined in this paragraph or in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3, and
can produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:16A-8 or if the criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an
equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal offense
occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant from
operating or driving a limousine.
g. Issuance of License; Fee. The Clerk of the municipality, in which the
owner has his principal place of business, upon the filing of the required
insurance policy and the payment of the fee, which shall not exceed $50
shall issue in duplicate a license to operate showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-17.
The original license shall be retained within the limousine and shall be
available for inspection by any Police Officer in the State.
The duplicate license shall be filed with Motor Vehicle Commission
before any such car is registered as a limousine.
h. Inspection Required Before Issuance of License. No limousine shall be
licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and
examined by the Police Department and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers. Such licensed limousine
shall be clean, fit and of good appearance and well painted and
varnished. Side curtains or shades shall not be permitted on any such
licensed vehicles. The Police Department shall refuse a license to any
applicant or, if already issued, revoke or suspend the license of any
vehicle found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers. All
reports of such inspections and examinations, after having been
submitted to the Mayor's designee shall be filed with the City Clerk and
become a part of the application filed for the licensing of such vehicle,
as hereinafter provided.
i. Display of License. Every licensed taxicab shall display in a manner
required or approved by the Mayor's designee, its City license number
upon the issuance of the City license of any limousine. There shall be
furnished to the owner a card setting forth the name and address of the
owner and the number of the license which card shall be promptly
displayed in the interior of the auto/taxicab.
j. Register to Be Maintained. The City Clerk shall keep a register of the
name of each person owning or operating vehicle or vehicles licensed
under this subsection, together with the license number and the
description, make, dimension of such vehicles, with the date and
complete record of inspections made of them. All applications for
licenses shall be filed by the City Clerk and carefully preserved for
reference. All licenses issued shall be recorded in books provided for
that purpose, which shall be in such form as the Mayor's designee shall
prescribe. All such records shall be open to the inspection of the public
§ 5-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.3
AO:135
§ 5-2. MECHANICAL MUSIC MACHINES, AMUSEMENT DEVICES
AND VENDING MACHINES.
§ 5-2.1. Definitions. As used in this section: [1990 Code § 5-2.1]
AUTOMATIC OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Shall mean a
machine of the type commonly known and designated as bagatelle, baseball,
football, or pinball amusement games or similar machines and particularly,
but not by way of limitation, any and all coin-operated amusement devices
of any and all types and kinds, which, upon the insertion of a coin or slug,
operate or may be operated for use as a game, contest, amusement or
entertainment of any description, or which may be used for any such game,
contest, amusement or entertainment, and which contain no automatic
payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, checks, tokens, or
merchandise, or which provide for no such pay-off by any other means or in
any other manner whatsoever.
at all reasonable times and shall be deemed the official records of the
Police Department and of the City.
k. Inspection, Written Reports Required. The Police Department shall
maintain a constant vigilance over all limousines to see that they are
kept in a condition of safety for the transportation of passengers, and to
this end shall have the right at any and all times to inspect any and all
licensed vehicles, and shall maintain a record, in writing of a report of
such inspections.
l. Insurance. As required in N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, no limousine shall be
operated wholly or partly along any street in any municipality until the
owner of the limousine shall have filed with the Clerk of the
municipality in which the owner has his principal place of business, an
insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under
the insurance laws of this State in the sum of $1,500,000 against loss by
reason of the liability imposed by law upon every limousine owner for
damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by any person as
the result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public street.
m. Licenses Revoked or Suspended. Licenses granted under this section
may be revoked or suspended at any time after notice and hearing by
the Mayor's designee if the vehicle shall not be in a safe condition for
the transportation of passengers or not kept in conformity with the
terms of this subsection or if used or its use permitted for any improper,
immoral or illegal business or purpose, or for the violation of any
statute or law of the State of New Jersey or of the United States, or for
the violation of any of the provisions of this subsection, or any of the
rules and regulations made by the Appropriate Authority.
n. Penalties for Violation. The penalties for violation of this ordinance shall
be as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the City of
Lambertville and N.J.S.A. 48:16.
§ 5-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-2.1
AO:136
AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean any coin-operated
machine used for the purpose of selling liquids, candy, food or general
merchandise. Up to six coin-operated non-electrical bulk vending machines,
located on the same stand, shall be considered to be one machine and
require one license. The license fee shall be calculated based on the highest
dispensing fee of the bulk vending machines.
MECHANICAL MUSIC MACHINE — Shall mean any coin-operated machine
or device over and through which music by transcription is played.
§ 5-2.2. License Required. [1990 Code § 5-2.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or use within the
City any mechanical music machine, automatic or electronic amusement
device, automatic vending machine, without first having obtained a license
from the City or without complying with all provisions concerning the same
contained in this section; and the maintaining, operating or using of such
mechanical music machines, automatic or electronic amusement devices,
automatic vending machines, without first having obtained a license from
the City, or without complying with any and all provisions contained in this
section, shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day that
such machines and devices are maintained, operated or used.
§ 5-2.3. License Fees; License Transfer Not Permitted. [1990 Code
§ 5-2.3]
§ 5-2.4. Application for License. [1990 Code § 5-2.4]
a. Vending Machines. The annual license fee, per machine or device, for
maintaining, operating or using such mechanical music machines,
automatic amusement devices and automatic vending machines in any
one place shall be as follows:
1. Mechanical Music Machines - $100 per year per machine.
2. Automatic Amusement Devices - $100 per year per machine.
3. Automatic Vending Machines - yearly fee:
(a) Up to $0.10 $25.
(b) Over $0.10 $50.
b. The licenses granted pursuant to this section are not transferable.
a. Application. Every person maintaining, operating or using such
mechanical music machines, automatic amusement devices and
automatic vending machines, shall, on or before May 1 annually, make
application to the City Clerk for a license to maintain, operate or use
such machines or devices. The application shall be filed with the City
Clerk and shall be accompanied by the license fee required in
subsection 5-2.3.
§ 5-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.4
AO:137
§ 5-2.5. Operation of the Machine Regulated. [1990 Code § 5-2.5]
The payment of the license fee required by this section, its acceptance by
the City, and the issuance of a license to any person, shall not entitle the
holder thereof to use any such machine or device so licensed in any manner
which would be in violation of any law or ordinance.
b. Investigation. The City Clerk shall cause an investigation of each
application to be made by the Police Department to determine whether
the owner, occupant or tenant of the premises upon which or within
these machines or devices are to be maintained, operated or used, is
complying with all laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances of the
City of Lambertville relating and pertaining to the preservation and
protection of the lives, health, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; and for the purpose of such investigation, such
applicants for licenses shall allow and permit the inspection of any such
place or premises at all reasonable hours by any Police Officer of the
City of Lambertville. The Police Department shall make a report of their
investigation to the City Clerk.
c. Favorable Report. If the investigation report is favorable, the City Clerk
shall issue the licenses. The effective date of each license shall be June
1 annually and such license shall expire on May 31 annually. Every
person maintaining, operating or using these machines or devices shall
keep said license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some
conspicuous part of the premises.
d. Unfavorable Report. If the investigation report is unfavorable, it shall
be the duty of the City Clerk to refuse the issuance of the license in
question. This action of the City Clerk may be appealed to the City
Council who shall, after notice and hearing, determine whether the
action of the City Clerk shall be affirmed or reversed.
e. Licenses Not Pro-Rated. When any such machine or device is installed
on any premises in the City before or after May 1 in any year, an
application for a license for such machine or device must be made
immediately and the same procedure must be followed as outlined
above in the case of the annual application. In such cases there will be
no pro-rating of the annual license fee and any license issued upon such
application shall be effective only to the time for the next annual
license.
f. Licensee to Be Proprietor, Tenant or Occupant. All licenses hereunder
shall be issued to and in the name of the proprietor, tenant or occupant
of the premises where the machine or device is to be installed for the
maintenance, operation and use thereof.
g. Investigation Charge. Whenever any application for a license hereunder
is rejected, the City Clerk shall retain for the use of the City 20% of the
annual license fee as an investigation charge.
§ 5-2.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-3
AO:138
§ 5-3. CIRCUSES, SHOWS, AND CARNIVALS.
§ 5-3.1. License Required. [1990 Code § 5-3.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, to commence or carry
on any traveling circus, traveling show or carnival, whether under canvas
or not in the City without first having procured a license from the City
and without complying with the provisions contained in this section or in
any other ordinance heretofore or hereafter adopted by the City which is
or may be in full force and effect; and the carrying on of any traveling
circus, traveling show or carnival, whether under canvas or not, without
having first procured a license from the City, or without complying with
any and all of the provisions contained in this section, or in any other
ordinance adopted by the City which is or may be in full force and effect,
shall constitute a separate violation of this section for each and every day
that such business is so carried on.
§ 5-3.2. Fees. [1990 Code § 5-3.2]
The license fees which are fixed for the raising of revenue and for regulation
and control, to be paid to the City for the conducting of or engaging in any
traveling circus, traveling show or carnival, whether under canvas or not,
shall be as follows: $25 per day.
§ 5-3.3. Issuance of License; Posting. [1990 Code § 5-3.3]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to issue a license under this section
for every person liable to pay a license hereunder and to state in each
license the amount thereof, the period of time covered thereby, the name
of the person, firm or corporation to whom issued, the particular business
licensed, and the location or place of business where the same is to be
carried on. Every person having a license under the provisions of this
section and the carrying on such a licensed business shall keep such license
posted and exhibited while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place
of business. No refund shall be made on any license fee paid on account of
a cessation of business after such license shall have been issued.
§ 5-3.4. Inspections; Violations. [1990 Code § 5-3.4]
Every person licensed under this section shall comply with all laws of the
State of New Jersey and ordinances of the City relating and pertaining to
the preservation and protection of the lives, health, morals and the general
welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and, for that purpose, such licensees
shall allow and permit inspection of any place licensed under this section at
all reasonable hours of the Chief of the Fire Department, the Health Officer
and any Police Officer of the City, which officers are hereby authorized and
directed and it shall be their duty to make such inspections and report any
violation of any laws of the State of New Jersey or of the ordinances of the
§ 5-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.4
AO:139
City of Lambertville relating to the preservation and protection of the lives,
health, morals and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City, to the
Mayor and Council, who shall order and direct the officers aforenamed to
take such steps that they may deem necessary and lawful to remedy and
correct any such violations.
§ 5-4. BILLIARDS, POOL PARLORS AND MOVIE THEATERS.
§ 5-4.1. Licenses Authorized. [1990 Code § 5-4.1]
The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized to grant licenses to carry on
or conduct billiard parlors, pool parlors and movie theaters.
§ 5-4.2. Fees. [1990 Code § 5-4.2]
The charges for such licenses shall be as follows, for each billiard or pool
table, $25 for the first table per year and $15 for each additional table per
year; for each movie theater $240 per year.
§ 5-5. ITINERANT VENDORS.
§ 5-5.1. Definitions. [1990 Code § 5-5.1]
As used in this section the following terms have the meaning indicated:
ITINERANT VENDOR — Shall mean any person, whether a resident of the
City or not, and their principals and agents who engage or conduct any
business for the sale or offer for sale of goods, wares, or merchandise which
is or to be carried on in any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car,
or real estate for a period of less than six months in each year.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, association
or other entity.
§ 5-5.2. Exemptions. [1990 Code § 5-5.2]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
a. Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business;
b. Wholesale trade shows and/or conventions;
c. Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample, catalog, or brochure
for future delivery;
d. Fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for
amusement and/or entertainment;
e. Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any non-profit
organization;
f. Garage sales held on premises devoted to residential use;
§ 5-3.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-5.2
AO:140
§ 5-5.3. License or Permit of Exemption Required. [1990 Code
§ 5-5.3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in an itinerant vendor business
activity, as defined in this section, within the corporate limits of the City,
without first obtaining a permit of exemption or license as required by the
City.
§ 5-5.4. Fees. [1990 Code § 5-5.4]
The fees for an itinerant vendor's license shall be as follows: $1,000 for
the first month and $500 for each month thereafter, not exceeding in all
a period of six months. Upon application for the license in question, the
applicant shall, in addition to the bond (see subsection 5-5.6), deposit a
sum in cash equivalent to the full amount that would be due hereunder for
the license based on the estimated time required. The City will reimburse
the licensee if the license is used for less than the full estimated time. It
is understood that after the initial $1,000, the $500 monthly additional fee
is for the month or any part thereof. Adjustments are not made on a per
diem basis. If the license is denied, then 90% of the fee deposited shall be
refunded.
§ 5-5.5. Term; Nontransferable. [1990 Code § 5-5.5]
Licenses and permits shall be issued for a term of more than six months.
Any license or permit issued under this section shall not be transferable.
§ 5-5.6. Bond. [1990 Code § 5-5.6]
Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to
the City a cash bond or a surety bond by a corporate surety authorized to do
business in this State and approved by the City Attorney, equal to an amount
g. Sales of crafts or items made by hand and sold or offered for sale by the
person making such crafts or handmade items and sold from their
residence;
h. Sales of agriculture food products, except nursery products and foliage
plants;
i. Person(s) operating a year-round 12 months established place of
business in the City;
j. Sales made by a seller at residential premises pursuant to an invitation
issued by the owners or legal occupant of such premises.
Any itinerant vendor not otherwise exempted from the provisions of this
section shall not be relieved or exempted from the provisions of this
section by any reason of associating himself temporarily with any local
dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor, or merchant or by conducting
such temporary or transient business in connection with or in the name
of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant.
§ 5-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.6
AO:141
of 25% of the value of the merchandise to be sold, but in no event shall the
bond be less than $5,000. Such bond shall remain in force for one year after
the date of expiration of the license and shall be conditioned to indemnify
and pay the City any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of any
provisions of this section and to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser in
a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment such purchaser may
have been induced to make through the misrepresentation as to the kind,
quality, or value of the merchandise, and to indemnify or reimburse any
such purchaser in an amount equal to at least the amount of any payment
such purchaser may have made to any licensee under this section, the
delivery of which is either not made at all, or not made as represented
by the licensee. The bonds shall be maintained so long as the itinerant
vendor conducts business in the City and for a period of one year after the
termination of such business and shall be released only when the itinerant
vendor furnishes satisfactory proof to the City Clerk that it has satisfied all
claims of purchasers of goods, wares, merchandise or services from such
merchant, and that all State and local taxes and other taxes have been paid.
This subsection shall not apply to a permit of exemption.
§ 5-5.7. Applications. [1990 Code § 5-5.7]
Applicants for a permit of exemption or license shall file with the City Clerk
a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk,
no later than 60 days preceding the sale, which shall give the following
information:
a. Name and description of the applicant (trade name and business name
also to be included).
b. Permanent home address and business address, if any, of the applicant;
and proposed location of the business.
c. Home phone number and business phone number of the applicant.
d. A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to be sold
and the name and address of the principal office of their manufacturer,
as well as the name and address of the agent designated to receive
service of process in the State; and a sketch of the area of the business
showing sales area, pedestrians and vehicle traffic patterns, parking,
traffic control signs, advertising signs.
e. If employed, the name and address of the employer.
f. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
g. A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to
the date of the filing of the application.
h. Fingerprints of the applicant, and the names of at least two reliable
property owners of the County who will certify as to the applicant's
good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of such names of
reference, such other valuable evidence of good character and business
§ 5-5.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-5.7
AO:142
§ 5-5.8. Investigation of Applicant. [1990 Code § 5-5.8]
When the application is properly filled out and signed by the applicant, the
original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Clerk
shall refer the original to the Police Director who shall make or cause to
be made such investigation of the applicant's business responsibility and
character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare.
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to evaluate
properly such character and business responsibility. Approval or
recommendation by the Better Business Bureau or the Chamber of
Commerce may be accepted in lieu of the above references.
i. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violations of any municipal ordinance other
than traffic violation, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor.
j. Proof that property taxes are paid up to date at the location of the
property where such business will be conducted. Address, lot and block
number of the location where the business activity will take place.
k. Sales tax certificate issued by the New Jersey Division of Taxation for
the premises and business.
l. The days of the week and hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
m. Written consent of the property owner.
n. Such other information as the City Council or its delegated agent may
prescribe.
o. Any application filed within 60 days of the sale shall be denied.
p. Paragraphs h, i, and j shall not apply to permits for exemption.
a. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Police Director shall
endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons therefor
and shall return the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant that his application is disapproved. Any determination by the
Police Director that an application is unsatisfactory shall be based on
one or more of the following findings with respect to the applicant;
however, such determination is not limited to the items listed below:
1. Conviction or pending charges of a crime involving moral
turpitude;
2. Prior violation of an ordinance or law pertaining to itinerant
vendors;
3. Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
§ 5-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.8
AO:143
§ 5-5.9. Revocation. [1990 Code § 5-5.9]
Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council after reasonable notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 5-5.10. Appeals. [1990 Code § 5-5.10]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Director or the City Clerk
in the denial of an application for a permit or license, shall have the right to
appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Mayor and Council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained
of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Mayor and Council shall
set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant in the manner as provided here for notice of
4. Record of breach of solicited contracts.
5. Concrete evidence of bad character.
6. Any additional information revealed in the investigation that is not
included above.
b. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Police
Director shall endorse his approval on the application returning the
application to the City Clerk, who shall, upon submission of the
required bond, issue the proper license to the applicant. The City Clerk
shall keep a record of all licenses issued, and of all complaints received,
if any, concerning each license.
a. Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
license.
b. Misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of carrying
on the activities regulated herein.
c. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
d. Conducting the business of an itinerant vendor in an unlawful manner,
in violation of this section, or in such manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare to the public.
e. If the licensee has violated the regulations enumerated in the zoning
and development ordinances and regulations of the City.
Notice of hearing for revocation of license shall be given in writing
setting forth the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the addresses given by the
licensee in making application, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
§ 5-5.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-5.10
AO:144
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Mayor and Council on
such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 5-5.11. Exhibition of License or Permit. [1990 Code § 5-5.11]
All persons holding a license or permit of exemption under this section shall
display the license prominently at the location of such business.
§ 5-6. BINGO AND RAFFLES.
§ 5-6.1. License Required. [1990 Code § 5-6.1; amended 12-19-2019
by Ord. No. 29-2019]
It shall be unlawful for any person whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, to conduct bingo or
raffle games without obtaining a license from the City Clerk as required by
N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq. or any other state law.
§ 5-6.2. Fees. [1990 Code § 5-6.2]
All qualified organizations are exempt for the payment of any municipal
licensing fee.
§ 5-7. CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION - NONRESIDENTIAL SITES.
§ 5-7.1. Purpose; Applicability. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 2; Ord. No.
2010-17 § 2]
§ 5-7.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 3; Ord. No. 2010-17 § 3]
Services shall mean to erect any new structure, add or remove rooms,
dormers or other structures or to improve, modernize or modify an existing
room or rooms or structures, including all plumbing, electrical, HVAC
(mechanical) and fire additions and/or alternation, or to install, resurface or
improve driveways or sidewalks or any improvement whatsoever upon any
a. The purpose of this section is to adopt a procedure for the registration
of all construction contractors who are not required to register with the
State of New Jersey to perform certain work within the City of
Lambertville. This section shall apply to contractors performing
services on all nonresidential sites.
b. This section shall apply to all persons, partnerships, corporations or
other entities not otherwise licensed by the State of New Jersey who
undertake to provide services within the City of Lambertville for a fee.
c. Registration pursuant to this section does not relieve the contractor of
the requirement to obtain a construction permit or of any liability
resulting from contractor's performance of service.
§ 5-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7.2
AO:145
structure in the City of Lambertville where persons reside, will reside or
conduct any type of business upon completion of the work.
§ 5-7.3. Application. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 4; Ord. No. 2010-17 § 4]
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity to whom this section
applies shall, prior to commencing any work or service as herein described
in the City of Lambertville, make application to the City Construction Office
for registration as a contractor in the City of Lambertville. The failure to
make application for such registration prior to commencement of work or
services shall constitute a violation of this section. The form of application
may be found on file in the City Offices.
§ 5-7.4. Term of Registration; Fee. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 5; Ord. No.
2010-17 § 5]
§ 5-7.5. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 6; Ord. No.
2010-17 § 6]
Each applicant shall be required to submit a certificate of insurance to
the City Construction Office evidencing a current policy for workers
compensation insurance and public liability insurance with a minimum
liability of $100,000/$300,000.
§ 5-7.6. Grounds for Denial of Initial Registration or Revocation or
Denial of Existing Registration. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 7; Ord. No.
2010-17 § 7]
The following constitutes but is not limited to grounds for denial or
revocation of registration:
a. All registration numbers issued pursuant to this section shall expire one
year from the date of issuance. Such registration may be renewed
annually upon payment of the required fee and submission to the City
Construction Office of a current certificate insurance.
b. The initial fee to register as a contractor in the City of Lambertville
shall be $200. The fee for renewal registrations shall be $100.
a. Failure to maintain and keep current an adequate workers
compensation insurance policy or certification of no employees
requiring workers compensation insurance.
b. Failure to maintain and keep current a public liability insurance policy;
c. Failure to comply with the construction standards required by State
laws or regulations or local ordinances or codes after having been given
notice of such noncompliance and failing to alleviate noncompliance
without just cause;
d. Any of the following:
§ 5-7.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-7.6
AO:146
§ 5-7.7. Appeals or Denial or Revocation. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 8;
Ord. No. 2010-17 § 8]
In the event that the City Clerk denied or revoked a registration to an
applicant or has refused to renew such registration upon submission of the
required fee, the aggrieved contractor may appeal such denial, in writing
to the Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville. Upon such appeal the
following action shall be taken:
1. Failure to comply with the lawful instructions of the Construction
Code Official regarding site safety, or building code violations.
2. Altering plans submitted in obtaining a construction (building,
electrical, plumbing, fire) permit without further receiving the
approval of the Construction Official;
3. Failure to obtain a construction permit where required;
4. One owner/resident complaint against the contractor for unsafe
services, unjustified interruption of work, or substandard
workmanship which complaint has been personally verified by the
Construction Official or his deputy;
5. Failure to complete the project according to terms of contract;
6. Failure to correct building, zoning or City violations in connection
with project;
7. Breach of contract by registrant;
8. Failure to request and obtain final inspection approvals and
Certificate of Approval/Occupancy within the timeframe allowed by
the Uniform Construction Code.
e. Any registrant that has had his registration revoked three times, in
accordance with this section, the City Clerk or Construction Official
may, upon notice to the registrant, request the Mayor and City Council
conduct a public hearing to determine whether or not said registrant
shall be permanently barred from performing work within the City.
f. The revocation of prior registration by the City of Lambertville City
Clerk or Construction Official or the revocation of any local contractor's
license or registration by another municipality in the State of New
Jersey for any cause other than failure to pay licensing or registration
fees.
a. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall set a date for
the Mayor and Council to hear such appeal. This date may be adjourned
for a period of 60 days at the request of the Mayor and Council or the
contractor.
b. At the time, date and place set for the hearing, the Mayor and Council
shall hear testimony from the City Clerk and/or Construction Official as
§ 5-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7.7
AO:147
§ 5-7.8. Duties of the Construction Official. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 8;
Ord. No. 2010-17 § 8]
The Construction Official shall have the responsibility to do the following:
§ 5-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-04 § 9; Ord. No.
2010-17 § 9]
It shall be considered a violation of this section for any person or firm as
described herein to fail to make application for a contractor's registration
or to perform any work as described herein without first having applied for
and received a contractor's registration number. Following a conviction of
violation of this section by a court of competent jurisdiction, a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $1,000 shall be imposed.
§ 5-8. OUTDOOR SEATING.
to the grounds for denial and hear testimony from the contractor
contesting such denial. At the hearing, the contractor shall be entitled
to call witnesses and to be represented by counsel.
c. At the conclusion of the hearing, a determination shall be made. If
denial is deemed to have been inappropriate, the City Clerk shall be
directed to issue a registration number to the contractor. If it is
determined that the denial was proper, the Mayor and Council shall
have the discretion to take one of the following actions:
1. Uphold the denial without further action.
2. If circumstances warrant, direct the City Clerk to register the
contractor upon conditions imposed by the Mayor and Council and
Construction Official which are designed to reasonably ensure
compliance by the contractor and this section.
3. If circumstances warrant, direct the Construction Official to
register the contractor when the deficiencies have been alleviated
by the contractor to the Construction Official's satisfaction.
d. Within 10 business days from the hearing date, the Construction
Official and the contractor shall receive notification, in writing, with the
determination of the Mayor and Council and any conditions which have
been placed upon the approval for the application for registration.
a. Monitor the accuracy and current status of the information contained in
the application for contractor's registration.
b. Keep all registration applications on file so that they are available for
inspection and copying by any interested party as public documents.
c. Notify the owner of the property on which work is being performed by
the contractor of the revocation of contractor's registration for failure
to keep current its public liability insurance.
§ 5-7.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-8.1
AO:148
§ 5-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
As used in this section:
OUTDOOR SEATING — Shall mean a retail food establishment (as defined
herein):
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association
or other entity.
PRIMARY BUILDING — Shall mean the building whose principal facade is
adjacent to where the outdoor seating is or is proposed to be located.
PRINCIPAL FACADE — Shall mean that portion of the facade of a building
which fronts on a public street.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean an establishment actually
located within the primary building for which a current retail establishment
inspection certificate has been issued by the Board of Health and shall
include, by way of example, a restaurant, hotel, coffee shop, tea room,
dining room, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich shop, delicatessen, and the
like.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean the paved surface provided for the exclusive use
of pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building to the
curb of any street (excluding therefrom any unpaved area).
§ 5-8.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
Serving food to be consumed by the public at tables located adjacent to
the primary building.
a.
b. Containing readily removable tables, chairs, and/or planters; and
Unenclosed by fixed walls or ceilings, except for retractable awnings,
umbrellas or other non-permanent enclosures which in no way present
a safety hazard to or implied pedestrian traffic.
c.
a. No person shall operate outdoor seating within the City without having
first obtained an outdoor seating license in accordance with the
requirements of this section. The license shall be issued by the Mayor
and City Council by resolution and may contain conditions. The license
shall not be transferable and shall be for the period of April 15th of the
issuing year through April 14th of the following year. The license shall,
however, be subject to future amendments to this section or other
applicable regulations.
b. A person who has received approval by resolution of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment for outdoor seating is exempt from the above
licensing requirement. This exemption applies only for the specified
number of seats permitted in the approving resolution.
§ 5-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.3
AO:149
§ 5-8.3. Fee. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
The annual fee for an outdoor seating license shall be $50 per seat payable
upon submission of an application for a license. Exempt from the annual
license are retail food establishments that have received approval by
resolution of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment for outdoor
seating. This exemption applies only for the specified number of seats
permitted in the approving resolution.
§ 5-8.4. Application. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
a. Each applicant for an outdoor seating license shall submit and file an
application with the City Clerk, together with three copies of an
Outdoor Seating Plan (as defined below), and the appropriate fee. The
application shall set forth:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The name and address of the owner of the primary building (if
other than the applicant); and
3. The name and address of the person who has prepared the Outdoor
Seating Plan; and shall be accompanied by the written
authorization and approval of the owner of the primary building (if
other than the applicant).
b. The "Outdoor Seating Plan" shall include the following information (and
such other additional information, if any as may be deemed necessary
and subsequently requested by the City):
1. Identification of the primary building and all properties
immediately adjacent to such building, including names and
addresses of the adjacent property owners; and
2. The plan shall be drawn to scale but does not require professional
seals. The scaled drawing of the proposed design and location of
the outdoor seating shall include setbacks, all temporary
structures, equipment and apparatus to be used in connection with
its operation, including tables, chairs, planters, awnings, lighting
and electrical outlets (if any), provisions for the storage of such
structures, equipment and apparatus, and the location of any fire
hydrant, plug or standpipe, utility pole, parking meter, or other
permanent fixture between the primary building and the curb,
including a clear indication of the presence of the required
pedestrian passageway. If the outdoor seating is located on private
property adjacent to the sidewalk, the plan shall demonstrate that
pedestrian traffic will in no way be impeded.
3. A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed outdoor seating
and of the existing retail food establishment actually operated by
the applicant in the primary building. The Zoning Officer in
conjunction with the City Clerk shall approve or disapprove
§ 5-8.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-8.4
AO:150
§ 5-8.5. Term of License; Renewals. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
All outdoor seating licenses shall be issued from April 15th and ending April
14th of the following year. Licenses may be renewed annually by the filing
of an application in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 5-8.6. Rules, Regulations and Specifications. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
Outdoor seating is authorized and operating pursuant to this section shall
comply with all of the following rules and regulations, and such others as
may be adopted by ordinance of the City Council.
modification of the Outdoor Seating Plan within 15 business days
following its submission.
a. The outdoor seating shall be operated and maintained in accordance
with the Outdoor Seating Plan as finally approved, and by the same
person who operates and maintains the abutting retail food
establishment.
b. The placement of furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance
used in connection with the operation of the outdoor seating in relation
to any fire hydrant, plug or standpipe permanent fixture shall be
approved by specific written authorization of the Fire Official based
upon his review of the Outdoor Seating Plan.
c. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor seating shall be located in
such a way as to impede the safe and speedy ingress and egress to or
from any building or structure.
d. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor seating shall be located in
or project or protrude into the required pedestrian passageway.
e. Any table service provided at the outdoor seating shall be provided by
persons engaged or employed for that purpose and shall be furnished to
seated patrons only. Table service is not required, and retail food
establishments that do not provide table service may operate outdoor
seating in which patrons carry their food from inside the premises to
tables located in the outdoor seating.
f. The outdoor area utilized by the outdoor seating shall be kept clean and
free of litter and shall be washed as required. Trash receptacles shall be
provided as required and approved by the City. If no table service is
provided, the trash receptacles shall include those needed for
recycling.
g. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the
provisions of applicable ordinances of the City.
§ 5-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.6
AO:151
§ 5-8.7. Alcoholic Beverage. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
The outside area upon which outside seating has been authorized to operate
may permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages as follows:
§ 5-8.8. Notice of Violation; Failure to Comply. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
Upon a determination by the Zoning Officer in conjunction with the City
Clerk that a licensee has violated one or more of such provisions, the Zoning
Officer shall give written notice to the licensee to correct such violation
within 24 hours of the receipt of such notice by the licensee. In the event
that the licensee fails or refuses to correct such violation within such period,
the licensee's outside seating license shall thereupon be revoked.
§ 5-8.9. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Zoning Officer, in the denial or
revocation of an outside seating license, shall have the right to appeal to
the Mayor and City Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
City Clerk, within 30 days after the notice of the action complained of has
been served personally upon the licensee, or mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at the address given by the licensee in making application under
subsection 5-8.4, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
appeal. The City Clerk shall set a time and place of hearing for the appeal, at
h. Outdoor seating shall be permitted to operate only within a licensed
facility and only from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. Monday through
Thursday, and 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Friday through Sunday during
the months of license period, inclusive.
i. Furniture, apparatus, decorations and appurtenances may be secured
in accordance with an Outside Seating Plan which describes the
method for securing same that is specifically approved by the Chief of
Police and the Fire Official, with particular attention being given to
issues of ingress and egress and the possibility of the stored material
being used to create a public hazard.
j. No food may be prepared in the outside seating area or outside the
primary building without the approval of the Fire Official.
k. The licensee shall comply with all other ordinances of the City.
l. Outdoor seating is prohibited on the public sidewalk.
a. A retail food establishment that does not possess a liquor license may
permit its patrons to consume only beer or wine, which is brought to the
premises, by its patrons.
b. A retail food establishment that possesses a plenary retail consumption
license must amend their liquor license to include the outdoor seating
area in order to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by its
patrons.
§ 5-8.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-8.9
AO:152
which time the Mayor and City Council shall conduct a hearing and affirm,
modify or reverse the action appealed from.
§ 5-8.10. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-15]
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of at least $200 and not exceeding $500 for each
and every offense for each day in which the violation has not been abated.
In addition to the penalty the person shall be responsible for the cost of
conviction.
§ 5-9. TOWING.
§ 5-9.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.01]
§ 5-9.2. Exceptions — Owner Requested Service. [Ord. No. 07-2013
§ 5-12.02]
No tow operator license shall be required for the on-site repair, and/or the
towing or storage of any vehicle when the request is received by the towing
operator from the motor vehicle owner/operator prior to a Police request, or
if the owner/operator of a motor vehicle requests the Police to contact a tow
company of the owner/operator's choice for towing and/or storage under the
direction and control of the owner/operator.
§ 5-9.3. License Term. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.03]
a. No towing operator shall operate within the City for Police requested
towing services and/or storage services unless the towing operator has
obtained a license issued by the City.
b. Licenses shall be issued on an annual basis for the period of January 1
through December 30.
c. There shall be no limitation on the number of licenses issued and in
effect at one time, so long as each licensee meets the requirements of
this section and complies with the tow operator's rules/regulations and
guidelines established by the City.
d. The application for a license under this section shall be upon forms
made available through the office of the City Clerk.
a. Applications for the initial license shall be available from and must be
received by the City Clerk on or before November 1 of each year.
b. The City Clerk will forward all complete applications to the Police
Director within five days of receipt. The Police Director will conduct, or
cause to be conducted, an investigation of each application to verify the
information contained in the application, background check, survey of
equipment, compliance with established rules and regulations, and
such other pertinent matters related to potential licensing or renewal.
Upon concluding the review, the Police Director will return a copy of the
§ 5-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.3
AO:153
§ 5-9.4. Application Fees. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.04]
All application fees submitted to the City are nonrefundable and shall be
utilized to offset the cost of processing of the application and license. The
fees will be set by resolution adopted by Mayor and Council.
§ 5-9.5. Investigation and Inspection. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.05]
application to the City Clerk, along with a recommendation for approval
or disapproval of a license, and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. The
City Clerk shall issue a tow operator license to each qualified applicant,
and thereafter, the licensee's name shall be placed on the City Police
Department licensed tow operator's list. The Clerk shall forward to any
person rejected for a license, a copy of his or her application with the
reasons for disapproval.
c. The term of the license shall be for one year commencing January 1 and
expiring on the next succeeding December 31, and shall list the name of
the tow operator business and each employee licensed thereunder.
d. Each licensee shall be required to maintain in full force and effect
during the term of its license, insurance coverage including garage
liability and garage keeper's liability insurance, comprehensive
automobile liability insurance, and worker's compensation insurance
with limits of not less than those set forth in the tow operator's rules/
regulations and guidelines, and provide proof of such coverages to the
City Clerk at the time of filing of its license application.
e. In the event of any disapproval, suspension or revocation of a license
for failure to comply with this section or the tow operator's rules/
regulations and guidelines, no refund of application fees shall be given,
and payment of another initial application fee shall be required upon
applying for reinstatement.
a. The Police Department of the City may conduct a thorough background
check of the licensee, its officers, principals, and employees prior to the
granting of a license. A conviction for high misdemeanor and/or a motor
vehicle record evidencing unsafe driving habits or a disregard for the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Laws, will be considered ample reason to
disqualify any applicant or a particular employee. Each prospective
licensee shall furnish with its application, executed background check
waivers for all officers, principals and employees, in the form provided
by the Police Director.
b. Each licensee shall submit the names of all employees newly hired
during the term of the license for a review and background check,
which may be performed by the City Police Department prior to such
individual being added to the license and performing any services as
described in this section. The license shall be subject to revocation for
failure to submit employees to such a background check.
§ 5-9.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-9.6
AO:154
§ 5-9.6. Disapproval of License; Suspension; Revocation. [Ord. No.
07-2013 § 5-12.06]
§ 5-9.7. Rules and Regulations; Amendments. [Ord. No. 07-2013
§ 5-12.07]
The Police Director is directed to monitor, and from time to time,
recommend to the Mayor and Council, amendments to the tow operator's
rules/regulations and guidelines for consideration and enactment by formal
resolution of the Mayor and Council at a public meeting. Prior to the
adoption of any amendment to these initial tow operator's rules/regulations
and guidelines, the Police Director shall provide to each tow operator
licensed under this section, a copy of such proposed amendment at least
a. The Police Director shall have the right, in his or her sole discretion, to
disapprove and suspend or revoke any license issued under this section,
upon investigation and the determination that there has been a
violation of the tow operator's rules/regulations and guidelines and/or
this section by the licensee or its employees.
b. The Police Director shall be the sole administrator of the Police
Department's licensed Tow Operator's List. All complaints concerning
any licensed tow truck company/operator shall be forwarded to the
Police Director for review and investigation.
c. Any license suspension or revocation shall cause the tow company to be
removed from the Tow Operator's List. A licensed tow company which
has been suspended or revoked may reapply in accordance with the
provisions of this section to be placed on the list as of October 1 of the
year after the suspension or revocation.
d. An applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal the decision of
the Police Director to the Mayor and Council to disapprove, suspend or
revoke its license. Any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the
Police Director by providing a written statement of appeal containing
the facts and supporting documentation to the Mayor within seven days
of the date of such disapproval, suspension or revocation.
Within 14 days of the receipt of the appeal, the Mayor shall investigate
the matter and issue a written report thereon, with copies to the
aggrieving party, the Police Director and the City Clerk.
In the event that the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
aggrieved party, then the aggrieved party may request a final review
of such action by the City Council, by filing a written request with
the office of the City Clerk within seven days of the date of the Police
Director's written report. Thereafter, the City Council will conduct a
review of the matter and issue a final determination no later than the
second regular City Council meeting next following the receipt of the
written request by the City Clerk.
§ 5-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.7
AO:155
five days in advance of the public meeting at which the Mayor and Council
will consider such recommendations.
§ 5-9.8. Maximum Fee Rate Schedule. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.08]
There is established and adopted, a maximum fee rate schedule for the
towing and storage by licensees under this section. The maximum fee rate
schedule set forth herein shall also be made part of the rules, regulations
and guidelines for tow operators, and shall be subject to adjustment, which
will be authorized by resolution of the Governing Body and shall include the
following categories and be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 56:13-1 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.4.7
Rate Schedule
a. Basic Towing Services.
Days (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.), first mile Nights, weekends and N.J. State
holidays, first mile Each additional mile
b. Storage Fees.
Inside storage per 24 hours (must have been requested)
Outside storage per 24 hours
Storage and storage fees must be in compliance with N.J.A.C.
13:45A-31.4.
c. Other Services. Tire changing, jump starts, fuel, etc., shall be at the
basic rate set out in paragraph a of this section. Cleaning up and
bagging of liquid spills is an additional expense. The above towing fees
do not include heavy duty towing but apply only to a private passenger
automobile/utility vehicle. Additional services as may be required for
recovery such as uprighting of vehicle, etc. which are considered to be
"special cases" may be charged.
AFTER HOURS PICKUP - Shall mean after hours pickup from storage
facility.
STAND-BY TIME - Shall mean time at scene of major accidents when so
required by police and does not include heavy duty towing.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE -Shall mean the removal and transportation
of an automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road,
or a parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally
incidental thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from
a position beyond the right- of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon
any other object within the right- of-way or berm.
7. Editor's Note: The Rate Schedule can be found on file at the office of the City Clerk.
§ 5-9.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-9.8
AO:156
§ 5-9.9. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.09]
All licensees, by applying for and accepting a tow operator's license under
this section, agree to and shall indemnify and hold the City and its officers
and employees harmless from any liability, expense or costs of suit,
including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, arising out of or resulting
from any action of the tow operator in performing towing and storage
services in the City as a licensee under this section. This indemnification
clause shall be included as part of the application for a license and shall also
be printed on the applicant's license.
§ 5-9.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 07-2013 § 5-12.10]
Any person or entity that shall be found to have violated any provision of
this section, or to have submitted a false or misleading application, shall
in addition to penalties hereinafter provided in this chapter, be subject to
removal from the tow operator's list and/or suspension or revocation of their
license. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the person or entity
shall be punishable by the fines and penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5, General Penalty.
§ 5-10. DEALERS IN SCRAP METAL.
§ 5-10.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 11-2016]
The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement officials
and victims of crime in recovering scrap metal by requiring minimum
identification, reporting, maintenance, and distribution criteria for licensed
dealers in these goods.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or occupation
of the buying, selling, or pawning of scrap metal without complying with the
requirements of this section in the exact manner described within.
REASONABLE YARD CHARGE - Shall mean a one-time charge for crash
vehicles that are leaking fluids and store in the tow operators yard.
ADDITIONAL FEES - Shall mean charges not mentioned in this section
which are prohibited.
d. If a licensed tow operator tows a vehicle at the request of the Police
Department, and it is determined by the Police that the vehicle is
abandoned, and then the Police Department will direct that the vehicle
will then be towed to the Police Impound Yard. The tow operator may
then charge the City for a basic daytime tow rate if the vehicle was
towed during the day, or the basic night, weekend or holiday rate if the
vehicle was towed during that time. The City will only pay the basic
rates. All other fees will not apply (mileage, cleanup, storage, etc.).
§ 5-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.2
AO:157
§ 5-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-2016]
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean a current valid New Jersey
Driver's License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US State, a valid United States Passport, or other
verifiable US Government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department on request.
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates a scrap metal business involving the buying and/or selling of
scrap metal as defined herein, including itinerant businesses, and transient
buyers as defined herein.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean any scrap metal dealer who conducts
business intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations. All
itinerant business owners must also comply with Section 5-5 of the
Lambertville City Code, 2014.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — Shall mean the statutory officer whose duties are
defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of
the "city," "town," "township," "village," or "borough."
PUBLIC — Shall mean individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Shall mean every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which scrap metal is
purchased or pawned.
SCRAP METAL — Shall mean used, discarded, or previously owned items
that consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead,
chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys.
SCRAP METAL BUSINESS — Shall mean a commercial establishment,
which, as one of its principal business purposes, purchases scrap metal for
purposes of resale or processing including transient buyers of scrap metal
and itinerant businesses, as defined herein. All Itinerant Business owners
must also comply with Section 5-5 of the Lambertville City Code, 2014.
SELLER — Shall mean a member of the public who sells scrap metal to a
dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Shall mean an operator of scrap metal business, as
defined herein, who has not been in the scrap metal business continuously
for at least six months at any address in the municipality where the dealer is
required to register who intends to close out or discontinue the scrap metal
business within six months.
§ 5-10.3. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 11-2016]
No person, partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in a scrap metal business, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality, without having first obtained a license
§ 5-10.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-10.3
AO:158
therefore from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number
issued by the Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal
Clerk shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer,
whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or
not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly person's
offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign regarding the
purchase of scrap metal at any location within the municipality shall
constitute engaging in business as a dealer of scrap metal within the
jurisdiction of the municipality for the purposes of this section. No person,
partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation or other entity shall
place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such item(s)
without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a person or
entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number
shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-right-hand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
indicate the license number shall be a violation of the section and shall be
subject to the penalties established in subsection 5-10.9.
§ 5-10.4. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 11-2016]
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Police Director, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
section for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of scrap metal, although nothing in this section shall be
construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack
of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly person's offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Police Director may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of scrap metal, and
§ 5-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.4
AO:159
other factors bearing on whether the licensed business will be of
a fixed and permanent nature. This section shall not be construed
to require denial of any license solely on the grounds that the
business is not from a fixed location or that the applicant is a
transient buyer or itinerant business, however applicants who fall
under the category of a transient buyer or itinerant business must
state with specificity on the license application the business
address where transaction records required by subsection 5-10.6d
of this section will be stored as well as the location where scrap
metal goods purchased will be retained during the mandatory
inspection period required in subsection 5-10.6a of this section. All
itinerant business owners must also comply with Section 5-5 of the
Lambertville City Code, 2014.
b. The Police Director shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Police Director within that period, the Police Director
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Police Director shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of denial,
shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said recommendation. If
the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation of the Police Director
to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified in writing within 10
days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to the applicant a
statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to scrap metal business. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation are an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in subsection 5-10.5, the retention and inspection
requirements of subsection 5-10.6, or any other portion of this section.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Police Director, the
Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent
§ 5-10.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-10.4
AO:160
§ 5-10.5. Identification of Seller; Recordkeeping Requirements for
the Dealer. [Ord. No. 11-2016 § 5]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
upon the receipt of a bond as required by subsection 5-10.7 of this
section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the
Police Director, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to
introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any
applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of
appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license
to act as a scrap metal business.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
a. Require of each member of the public selling scrap metal acceptable
identification as defined above in subsection 5-10.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of 18 years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling scrap metal on a sequentially
numbered receipt:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Police Director, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in subsection 5-10.2, in a format
acceptable to the Police Director;
5. A photographed recording for all items sold in a format acceptable
to the Police Director;
6. The receipt number;
§ 5-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.5
AO:161
7. A full description of the item(s) purchased, including but not
limited to the manufacturer, type, amount, form, model, any
identifying marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms, and serial numbers;
8. The price paid for the item(s);
9. The make, model and license plate of the motor vehicle delivering
the scrap metal;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in paragraph c above must additionally be
documented through the use of an electronic database software system
authorized by the Police Director. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in paragraph f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Police
Director, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of close of business on the same date as
the purchase. The information entered must contain all pertinent
information outlined in paragraph c above.8
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Police Director within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in paragraph c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this section and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
subsection 5-10.6.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of scrap metal as well as the articles purchased and, where
necessary, relinquish custody of those articles as provided in subsection
5-10.6. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible for
8. Editor's Note: This section was adopted March 15, 2016 by Ordinance No. 11-2016.
§ 5-10.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-10.5
AO:162
§ 5-10.6. Retention; Suspension and Revocation; Other Restrictions.
[Ord. No. 11-2016 § 6]
notifying the Police Director of the address where records and articles
will be stored.
g. For all reportable transactions between a dealer and a member of the
public, the dealer may only accept delivery of scrap metal for purchase
by motor vehicle and the license plate of the motor vehicle must be
recorded as provided in paragraph c above.
h. No scrap metal business shall, except as provided in paragraph i below,
purchase:
1. Any metal marked with identification of a telephone, cable, electric,
water, other public utility, or government entity;
2. Any utility access or water meter cover;
3. Any street light pole or fixture;
4. Any road or bridge guard rail;
5. An highway or street sign, traffic directional or control sign, or
light signal;
6. Any metal beer keg that is clearly marked as being the property of
the beer manufacturer;
7. Any historical marker, grave marker, or burial vase;
8. Any central air conditioner evaporator coils or condensers or
catalytic converters that are not attached to a vehicle; or
9. Any metal bleachers or benches.
i. The provisions of paragraph h shall not apply to purchases of scrap
metal from entities who manage such metal in the ordinary course of
business. These entities include manufacturing, industrial, government,
contractor, individual, or other commercial venders or scrap metal
businesses that generate or purchase or process scrap metal in the
ordinary course of business.
a. All scrap metal purchased by a dealer in a reportable transaction are to
be made available for inspection by the Police Director or designee
thereof at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date of the transaction information is actually
reported to the Police Director in the approved manner described above
in subsection 5-10.5. All scrap metal subject to inspection must remain
in the same condition as when purchased and shall not be sold,
disposed of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the sevenday
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient
§ 5-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.6
AO:163
buyers will be responsible for notifying the Police Director of the
location where the purchased scrap metal is being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
subsection 5-10.5b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:2-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought against a dealer for a violation of this section if
retention for the time period required would have resulted in serious
and substantial economic losses to the dealer, or the probability of such
losses was significant due to rapid and highly fluctuating market
conditions, provided that the persons so charged shall prove the
existence of the market conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense
by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be a
defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts would
characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence so as to
clearly distinguish trading conditions from normal variations in the
market movement in response to economic news or other events.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
scrap metal in the manner prescribed in subsection 5-10.5c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Police Director or business
designee identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be
made and the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Police Director or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to subsection 5-10.9
of this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
§ 5-10.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-10.6
AO:164
violation of any other statue, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Police
Director or a designee hereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for suspension and notify
the dealer of his or her right to appeal, pursuant to paragraph h. A
temporary suspension shall be issued immediately, pending the
outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must immediately
cease all purchasing and/or selling of scrap metal in the
municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Police Director or designee, been cured, corrected or
appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed appropriate
by the three-person panel appointed by the Police Director, upon
the timely filing of an appeal as provided in paragraph h.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Police Director
or designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or competent
to comply with the requirements of this section. This penalty shall be in
addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur under
subsection 5-10.9.
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any regulations or local
ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Police
Director or designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk in
writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Police Director, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
§ 5-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.6
AO:165
§ 5-10.7. Bond. [Ord. No. 11-2016 § 7]
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A: 9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this section, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the
following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the
party (City of Lambertville), be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor and a result of damage sustained
in operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 5-10.8. Fees; Period of License Validity. [Ord. No. 11-2016 § 8]
A nonrefundable fee for the initial application and license for an operator
of scrap metal business, as covered under this section, is $300. The annual
renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are separate from and in
addition to any fees the dealer will be required to pay in relation to the
mandatory electronic database system designated by the Police Director, as
provided by subsection 5-10.5d of this section. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 5-10.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 11-2016 § 9]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating a scrap metal business within the municipality.
h. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Police Director, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
i. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notified the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 5-10.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 5-10.9
AO:166
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in subsection 5-10.6f and g above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and,
in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
subsection 5-10.6g. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this section.
§ 5-10.10. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability.
[Ord. No. 11-2016 § 10]
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1990 Code § 6-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the City of Lambertville in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
a. Any person, partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation, or
other entity engaging in the scrap metal business shall conform to the
provisions of this section within 90 days following the effective date of
this section.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
c. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing scrap metal business, as in N.J.S.A.
45:28-1 et seq. or any other statutory provision regarding any subject
matter discussed herein.
d. If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this section is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 5-10.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-2
AO:167
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1990 Code § 6-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1990 Code § 6-3.1]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1990 Code § 6-3.2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the City Council
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1990 Code § 6-3.3]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the City
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [1990 Code § 6-3.4; Ord. No. 2004-02; Ord.
No. 2007-24]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of the alcoholic
beverages in the City shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption License $2,500 10
Plenary Retail Distribution License $2,500 2
Club License $188 2
Consumption/Distribution License $2,500 1
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1990 Code § 6-4.1]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed in
any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
§ 6-2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 6-4.1
AO:168
a.m. except Christmas Day and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter
provided.
§ 6-4.2. Christmas Day. [1990 Code § 6-4.2]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Christmas Day. On
Christmas Day no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered or
consumed in any licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1990 Code § 6-4.3]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered or consumed in any
licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.4. Closing Provision. [1990 Code § 6-4.4]
During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove prohibited,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed, and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee, provided, however, that this section shall not
prevent hotels and restaurants from remaining open to engage in nonalcoholic
beverage activity.
§ 6-5. SALES PROHIBITED TO PERSON UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
[1990 Code § 6-5]
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverages to any person under
the legal age to consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-6. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1990 Code
§ 6-6]
Any licensee issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of Sections 6-1 through 6-5 or any
provision of any applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the
State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by a service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for a
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-7. UNLAWFUL ACTS BY PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE FOR
PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; PURCHASE BY
ANOTHER.
§ 6-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-7.1
AO:169
§ 6-7.1. Prohibited Acts. [1990 Code § 6-7; N.J.S.A. 33:1-81]
It shall be unlawful for:
§ 6-7.2. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. In addition, the
court shall suspend or postpone the person's license to operate a motor
vehicle for six months.
Upon the conviction of any person under this section, the court shall
forward a report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and
last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court
pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a
sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement,
including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and
shall run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the
person as well as the first and last date of the license suspension period
imposed by the court.
a. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her,
any alcoholic beverage; or
b. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage, or
c. Any person to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his age have the
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
d. Misrepresentation of Age. It shall be unlawful for any person to
misrepresent or misstate his age, or the age of any other person for the
purpose of inducing any licensee or any employee of any licensee, to
sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal
age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-7.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 6-7.2
AO:170
The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt
of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate given the age at the
time of sentencing, the nonresident driving privilege of the person and
submit to the Motor Vehicle Commission the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Motor Vehicle Commission shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension
or postponement.
In addition to the general penalties prescribed for an offense, the court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted. (N.J.S.A. 33:1-81)
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #88-25, § 1; 1990 Code § 7-1]
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the orderly and safe
parking of motor vehicles and the minimizing of traffic congestion in the
City of Lambertville.
§ 7-2. WORDS AND PHRASES. [Ord. #88-25, § 2; 1990 Code § 7-2]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-3. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. [Ord. #88-25, § 3; 1990 Code
§ 7-3]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as may be in
current use in the City.
§ 7-4. PARKING.
§ 6-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.1
AO:171
§ 7-4.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 7-4.1]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-4.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord.
#88-25, § 5; Ord. #91-07, § 1; Ord. #96-14, § I; 1990 Code § 7-4.2]
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked on
the streets, or portions thereof as set forth in subsection 7-4.8 of this
chapter. The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased falling until the streets have been plowed sufficiently
and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
b. Parking may also be temporarily prohibited upon any of the streets of
the City by the Chief of Police for weddings, funerals or when the Chief
determines that a parking emergency exists. When such a
determination is made, then there shall be no parking upon the streets
or sections of streets where temporary "emergency no-parking" signs
are displayed.
c. Any vehicle which is disabled to the extent that the operator can not
move it due to mechanical failure or weather conditions or any
unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this subsection
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any Police Officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
d. The provisions of paragraphs a., b and c shall not apply to any
firefighting equipment, ambulances or other emergency equipment
actively engaged in dealing with an emergency in the City.
e. Parking by Emergency Personnel.
1. Definitions.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any fire, flood or natural disaster or
state of emergency as determined by the Mayor or his designee,
the Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management or the
Police Director.
EMERGENCY PERSONNEL — Shall mean all active members of
the Lambertville Police Department, the Fire Departments of the
City of Lambertville and the Lambertville-New Hope Ambulance
and Rescue Squad.
§ 7-4.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.2
AO:172
§ 7-4.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord.
#88-25, § 5; Ord. #90-02, § 1; Ord. #91-01, § 1; Ord. #91-07, § 3;
Ord. #92-05, § 2; Ord. #95-12, § 1; Ord. #96-13, § 2; Ord. #97-04,
§ 1; Ord. #97-13, § 1; Ord. #97-16, § 1; 1990 Code § 7-4.3]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below.
Name of Street Sides Location
Brunswick Avenue South Between Franklin Street and the City line
Church Street South Between Franklin and North Main
Clinton Street East Between Delevan Street and Buttonwood
Street
Clinton Street West Between Delevan Street and York Street
Delevan Street North Between Main Street and Union Street
Delevan Street South Between Union Street and Clinton Street
Ferry Street North Between Kline's Court and South Main
Street
Ferry Street North Between Main Street and the canal
George Street Both Between Bridge Street and York Street
George Street East Between Elm Street and York Street
PARKING REGULATIONS — Shall mean those regulations
controlling parking whether set forth in the statutes of the State of
New Jersey or the Code of the City of Lambertville.
2. During periods of emergency, all parking regulations shall be
suspended for emergency personnel from the commencement of
the emergency until two hours following its conclusion.
3. The Fire Chief and the Chief of the Lambertville-New Hope
Ambulance and Rescue Squad will provide the Clerk of the City of
Lambertville with applications, approved by the respective Chief,
for emergency parking permits for all active members.
4. Emergency parking permits will be issued by the City Clerk based
upon said application and will expire on December 31st of the year
of issuance.
5. Permits will be issued on a yearly basis and may be issued at any
time during the year.
§ 7-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.3
AO:173
Name of Street Sides Location
George Street West Between Perry Street and Jefferson Street
in the area of the protruding curbs located
approximately 250 feet north of the
intersection with Jefferson Street and 150
feet north of the intersection with Delaware
Avenue
George Street Both Between Church Street and Delevan Street
Gordon's Alley Both Between Bridge Street and Church Street
Jean Street South Between Rosemont Avenue and Alexander
Avenue
Kline's Court East Between Bridge Street and Ferry Street
Lambert Lane Both North of Coryell Street
Lambert Street East Between Bridge Street and Coryell Street
McCready Alley West Between Bridge Street and Church Street
North Union
Street
[Ord. No.
2006-22]
East Side Starting on Cherry Lane on the southeast
corner of Cherry Lane and North Union
Street continuing 245 feet south on the east
side of North Union Street to the northeast
corner of Block 1004 Lot 26 and extending
an extra 25 feet south
Phillips Barber
Road
Both Between Main Street and Alexander Avenue
Quarry Street North Between Franklin Street and Curley Lane
Quarry Street North Between Franklin Street and the City line
Quarry Street South Between Curley Lane and the City line
South Franklin
Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
East Between the southerly entrance to St.
John's Cemetery and the City limits
Studdiford Street Both Between Swan Street and the City line
Wilson Street West Between Swan Street and Mount Hope
Street
York Street East 280 feet from the intersection of
Washington Street toward Route 179
§ 7-4.4. Parking Prohibited Certain Hours. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord.
#90-02, § 1; Ord. #94-16, § 3, Ord. #97-20, § 1; 1990 Code § 7-4.4.]
Parking of motor vehicles on the streets on the days and between the hours
set forth in this subsection is prohibited.
§ 7-4.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.4
AO:174
Name of Street Side Hours Location
MONDAY
Buttonwood
Street [Ord. No.
2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Cherry Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Delaware Avenue
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Delevan Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Elm Street [Ord.
No. 2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Jefferson Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Union
Street [Ord. No.
2003-15]
West 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
North side of York
Street to the northerly
terminus
Perry Street [Ord.
No. 2003-15]
North 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Name of Street Side Hours Location
TUESDAY
Buttonwood
Street [Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Cherry Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Delaware Avenue
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Delevan Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Elm Street [Ord.
No. 2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.4
AO:175
Name of Street Side Hours Location
TUESDAY
Jefferson Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Union
Street [Ord. No.
2003-15]
East 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
North side of York
Street to the northerly
terminus
Perry Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
South 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Name of Street Side Hours Location
WEDNESDAY
Church Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Commerce Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Coryell Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Ferry Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Mt. Hope Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Swan Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From South Union
Street to Highway
#165 north side
York Street [Ord.
No. 2004-09]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Name of Street Side Hours Location
THURSDAY
Church Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Coryell Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-4.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.4
AO:176
Name of Street Side Hours Location
THURSDAY
Ferry Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Hancock Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Lambert Lane
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Mt. Hope Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Franklin
Street [Ord. No.
2004-09]
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Union
Street [Ord. No.
2004-09]
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From York Street to
the southerly terminus
South Union
Street [Ord. No.
2004-09]
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From York Street to
the southerly terminus
Swan Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From South Union
Street to Highway #29
south side
Wilson Street
[Ord. No.
2004-09]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
York Street [Ord.
No. 2004-09]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Name of Street Side Hours Location
FRIDAY
Arnett Avenue
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
Both 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
Cherry Lane
[Deleted by
Ord. No.
2004-09]
§ 7-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.4
AO:177
Name of Street Side Hours Location
FRIDAY
Clinton Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15]
Both 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Entire length
George Street
[Ord. No.
2003-15; Ord.
No. 2004-09]
Both 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Elm Street to York
Street
Lincoln Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Franklin
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Entire length
North Union
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
South side of York
Street to the southerly
terminus
Quarry Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Entire length
South Franklin
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Entire length
South Union
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
South side of York
Street to the southerly
terminus
Studdiford Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Entire length
Swan Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Highway #165 to
Brunswick Avenue
Name of Street Side Hours Location
MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY
North Union
Street [Ord. No.
2006-11]
West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Entire frontage of
Block 1005 Lots 15
and 16
§ 7-4.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. 88-25, § 5;
Ord. #91-13, § 3; Ord. #93-07, § 4; Ord. #2001-34, §§ 1, 2; 1990
Code § 7-4.5]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown, at any
time between the hours listed of any day upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below.
This subsection shall not apply to police, firefighting or rescue squad
vehicles in the performance of their duties.
§ 7-4.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.5
AO:178
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Bridge Street
[Ord. No.
18-2013]
Both 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From Union
Street to
Lambert Lane
Bridge Street
[Ord. No.
04-2017;
repealed
11-30-2020 by
Ord. No.
16-2020]
NOTE: Ord. No. 18-2013 authorizes the removal of three spaces to
establish a mid-block crosswalk by the D&R Canal's tow path on the north
and south side of the street
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Church Street
[Ord. No.
2008-05]
Both 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From the east
side of Union
Street to the
west side of
North Main
Street
Coryell Street
[Ord. No.
2008-05]
Both 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From the east
side of the canal
bridge to the
west side of
North Main
Street
Ferry Street
[Ord. No.
2008-05]
South 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
Between Union
Street and
Kline's Court
Ferry Street
[Ord. No.
22-2013]
South 2 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From Union
Street to Main
Street
§ 7-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.5
AO:179
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Kline's Court
[Ord. No.
2008-05]
West 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From Bridge
Street to Ferry
Street
Lambert Lane
[Ord. No.
2008-05]
West 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From Bridge
Street to Coryell
Street
North Union
Street [Ord. No.
2006-03]
East 15
minutes
Mon.-Fri. East From the
first parking
space on the
north side of
York Street to
the handicapped
parking spot
south of the
driveway
Union Street
[Ord. No.
2008-05; Ord.
No. 18-2013;
Ord. No.
22-2013]
Both 4 hours Mon.-Sat. 9:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Sun. 1:00
p.m. to 9:00
p.m.
From the south
side of York
Street to the
north side of
Ferry Street
York Street [Ord.
No. 2003-21;
amended
9-19-2019 by
Ord. No.
20-2019]
North 15
minutes
Mon.-Fri. 7:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Second and
third parking
spaces west of
Main Street
§ 7-4.6. Parking for Justice Complex. [1990 Code § 1-4.6; Ord. No.
2004-17]
a. Parking and Reserved Areas. Parking on the west side of South Union
Street starting on the north side of Justice Complex driveway going 54
feet north through parking stalls shall be reserved in the following
manner Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, from 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.:
1. The first and second parking space shall be reserved for the Court
personnel.
2. The third parking space shall be 15 minute parking for court
business only.
§ 7-4.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.7
AO:180
§ 7-4.7. Parking Restricted for Use by Handicapped Persons. [Ord.
No. 2003-14; Ord. No. 2005-12; Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord. #90-10, § 1;
Ord. #91-07, § 4; Ord. #91-13, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #92-04; Ord. #92-10,
§ 1; Ord. #92-13, § 1; Ord. #92-15, § 1; Ord. #93-03, § 1; Ord. 93-07,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. #93-13, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #93-18, § 1; Ord. #94-04, § 1; Ord.
#94-08, § 1; Ord. #94-16, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #94-18, § 1; Ord. #94-21, § 1;
Ord. #95-01, § 1; Ord. #95-05, § 1; Ord. #95-18, § 1; Ord. #96-01,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. #96-05, § 1; Ord. #96-20, § 1; Ord. #97-13, § 2; Ord.
#97-14, § 1; Ord. #97-23, § 1; Ord. #98-03, § 1; Ord. #98-06, § 1;
Ord. #98-12, § 1; Ord. #98-14, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #98-19, § 1; Ord.
#98-21, § 1; Ord. #99-04, § 1; Ord. #2000-02, § 1; Ord. #2001-25,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. #2001-28, § 1; Ord. #2002-01, § 1; Ord. #2002-06, § 1;
Ord. #2002-15, § 1; Ord. #2002-21, § 1; Ord. #2002-23, § 1; 1990
Code § 7-4.7; Ord. #07-2015; Ord. #18-2015; Ord. #19-2015; Ord.
No. 03-2016; Ord. No. 04-2016; Amendments noted where
applicable.]
a. A handicapped parking space is a special designation to provide a
parking space for those individuals with medical needs which preclude
their ability to walk any distance to their residence. It must be created
by ordinance and carries a minimum fine of $100 for misuse. In a city
where parking is limited, the approval of a handicapped parking space
which serves to further restrict parking in residential neighborhoods
needs to be evaluated by the Mayor and Council.
1. All requests for designation of a handicapped parking space shall
be in writing and certify that there is no off-street parking at this
location.
2. Include a copy of the handicapped placard issued by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
3. Include a copy of the applicant's current motor vehicle license and
registration.
4. If the applicant does not drive or does not own a vehicle, then the
license and registration of the member of the household who is
responsible for driving the applicant shall be included.
5. The information shall be forwarded to the Public Works Director
and Chief of Police for review and comment.
6. The information will be presented to the Council at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
7. The Mayor and Council will consider the written comments from
the Police Director and Public Works Director citing the availability
of parking in that area on a regular day, the need for a handicapped
parking space in that vicinity and other pertinent factors.
b. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described herein except:
§ 7-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.7
AO:181
1. Persons issued handicapped persons identification cards by the
Director of Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and the
vehicle bears a wheelchair symbol license plate or a placard issued
by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission which is properly
displayed on such vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206; and
2. Temporary handicapped persons who shall be issued a temporary
placard by the Chief of Police of any municipality in the State of
New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, and the vehicle displays
such temporary placard.
3. In accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A 39:4-197(3)c and
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any person
parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without a
special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250
for the first offense, and for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days community service, on such terms and in
such form as the Court shall deem appropriate, or any combination
thereof.
c. The removal of a handicapped parking space shall be at the discretion
of the Mayor in consultation with the Police Director and Public Works
Director after notification is received that the space is no longer
necessary.
Name of Street Sides Location
Arnett Avenue [Ord.
No. 19-2015]
In front of 5 Arnett Avenue
Arnett Avenue
[Added 7-18-2019
by Ord. No.
16-2019]
East East side of Arnett Avenue (Main
Street side)
Arnett Avenue [Ord.
No. 29-2017]
South 3 Arnett Avenue
Buttonwood Street North Adjacent to No. 56 Buttonwood
Street
Buttonwood Street
[Ord. No. 2009-16]
South Adjacent to 25 Buttonwood Street
Buttonwood Street
[Ord. No. 2009-11]
North Adjacent to 171 North Union Street
Buttonwood Street
[Ord. No. 2006-02]
North Adjacent to 44 Buttonwood Street,
Block 1010 Lot 17
Church Street [Ord.
No. 07-2015]
In front of 11 Church Street
Church Street [Ord.
No. 15-2012]
In front of 66 Church Street
§ 7-4.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.7
AO:182
Name of Street Sides Location
Church Street [Ord.
No. 2003-06]
South Adjacent to 43 Church Street
Clinton Street West In front of 111 Clinton Street
Clinton Street South In front of 84 Clinton Street
Clinton Street [Ord.
No. 2009-03]
East Adjacent to 20 Clinton Street
Clinton Street [Ord.
No. 2005-18]
East In front of 12 Clinton Street
Clinton Street [Ord.
No. 03-2017]
South
side
10 Clinton Street
Clinton Street
[Added 5-21-2020
by Ord. No.
02-2020]
West 39 Clinton Street
Coryell Street South 1 space between George Street and
North Main Street
Coryell Street First parking spot west of North
Main Street
Coryell Street Adjacent to No. 81 Coryell Street
Coryell Street First spot west of North Union
Street
Delevan Street [Ord.
No. 24-2011]
In front of 20 Delevan Street
Douglas Street [Ord.
No. 2010-26]
In front of 80 Douglas Street include
a curb cut and handicapped parking
space
Ferry Street [Ord.
No. 2007-09]
South Adjacent to 9 Ferry Street
Ferry Street South Adjacent to 7 Ferry Street
First Fidelity Bank
Parking Lot
Northeast
corner
Parallel to South Union Street
George Street [Ord.
No. 21-2011]
In front of 171 George Street
George Street [Ord.
No. 03-2016]
196 George Street
George Street [Ord.
No. 2004-08]
West First spot south of Buttonwood
Street
Jefferson Street [Ord.
No. 2009-29]
In front of 3 Jefferson Street
§ 7-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.7
AO:183
Name of Street Sides Location
Jefferson Street
[Added 9-19-2019
by Ord. No.
21-2019]
The George Street side of 18
Jefferson Street
Jefferson Street [Ord.
No. 15-2011]
In front of 31 Jefferson Street to
include a curb cut and handicapped
parking space
Jefferson Street [Ord.
No. 2003-16]
South First parking space off North Main
Street
Lilly Mansion Parking
Lot
Northeast
corner
South Main and Lilly Streets
Mount Hope Street
[Ord. No. 2007-22]
North Adjacent to Cavallo Park
playground, last parking spot on the
street closest to Canal Street
Mount Hope Street
[Ord. No. 2007-22]
South Adjacent to Cavallo Park
playground, the first parking spot
closest to South Union Street
Mount Hope Street
[Ord. No. 2007-22]
South Adjacent to Cavallo Park
playground, the last parking spot
closest to Canal Street
Mount Hope Street North First parking space west of Wilson
Street
Mount Hope Street
[Ord. No. 12-2018]
West
side of
South
Union
First parking space will be
designated as a barrier free
handicapped parking space and will
meet all the required specifications,
including size and signage
North Franklin Street East Adjacent to 100 North Franklin
Street
North Franklin Street
[Added 5-16-2019
by Ord. No.
08-2019]
In front of 127 North Franklin
Street
North Franklin Street
[Added 11-30-2020
by Ord. No.
15-2020]
South In front of 29 North Franklin Street
North Main Street
[Ord. No. 257;
deleted by Ord. No.
2005-12]
§ 7-4.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.7
AO:184
Name of Street Sides Location
North Main Street West First legal parking space on the
west side of North Union Street just
south of the Presbyterian Church in
the vicinity of the northerly
boundary line of No. 23 North Union
Street
North Main Street North Adjacent to City Hall first parking
spot south of driveway
North Main Street
[Ord. No. 2008-01]
West Adjacent to 211 North Main Street
North Union Street East Adjacent to 256 North Union Street
North Union Street
[Ord. No. 2006-05]
East Adjacent to 260 North Union Street,
Block 1004 Lot 16
North Union Street
[Ord. No. 2006-15]
West Adjacent to 53 North Union Street,
Block 1030 Lot 6
North Union Street
[Ord. No. 04-2016]
274 North Union Street
North Union [Ord.
No. 07-2017]
East 97 North Union Street
North Union Street
[Added 5-21-2020
by Ord. No.
02-2020]
West 135 North Union Street
Perry Street [Ord.
No. 17-2013]
In front of 50 Perry Street
Quarry Street [Ord.
No. 2004-04]
South Adjacent to Block 1071 Lot 4
South Franklin Street
[Ord. No. 18-2015]
In front of 51 South Franklin Street
South Union Street West First legal parking space on west
side of Union Street after south of
Bridge Street
South Union Street
[Ord. No. 98-12]
South Adjacent to No. 53 South Union
Street
Swan Street South Adjacent to No. 21 Swan Street
Swan Street South The first spot west of South Union
Street
Swan Street North Adjacent to 48 Swan Street
Swan Street [Ord.
No. 2005-09]
North Adjacent to 170 Swan Street, Block
1070 Lot 16
§ 7-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.7
AO:185
§ 7-4.8. No Parking Snow Emergency. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord.
#97-03, § 1; 1990 Code § 7-4.8]
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets where parking is
prohibited during a snow emergency.
Name of Street Side Location
Franklin Street Both From Swan Street south to City line
Hancock Street Both From Route 179 east to City line
North Franklin Street Both From Delevan Street to Ely Field
North Union Street Both From its intersection to the south side
of Cherry Street to its intersection
with the north side of Bridge Street
South Union Street Both From its intersection with the south
side of Bridge Street to its intersection
with the north side of Mount Hope
Street
Studdiford Street Both From Swan Street south to the City
line
Name of Street Sides Location
Swan Street [Ord.
No. 20-2011]
In front of 23 Swan Street to include
a curb cut and handicapped parking
space
Swan Street [Ord.
No. 19-2016]
South In front of 31 Swan Street
Swan Street [Ord.
No. 05-2018]
South 46 Swan Street
York Street [Added
7-18-2019 by Ord.
No. 16-2019;
amended 9-19-2019
by Ord. No.
20-2019]
In front of 50 York Street, the first
space on the west side of North
Main Street
York Street [Ord. No.
05-2014]
In front of 84 York Street
York Street East Adjacent to No. 97 York Street
York Street South Adjacent to 27 York Street
York Street [Ord. No.
2008-23]
South Adjacent to 69 York Street
York Street [Ord. No.
2003-06; Ord. No.
2009-19]
South In front of 85 York Street to include
a curb cut and handicapped parking
space
§ 7-4.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-4.8
AO:186
Name of Street Side Location
Swan Street Both From Route 165 east to Route 518
§ 7-5. LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES.
§ 7-5.1. Trucks Over Four Tons Registered Gross Weight Excluded
from Certain Streets. [Ord. 8/6/74; Ord. #96-19, § 1; 1990 Code
§ 7-5.1]
Trucks over four tons registered gross weight are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described below except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Church Street From North Franklin Street to North Main
Street (Route #29)
Coryell Street From North Main Street (Route #29) to
North Franklin Street
Delevan Street From North Franklin Street to North Main
Street (Route # 29)
Feeder Street From Route 29 to Wilson Street
Mt. Hope Street From South Main Street to South Union
Street
North Franklin Street From Route #179 north to Delevan Street
South Union Street From Bridge Street to Mt. Hope Street
Swan Street From South Main Street to South Union
Street
Washington Street From Route #179 to York Street
Wilson Street From Swan Street to Feeder Street
York Street From Route #179 to North Main Street
(Route #29)
§ 7-6. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. #88-25, § 6; Ord. #92-05, § 2; 1990
Code § 7-6]
The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Church Street West Between Franklin Street and North
Union Street
Clinton Street South Between Buttonwood Street and York
Street
§ 7-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-6
AO:187
Name of Street Direction Limits
Curley Lane North From Brunswick Avenue (Rt. 518) to
Quarry Street
Delevan Street West From North Union Street to Clinton
Street
Ferry Street East Between South Union Street and South
Main Street
George Street North Between Church Street and York Street
George Street South Between Elm Street and York Street
Gordens Alley North Between Bridge Street and Church
Street
Grant Street West From Rt. 179 to North Franklin Street
Kline's Court South Between Bridge Street and Ferry Street
Lilly Street East Between South Main Street and State
Highway 165
McCready Alley North From Bridge Street to Church Street
Swan Street West Between State Highway 165 and South
Union Street
Washington Street North From Rt. 179 to York Street
York Street East From Clinton Street to North Union
Street
§ 7-7. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-7.1. Through Streets. [Ord. #88-25, § 7; codified in 1990 Code
§ 7-7.1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described below are hereby designated as Through Streets. STOP
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street/Limits
Alexander Avenue
From North Main Street to Delaware Road
Clinton Street
From the north side of Buttonwood Street to the north side of York
Street
Hancock Street
§ 7-6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-7.1
AO:188
Name of Street/Limits
From Route 179 to the City of Lambertville-Township of West Amwell
corporate line
North Franklin Street
From Route 179 to York Street
North Union Street
From Bridge Street to its northerly terminus
Quarry Street/Rocktown Road
From Brunswick Avenue to the City of Lambertville-Township of West
Amwell corporate line
Rosemont Avenue
From Perry Road to Jefferson Road
South Union Street
From Bridge Street to Mt. Hope Street
Studdiford Street
From Swan Street to the City of Lambertville-Township of West Amwell
corporate line
Swan Street
From the east side of Route 165 to Brunswick Avenue
York Street
From the east side of North Main Street to the west side of Route 179
§ 7-7.2. Stop Intersection. [Ord. #88-25, § 7; Ord. #90-02, § 2; Ord.
#96-11, § 1; 1990 Code § 7-7.2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
below are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. STOP signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Boozer Street and Douglas Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Douglas Street
Buttonwood Street and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
Church Street and Gorden Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Gorden Street
Church Street and McCready Alley
A STOP sign shall be installed on McCready Alley
Coryell Street and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
§ 7-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.2
AO:189
Delaware Avenue and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
Delevan Street and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
Douglas Street and Stryker Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Stryker Street
Ferry Street and Kline Court
A STOP sign shall be installed on Kline Court
Franklin Street and Highland Avenue
A STOP sign shall be installed on Highland Avenue
Grant Avenue and Belvidere Avenue
A STOP sign shall be installed on Belvidere Avenue
Highland Avenue and Boozer Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Boozer Street
Highland Avenue and Douglas Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Douglas Street
Highland Avenue and Stryker Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Stryker Street
Jefferson Street and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
Lambert Lane and Coryell Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Coryell Street
Lincoln Avenue and Stryker Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Stryker Street
Mount Hope Street and South Union Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on South Union Street
Mount Hope Street and Wilson Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Wilson Street
North Franklin Street and Delevan Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Delevan Street
Perry Road and Rosemont Avenue
A STOP sign shall be installed on Rosemont Avenue
Perry Street and George Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on George Street
§ 7-7.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-7.2
AO:190
Swan Street and Studdiford Street
[Ord. No. 2006-14]
A STOP sign shall be installed on Swan Street
Swan Street and Wilson Street
A STOP sign shall be installed on Wilson Street
York Street and George Street
STOP signs shall be installed on George Street
§ 7-7.3. Yield Intersections. [1990 Code § 7-7.3]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
below are hereby designated as Yield intersections. YIELD signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-8. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. #88-25, § 8; Ord. #92-04, § 2; 1990
Code § 7-8; Ord. No. 26-2017]
The following described locations are hereby designated as Loading Zones
on the days and hours listed below. Parking is limited to 15 minutes for
loading or unloading a vehicle.
a. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays (New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Day After
Thanksgiving, and Christmas), from 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Name of Street Side Location
Clinton Street [Ord.
No. 2004-09]
East From the intersection with Delevan
Street running 76 feet southerly
George Street [Ord.
No. 26-2017]
West From the intersection at Elm Street
running 40 feet southerly
Lilly Street [Ord. No.
2004-14]
South First parking space off South Main
Street
North Union Street East Beginning 50 feet from the
intersection of Elm Street and
running 80 feet northerly
York Street [Ord. No.
2004-09]
South From North Main Street westerly to
the first driveway
York Street [Ord. No.
2004-09]
South From North Main Street easterly 80
feet
b. Monday through Saturday and Sunday:
§ 7-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8
AO:191
§ 7-9. TAXI STANDS. [1990 Code § 7-9]
The locations described below are hereby designated as Taxi Stands.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-10. BUS STOPS. [1990 Code § 7-10]
The locations described below are hereby designated as Bus Stops.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-11. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-11.1. Left Turn Prohibition. [1990 Code § 7-11.1]
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described below:
The lane in the City parking lot leased from the First Fidelity Bank
Northwest to left on Bridge Street.
§ 7-11.2. U-Turn Prohibition. [1990 Code § 7-11.2]
No person shall make a U-Turn at any of the locations described below.
(RESERVED)
Name of Street Side Location
North Union Street
[Ord. No. 2004-09;
Ord. No. 2005-20]
East Adjacent to Jack's Pizza, as it exists
at the present time, Monday
through Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. and Sunday from 1:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
c. Tuesday and Friday:
Name of Street Side Location
Swan Street [Ord.
No. 14-2012]
North The parking space between the
Swan's Parking Lot and 50 Swan
Street, Tuesday and Friday from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
d. Thursday:
Name of Street Side Location
North Union Street East From Coryell Street southerly 80
feet (Thursday from 12:00 noon to
5:00 p.m. only)
§ 7-8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-11.3
AO:192
§ 7-11.3. No Turns. [1990 Code § 7-11.3]
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described below.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-11.4. Right Turn on Red Traffic Signal Prohibited. [1990 Code
§ 7-11.4]
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red
signal (STOP) indication of any of the locations whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such turn on the red signal.
(RESERVED)
§ 7-12. SPEED LIMITS. [New; Ord. #97-03, § 1; Ord. #97-07, § 1;
1990 Code § 7-12]
The streets or parts of streets described shall have the speed limits
designated.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Side
Speed
Limit Location
George Street Northbound 10 mph Between Church Street and
York Street
Southbound 10 mph Between York Street and
Jefferson Street
Southbound 15 mph Between Jefferson Street
and Elm Street
Both 10 mph From Church Street to
Delevan Street
Gordon's Alley Northbound 10 mph From Bridge Street to
Church Street
§ 7-13. PENALTY. [Ord. #88-25, § 4; Ord. #94-02, § 1; Ord. #99-14,
§ 1; 1990 Code § 7-13; Ord. No. 26-2018]
a. A violation of the following subsections shall result in a fine as follows:
[Amended 7-23-2020 by Ord. No. 09-2020]
1. Subsection 7-4.2, Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency,
and Subsection 7-4.8, No Parking Snow Emergency, may be
satisfied by payment to the Municipal Court of a fine of $36 plus
any fees required by the State of New Jersey;
§ 7-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:193
§ 7-14. REPEALER. [Ord. #88-25, § 4; 1990 Code § 7-14; New]
All former traffic ordinances of the City of Lambertville which are
inconsistent with this Traffic Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency. This repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-15. REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON SEMI-PUBLIC ROADS.
§ 7-15.1. Semi-Public Roads at the Church of St. John the
Evangelist Cemetery. [Ord. No. 2009-08]
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL PARKING AREAS AND METERED PARKING
2. Subsection 7-4.4, Parking Prohibited Certain Hours, may be
satisfied by payment to the Municipal Court of a fine of $26.
b. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to the penalties contained in
Chapter 1, § 1-5, General Penalty.
a. Church of St. John the Evangelist, owners of the property, has filed a
written consent with the City of Lambertville that the provisions of
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semi-public road at Church of St. John the Evangelist
Cemetery that the City enforce and patrol the private road that
connects South Franklin Street with Boozer Street.
b. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniformed Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
c. Unless other penalty is expressly provided by the New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,250
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or both.
d. If any of this subsection is for any reason held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this
subsection.
e. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this subsection
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
f. This subsection shall take effect upon the final passage and publication
according to law and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-13 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 7-15.1
AO:194
ARTICLE I
Parking Lots
§ 8-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 8-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #84-3, § 1; 1990 Code § 8-1.1]
This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the orderly and safe
parking of motor vehicles and the minimizing of congestion of City owned
property.
§ 8-1.2. Definition. [Ord. #84-3, § 2; 1990 Code § 8-1.2]
When any words and phrases are used in this article, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1 shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
§ 8-1.3. Authority. [Ord. #7/19/76 § 1; 1990 Code § 8-1.3]
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 (1)g,
and other pertinent provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq.
Parking in a space which has been designated as "Permitted Parking Only"
shall be limited to the lessee of the space, who must display a hanging
permit on the vehicle's rear view mirror or dashboard. All unauthorized
vehicles parked in any of the designated reserved parking spaces in the lots
owned, maintained and operated by the City of Lambertville shall be issued
a notice of violation with a fine not to exceed $100. In addition, said vehicles
are subject to towing, the cost of which is to be borne by the registered
owner.
§ 8-2. YORK STREET LOT.
§ 8-2.1. Location. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-2.1]
The municipal parking lot located to the rear of City Hall, 18 York Street, on
the easterly side of North Union Street, between York Street and Delevan
Street.
§ 8-2.2. Lot Restricted to Municipal Employees, Use. [Ord. #84-3,
§ 3; 1990 Code § 8-2.2]
This lot is hereby designated as a municipal parking lot for the use of the
employees of the City.
§ 8-2.3. Parking by Permit. [Ord. #2001-21, § 1; 1990 Code § 8-2.3;
Ord. #2004-20]
In addition to the 11 municipal employee parking spaces, there shall be
eight parking spots, which shall be available to residents by permit only. The
permits shall be issued by the City Clerk on a first come first serve basis.
§ 8-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2.3
AO:195
Each spot shall be numbered to correspond with the permit number and
available to the permit holder at all times.
§ 8-2.4. Fees. [Ord. #2001-21, § 1; Ord. #2007-25, Ord. #2010-03;
1990 Code § 8-2.4; Ord. No. 08-2016]
The fee for a permit shall be $55 per month with a late fee of $10 if not
paid by the 5th of the month. If the fee is not paid by 10th of the month, the
permit shall be null and void and available for issuance to another person.
A list will be maintained by the City Clerk to be utilized in the event of a
vacancy.
§ 8-2.5. (Reserved)9 [Ord. #2001-21, § 1; 1990 Code § 8-2.5; Ord.
#2010-03]
§ 8-2.6. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. #11-2011]
The renovations of City Hall and the addition of the elevator made the
building ADA accessible. The addition of one handicapped parking space
has been added to the York Street parking lot by the elevator shaft entrance.
This space shall be limited for use by those visiting 18 York Street, seven
days per week, Sunday through Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. The
time limit per vehicle shall not exceed two hours.
§ 8-3. PERRY STREET.
§ 8-3.1. Location. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-3.1]
The west end of Perry Street between Clinton Street and the Delaware and
Raritan Canal.
§ 8-3.2. Parking. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-3.2]
There shall be diagonal parking only on the north side of the street.
§ 8-4. BUTTONWOOD STREET.
§ 8-4.1. Location. [Ord. #84.3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-4.1]
The parking area located at the west end of Buttonwood Street between
Clinton Street and the Delware-Raritan Canal.
§ 8-4.2. Parking. [Ord. #84.3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-4.2]
There shall be diagonal parking only on the north side of the lot.
9. Editor's Note: Use of the parking lot by nonprofit organizations was repealed by Ord.
#2010-03.
§ 8-2.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-5
AO:196
§ 8-5. (RESERVED)10 [Ord. #98-17; 1990 Code § 8-5; Ord. #2007-25;
Ord. #2010-03]
§ 8-6. through § 8-7. (RESERVED)
§ 8-8. DISABLED VEHICLES.
§ 8-8.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #84-3, § 5; 1990 Code § 8-8.1]
No person shall park or place any disabled vehicle or permit any such
disabled vehicle to remain in any such parking area without the express
permission of the Police or the attendant in charge of such parking area.
§ 8-9. OTHER RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 8-9.1. Duty to Observe. [Ord. #84-3, § 4; 1990 Code § 8-9]
The provisions of this article shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions of this chapter and the State
Vehicle Code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 8-10. PENALTY. [Ord. 7/19/76, § 9; Ord. #84-3, § 6; Ord. #99-14,
§ 2; 1990 Code § 8-10]
§ 8-11. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. #84.3, § 7; Ord. #2010-03; 1990 Code
§ 8-11]
Section 8-3 through Section 8-10 shall not apply to any municipal employees
of the City of Lambertville while on official City business nor to any vehicles
engaged in police work.
Municipal employees of the City of Lambertville, while on official City
business, shall be exempt from paying metered parking fees. The City Clerk
shall issue parking permits to all employees authorized and approved by
a. Any person violating one or more of the prohibitions set forth in this
article shall be liable to the penalties contained in Chapter 1, Section
1-5, General Penalty. Any person who while on a municipal parking lot
during legal parking hours, violates any pertinent provision of N.J.S.A.
39:1 et seq. shall be liable to the penalty provided for such violation.
b. The Police Department may have any vehicle parked in violation of this
article towed away at the expense of the owner. In the event that a
vehicle is towed away for illegal parking, it shall be stored in a safe
place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of the vehicle upon
payment of towing and storage costs. The location of vehicles which
have been towed away may be ascertained by requesting such
information from the Police Department.
10.Editor's Note: The Franklin Street parking area was repealed by Ord. #2010-03.
§ 8-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11
AO:197
resolution of the Mayor and Council. The parking permits must be displayed
in the vehicles. A list of all parking permits issued to employees shall be
provided to the Police Department.
§ 8-12. through § 8-14. (RESERVED)
§ 8-11 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-12
AO:198
ARTICLE II
Parking Meters
§ 8-15. PARKING METER ZONES.
§ 8-15.1. Establishment of Zones. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord. #96-27,
§ 1; Ord. #2002-10, § 1; 1990 Code § 8-15.1]
Parking meter zones are hereby established in the City. The zones shall be
described in Sections 7-4.5, 8-22, 8-23, 8-24 and 8-25.
§ 8-16. INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.
§ 8-16.1. City to Install. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord. #96-27, § 2; Ord.
#2001-34, § 3; Ord. #08-2011; 1990 Code § 8-16.1; amended
5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 09-2019]
The City shall install parking meters in the parking meter zones as provided
in this article immediately adjacent to each designated parking space. The
meters are digital and will accept any combination of nickels, dimes and
quarters. A vehicle may lawfully park in such parking meter zones for a
period of 10 minutes for a fee of $0.20, 30 minutes for a fee of $0.62, or one
hour for a fee of $1.25.
§ 8-16.2. Design. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code § 8-16.2]
Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set that
upon the expiration of the time period regulated, by the deposit of one or
more coins, as provided herein, it will indicate by appropriate signal that the
lawful parking period has expired, and during the period of time and prior
to the expiration thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of
such period.
§ 8-16.3. Prohibited Locations. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 8-16.3]
No parking meters shall be installed in any of the areas where parking is
prohibited pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 8-16.4. Legend. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code § 8-16.4]
Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and
hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the value of
the coins to be deposited, and the limited period of time for which parking is
lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which such meter is located.
§ 8-17. PARKING METER SPACES.
§ 8-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-17.1
AO:199
§ 8-17.1. Designated. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code § 8-17.1]
The City shall designate the parking spaces adjacent to each parking meter
for which the meter is to be used by appropriate markings upon the
pavement. Parking meter spaces so designated shall be of appropriate
length and width so as to be accessible from the traffic lanes of such street.
§ 8-17.2. Parking Within Spaces. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 8-17.2]
No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter space
during the restricted or regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone
in which the meter is located so that any part of the vehicle occupies more
than one space or protrudes beyond the markings designating the space,
except that a truck which is of size too large to be parked within a single
designated parking meter space shall be permitted two adjoining parking
meter spaces when coins shall have been deposited in the parking meter for
each space so occupied as is required in this section for the parking of other
vehicles in such space.
§ 8-18. DEPOSIT OF COINS AND TIME LIMITS.
§ 8-18.1. Deposit of Coins Required. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord. #91-07,
§ 2; Ord. #96-27, § 3; Ord. 2001-34, § 4; 1990 Code § 8-18.1]
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space in a parking zone
alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed during
the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in
which the meter is located unless a coin or coins of United States currency
of the appropriate denomination shall have been deposited therein, or shall
have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time
and the meter has been placed in operation.
§ 8-18.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code § 8-18.2]
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to municipally registered
vehicles.
b. For a fee of $10 per day payable to the City of Lambertville, contractors
regularly engaged in the maintenance field or vehicles involved for
moving household goods may secure a sign to be secured to the meter
allowing them to park in a metered space for that day. [Amended
5-16-2019 by Ord. No. 09-2019]
a. No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any
such meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to
the parking meter zone in which the meter is located while the parking
meter for the space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in
the space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of
parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately
thereafter a coin or coins in the meter.
§ 8-17.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-18.2
AO:200
§ 8-18.3. Other Restrictive Provisions. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 8-18.3]
The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve any person from the duty
to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this subsection and the
State Vehicle Code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 8-19. PROHIBITED ACTS.
§ 8-19.1. Use of Slugs Prohibited. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 8-19.1]
No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any
slug, button or any other device or substance as substitutes for coins of the
United States currency.
§ 8-19.2. Tampering With Meter. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; 1990 Code
§ 8-19.2]
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
§ 8-20. EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN HOLIDAYS. [Ord. #88-25, § 5;
Ord. #2010-09; 1990 Code § 8-20]
The parking regulations set forth in this article shall not be in effect and will
not be enforced on New Year's Day, Easter, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving, Christmas and from December 17 through December 24.
§ 8-21. PENALTY. [Ord. #88-25, § 5; Ord. #94-02, § 2; Ord. #99-14,
§ 3; 1990 Code § 8-21; New]
A violation of Sections 8-15 through 8-20, Parking Meters, may be satisfied
by payment to the Municipal Court of a fine of $25 plus any fees required
by the State of New Jersey.
§ 8-22. SOUTH MAIN STREET (ROUTE 29) LOT.
§ 8-22.1. Location. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; 1990 Code § 8-22.1]
The municipal parking lot located to the rear of the Lilly Mansion on the
easterly side of South Main Street between Ferry Street and Bridge Street.
b. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a
consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for
which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
the meter is located, irrespective of the number of amounts of the coins
deposited in such meter.
§ 8-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-22.2
AO:201
§ 8-22.2. Hours of Parking, Time Limit. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; Ord.
#91-13, § 3; Ord. #2001-34, § 6; 1990 Code § 8-22.2; Ord. #2008-05]
Name of Zone Time Limit Side Location
South Main Street
Lot
Up to 8
hours
East To the rear of the Lilly
Mansion.
Time Period: Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 8-23. NORTH UNION STREET LOT.
§ 8-23.1. Location. [Ord. #84-3, § 3]
The municipal parking lot located on the easterly side of North Union Street
between Bridge Street and Church Street.
§ 8-23.2. Hours of Parking, Time Limit. [Ord. #84-3, § 3; Ord.
#86-4, § 1; Ord. #88-25; Ord. #91-13, § 3; Ord. #2001-34, § 6; 1990
Code § 8-23.2; Ord. #2008-05; Ord. #08-2011]
Motor vehicles may park in the lot between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
Name of Zone Time Limit Side Location
North Union Street
Lot
Up to 12
hours
East Midway between Bridge
Street and Church Street
There shall be unlimited parking at all other times. There will be no parking
in the lot when snow covered.
§ 8-23.3. (Reserved)11 [Ord. #87-1, § 1; 1990 Code § 8-23.3; Ord.
#08-2011]
§ 8-24. BRIDGE STREET PARKING LOT. [Ord. #88-25; Ord. #90-10,
§ 2; Ord. #91-13, § 3; Ord. #2001-34, § 6; 1990 Code § 8-24; Ord.
#2008-05]
Parking meters zones are hereby established within the district or upon
those streets or parts of the streets described herein in which the parking
of vehicles in such zones shall be regulated by parking meters on the days
and between the hours specified as follows:
Time Period: Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
11.Editor's Note: Definition of Authorized Vehicles was repealed by Ord. #08-2011)
§ 8-22.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-24
AO:202
Name of Zone Time Limit Side Location
Bridge Street
Lot*
Up to 8
hours
South The southwest corner of the
intersection of Bridge and Union
Streets
* Note: Parking along the Kline's Court side shall be for Bank employees
only during banking hours
§ 8-25. SOUTH UNION STREET LOT.
§ 8-25.1. Location. [Ord. #2002-10. § 2; 1990 Code § 8-25.1]
The municipal parking lot located on the westerly side of North Union
Street, identified as Block 1044 Lot 14.
§ 8-25.2. Meters Erected, Hours of Parking, Meter Free. [Ord.
#2002-10, § 2; 1990 Code § 8-25.2; Ord. #2008-05]
Parking meters shall be erected in a portion of the lot and vehicles parked
in those spots between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, and from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sunday shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 8-17 and 8-18 regarding parking meter spaces and the
deposit of coins.
§ 8-25.3. Permit Parking. [Ord. #2002-10, § 2; Ord. #2010-03; 1990
Code § 8-25.3; Ord. No. 08-2016]
In addition to the metered parking spaces, there shall be parking spaces
created which shall be available at all times by permit. The permits shall
be issued by the City Clerk on a first come/first serve basis. Each spot shall
be numbered to correspond with the permit number and available to the
permit holder at all times. The fee for the permit shall be $55 per month
with a late fee of $10 per month if not paid by the fifth of the month. If
not paid by the 10th of the month, the permit shall be null and void and
available for issuance to another person. A list shall be maintained by the
City Clerk to be utilized in the event of a vacancy.
§ 8-25.4. Saturday and Sunday Parking Exceptions. [Ord. #2002-10,
§ 2; 1990 Code § 8-25.4]
Until meter and permit parking spaces are delineated, parking in this lot on
Saturday and Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall be
by payment of a $5 fee to the parking enforcement officer on duty.
§ 8-26. through § 8-27. (RESERVED)
§ 8-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-26
AO:203

ARTICLE III
Residential Parking Permits
§ 8-28. PERMITS INSTITUTED; ENTITLEMENT.
§ 8-28.1. Instituted. [Ord. #87-10, § 1; Ord. #90-01, § 1; 1990 Code
§ 8-28.1]
There is hereby instituted a resident parking permit program, to be
instituted as follows:
§ 8-28.2. Entitlement. [Ord. #87-10, § 2; Ord. #88-30, § 1; Ord.
#90-01, § 2; 1990 Code § 8-28.2]
The resident parking permit ("permit") shall entitle the owner or lessee of
any motor vehicle or vehicles to park on the street on which their residence
is located without the necessity of depositing the otherwise required meter
fee and/or without regard to time limits imposed by ordinance and signs,
except the time requirements pursuant to the sweeper ordinance.
If there is no parking permitted on the street on which the applicant's
residence is located, an area will be assigned by the City Clerk's Office.
§ 8-29. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 87-10 § 2; Ord. No.
88-30 § 2, 3; Ord. No. 90-01 § 5; Ord. No. 2001-11; Ord. #87-10, § 2;
Ord. #88-30, §§ 2, 3; Ord. #90-01, § 5; Ord. #2001-11; 1990 Code
§ 8-29; Ord. #2007-25; Ord. #2010-03; Ord. #19-2011; Ord.
#06-2012; Ord. #23-2013; Ord. #02-2014; Ord. #14-2014; Ord.
#15-2015; Ord. No. 25-2018]
a. Each licensed driver who resides in the City shall be entitled to a
resident parking permit for one registered vehicle. No household shall
receive more permits than licensed drivers residing therein.
b. The City Clerk is hereby empowered to issue said permits upon the
compliance with this article's regulations.
I. APPLICATION FORM: The application for a permit shall have appended
thereto an attestation by the applicant affirming that:
a. The applicant is a resident of the City of Lambertville;
b. There is no available driveway or garage at the applicant's
residence; and
c. There is no other free and legal off-street parking available for the
vehicles for which the permit is sought within one block of the
applicant's residence.
II. TERM FOR PERMIT: Each residential parking permit shall be valid
from January 1 to December 31 and shall be renewable upon expiration
provided the conditions for issuance continue to exist.
§ 8-28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-29
AO:205
III. DISPLAYING OF PERMIT: Each permit shall be issued with a
corresponding sticker to be affixed on the rear windshield, on the
passenger side bottom corner (right side).
IV. REVOKING OF PERMITS: Permits shall automatically be revoked if the
vehicle ceases to qualify or if the permit is affixed to a vehicle other
than the one so designated on the application. Vehicles with revoked
stickers will be subject to the same penalty as a vehicle parked in a
similar location without a permit.
V. EXEMPT FROM METER FEES: All vehicles properly displaying a valid
residential parking permit shall be exempt from paying any meter fee
and from the time limits imposed by signage on the street on which
their residence is located. The permit shall not be valid in any City
owned lot.
VI. APPLICATION TYPES: The resident parking permit ("permit") shall be
issued under the following regulations and rules:
1. PERMANENT RESIDENT: A completed application with the
following information is required for a permanent Lambertville
resident. If you are a licensed driver relocating to New Jersey from
another state, you need to change titles and registration for all
vehicles currently titled and registered in another state. You must
register your vehicles within 60 days or before your out-of-state
registration expires (whichever is first).
(a) A valid, current State of New Jersey driver's license.
(b) A valid State of New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the
vehicle for which the permit is sought, which must include the
applicant's Lambertville address.
(c) The resident parking permit ("permit") shall be issued under
the following regulations and rules:
(d) A valid vehicle insurance card.
(e) Lease or deed for the residence, which proves residency and
reflects off-street parking is not available.
(f) RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT TYPES AND FEES: There are
two types of resident parking permits and they include: a
permanent fixable Single Car Permit, and a Transferable Multi-
Car Permit.
(i) Permanent Single Car Permit: shall be issued to the
resident upon payment of a fee of $45. Permanent Single
Car Permits are not transferable and shall automatically
be revoked in the event a holder ceases to be a resident of
the City of Lambertville.
§ 8-29 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-29
AO:206
(ii) Transferable Multi-Car Permits: may be transferred
between a personal vehicle and a company vehicle and
may be issued upon documentation presented to the City
Clerk for a fee of $60.
(g) ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY PERMITS FOR RESIDENT
PARKING: Upon the payment of the required annual fee,
Temporary Permits may be issued for a period of 60 days to
allow newly relocated resident(s) to obtain the necessary New
Jersey Vehicle License and Registration. The City Clerk is
authorized to extend the temporary permit an additional 30
days for a total period of time not to exceed A TOTAL OF 90
days if the registration is for a leased vehicle. The applicant
must supply proof that the proper paperwork was filed with the
Motor Vehicle Commission of the State of New Jersey in order
for the City Clerk to consider the request for extension.
2. PART-TIME RESIDENT: A completed application with the following
information is required for a part-time Lambertville resident who is
not eligible to hold a New Jersey driver's license:
(a) A valid, current driver's license for the permanent residence.
(b) A valid motor vehicle registration for the vehicle for which the
permit is sought for the permanent residence.
(c) A valid vehicle insurance card in the name of the homeowner
or lease with the address of the permanent residence.
(d) Lease or deed for the Lambertville residence, which proves
ownership or a lease-holding interest in the property and
reflects off-street parking is not available.
(e) A certification of the following:
(i) That the applicant has established permanent residency in
another state,
(ii) That the vehicle is not principally garaged in Lambertville
for more than six months a year.
3. TEMPORARY NON RESIDENT PARKING PERMITS: Temporary
Permits may be issued for a period not to exceed two weeks or 14
days for a fee of $25. Temporary permits are available for the
following:
(a) Visitors of property owners who reside on a metered street.
(b) House sitters or pet sitters of property owners who reside on a
metered street.
§ 8-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-29
AO:207
§ 8-29.1. Specific Streets Enumerated for Parking Sticker Use. [Ord.
No. 23-2013; Ord. No. 20-2014]
The following information is required for the issuance of a
temporary permit:
(a) Property owners need to provide a notarized letter
covering the period of time the visitor or house guest stay,
(b) A copy of the property owner's driver's license tying them
to the property,
(c) Any payment in the amount of $25 for the temporary
permit.
4. DUPLICATE PERMIT: In the event that a permit is lost, stolen or
damaged, the fee for a duplicate permit or a permit for a new
vehicle shall be $25.
5. PRO-RATING: There shall be no monthly prorating for the permit
regardless of the permanent or temporary status.
6. BED AND BREAKFAST BUSINESSES (B&B's): B&B's with no more
than 10 rooms and located within the metered area of the City of
Lambertville, shall be eligible to purchase up to 10 parking stickers
per year for a fee of $100 per sticker. The maximum number of
parking stickers shall be limited to the number of rooms.
(a) The Bed and Breakfast Business must:
(i) File with the application a copy of the resolution of
approval issued by the Planning or Zoning Board of the
City of Lambertville.
(ii) Must be registered with the State of New Jersey, Division
of Taxation for Hotel and Motel Taxes.
(b) The fees must be paid in full annually and cannot be pro-rated.
(c) Hang-tags can only be issued and used by visitors of the Bed
and Breakfast business and are strictly prohibited for owners
or employees.
(d) The parking area permitted will be designated by an official of
the City of Lambertville in a low-use zone.
(e) Lost or damaged stickers can be replaced for a fee of $25.
a. Residents of Ferry Street, between Union and Main Streets, are eligible
for parking stickers if they meet all of the requirements in this Article
III and reside on Ferry Street between Union and Main Streets. They
may also park in the Library Parking Lot at 6 Lilly Street.
b. Residents of North Union Street, between Bridge and Coryell Streets,
are eligible for parking stickers, if they meet all of the requirement in
§ 8-29 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-29.1
AO:208
this Article III, and reside on North Union Street between Bridge and
Coryell Streets, to park on their respective street and in the North
Union Street Parking Lot.
c. Residents of South Main Street, between Bridge and Ferry Streets, are
eligible for parking stickers, if they meet all of the requirements in this
Article III, and reside on South Main Street between Bridge and Ferry
Streets, to park on their respective street and in the Library Parking
Lot.
§ 8-29.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-29.1
AO:209
Chapter 9
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 8-29.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 8-29.1
AO:210
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS. [1990 Code § 9-3]
ANIMAL — Shall for the purpose of this chapter mean dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey or authorized by the
Mayor and Council to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
AT LARGE — Shall mean off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of the owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash,
cord or chain or otherwise as in the case of obedience-trained dogs.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen,
not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
HARBOR — Shall mean to provide temporary quarters, shelter or refuge
and to give nourishment on a temporary basis for a period which exceeds
10 days.
LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog or cat which has attained the age
of seven months or possesses a permanent set of teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the City Clerk or any other official
designated by the Mayor and Council to administer the issuance and/or
revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat shall include
every person having a right of property or custody in such dog or cat and
every person who has such cat in his or her keeping or who harbors or
maintains a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or
about any premises owned or occupied by that person.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PREMISES OF THE OWNER — Shall mean and include the building and the
plot or tract of land on which the building stands in which the owner of the
dog or cat or dogs or cats has a place of abode or place of business in the
City.
§ 9-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1
AO:211

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Dogs and Cats
§ 9-2. LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 9-2.1. License Required. [1990 Code § 9-4.1]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat within the City without
first obtaining a license to be issued by the City Clerk upon application
of the owner and payment of the prescribed fee. Such license shall be
obtained within 10 days of a dog or cat attaining the age of seven months or
permanent teeth or within 10 days of the acquisition of a dog or cat that is
determined to be of licensing age. No person shall keep or harbor any dog
or cat in the City except in compliance with the provisions of this article and
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq.
§ 9-2.2. Dogs Subject to Licensing Requirements. [N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.4; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.6]
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
§ 9-2.3. Dogs licensed in Other New Jersey Municipalities.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and the license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this State shall be accepted by the Borough as
evidence of compliance with this section. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3)
§ 9-2.4. Seeing Eye Dogs and Service Dogs. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3; 1990
Code § 9-4.15]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall
not be required to pay any fee therefor.
a. Dogs owned and kept within the Borough on the first day of January of
any calendar year.
b. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar year
and kept within the Borough for more than 10 days after acquisition.
c. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
d. Any unlicensed dog brought into the Borough by any person and kept
within the Borough for more than 10 days.
e. Any dog licensed by another state, brought into the Borough by any
person and kept within the Borough for more than 90 days.
§ 9-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.5
AO:213
§ 9-2.5. Cats Subject to Licensing Requirements. [1990 Code
§ 9-4.1, 9-4.2]
§ 9-2.6. Exemption to Licensing Requirements. [1990 Code § 9-10]
The licensing requirement shall not apply to pounds maintained at the
public expense, kennels maintained by the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals, or to veterinarians to which dogs have been committed
by public authorities.
§ 9-2.7. Certificate of Vaccination against Rabies Required. [1990
Code § 9-8; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a]
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the Governing Body shall
grant any such license and official metal registration tag for any dog or
cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog or cat to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type
approved by and administered in accordance with the recommendations
of the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, or has been certified exempt
as provided by regulations of the State Department of Health. Such
vaccination shall be repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the
State Department of Health, and shall be administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
The State Department of Health shall promulgate regulations providing for
the recognized duration of immunity, interval of inoculation, certificate of
vaccination, certificate of exemption, and such other matters related to
rabies vaccinations.
§ 9-2.8. Record to Be Kept.
The information on each dog and cat licensed during the year shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs and/or cats in the City.
a. Cats Licensed in Another State. Any person who shall bring or cause to
be brought into the City a cat licensed in another State shall
immediately apply for a license issued by the City.
b. Cats Licensed in Another Municipality. Any person who shall bring or
cause to be brought into the city any cat licensed in another New Jersey
municipality for the current year, for a period to exceed 10 days shall,
within 10 days, apply for a registration tag for each cat for a
registration fee of $0.50. Proof of the current license shall be required.
Such registration shall be valid until December 31st of the current
licensing year.
§ 9-2.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 9-2.9
AO:214
§ 9-2.9. License Forms and Tags. [1990 Code § 9-4.4]
License forms and official tags shall be furnished by the City, shall be
numbered serially and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the
City of Lambertville.
§ 9-2.10. Renewal of License and Tag. [1990 Code § 9-4.5]
It is the responsibility of any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or
cat of licensing age to annually during the month of January apply for and
procure from the Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each
such dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored. The license and registration
tag shall be effective for the period beginning on January 1st and ending
on December 31st of the year in which the license is obtained. There is no
proration of the fee.
§ 9-2.11. Display of License. [1990 Code § 9-4.7]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat of licensing
age, shall place upon such dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored a collar
or other device with the registration tag securely fastened or displayed
thereto.
§ 9-2.12. Licenses are Nontransferable. [1990 Code § 9-4.8]
The license and registration tag issued shall not be transferred and affixed
to another animal. Every dog and cat shall be required to have a separate
license and registration tag. Failure to comply with this section shall be
deemed a violation and subject the owner of the dog or cat to whom the
license and registration tag were originally issued to the penalty as stated
in Article VI, Penalties, of this chapter.
§ 9-2.13. Duplicate Registration Tag. [1990 Code § 9-4.9]
In the event of loss, a duplicate license and registration tag may be obtained
from the Clerk for a fee of $0.50.
§ 9-2.14. License Fees; Late Fees. [1990 Code §§ 9-4.10, 9-4.11; Ord.
No. 2007-26; Ord. No. 25-2011]
License and late fees shall be as follows:
a. Dog Licensing Fees. The annual fee for a license and registration tag for
dogs which are spayed or neutered shall be $15. The annual fee for
dogs not spayed or neutered shall be $18.
b. Cat Licensing Fees.
1. Indoor Cats. The annual fee for a license of an indoor cat will be
waived with proof of rabies inoculation and a certification from the
pet owner that the cat does not go outside.
§ 9-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.14
AO:215
§ 9-2.15. Proof of Licensing. [1990 Code § 9-4.12]
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a dog or cat upon the request of any Health
Officer, Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, Animal Census Taker or other
authorized person.
§ 9-2.16. Disposition of Fees Collected. [1990 Code § 9-4.13]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this article shall be forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer of the City
of Lambertville and shall be placed in a special account separate from any
of the other accounts of the municipality and shall be used for the following
purposes only: fees required by the State of New Jersey; collecting, keeping
and disposing of dogs or cats liable to seizure for local prevention and
control of rabies; conducting rabies inoculation clinics; conducting the
annual dog and cat census expenses; and for administering the provisions
of this article including licenses, registration tags, notices and salary of
the Animal Control Officer and other authorized persons. Any unexpended
balance shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal year following at
which time, and at the end of each subsequent fiscal year, the excess of the
total amount paid into the fund on account of dogs during the last two fiscal
years shall be paid over to the general fund of the municipality.
§ 9-2.17. Unauthorized Removal or Attachment of Registration
Tags. [1990 Code § 9-4.14]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for
which it was not issued.
§ 9-2.18. License Not to Be Issued to Minors. [1990 Code § 9-11]
No license to own, keep or harbor a dog in the City shall be issued to, or in
the name of a minor.
2. Outdoor Cats. The annual fee for a license of a cat that goes
outdoors which is spayed or neutered shall be $15. The annual fee
for cats that go outside which are not spayed or neutered shall be
$18 per cat.
c. Late Fees. All animals are required to be registered annually. The City
will give pet owners a grace period through the end of February. A late
fee of $25 will be charged for all animals not registered starting March
1st of each year. The late fee will apply to all pets of seven months of
age and older who have resided with their owner for a minimum of 10
days.
§ 9-2.14 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 9-2.18
AO:216
ARTICLE III
Control of Dogs and Cats
§ 9-3. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 9-3.1. Leash Required Off Premises of Owner. [1990 Code § 9-2.1]
Any dog off the premises of the person owning, keeping or harboring it,
shall be accompanied by a capable person and shall be controlled and
secured by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
§ 9-3.2. Dogs Running at Large Prohibited. [1990 Code § 9-5]
No person shall permit any dog owned, harbored, possessed or controlled
by him to run at large within the limits of the City of Lambertville.
§ 9-3.3. Pet Waste; Owner Responsibilities for Removal; Penalties.
[1990 Code § 9-2.3]
a. This subsection shall apply to the owner or other person having custody
or control of any dog within the City.
b. It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to permit, suffer or
allow such dog to discharge its excreta upon any public or private
property other than the property of the owner or custodian. Failure to
remove and clean up such animal's excreta from public or private
property as provided in paragraph d is also unlawful and shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
c. In addition to the property of the owner or custodian, it shall be
permissible to permit, suffer or allow a dog to discharge its excreta on
public streets from curb to curb (not upon any sidewalk or walkway) or
within the confines of public alleys provided that the owner or
custodian removes and cleans up such animal's feces as provided in
paragraph d.
d. The owner or custodian of any dog shall immediately clean up and
remove any dog excreta. Such excreta shall be disposed of in the
sanitary sewer system or by placing same in a closed container and
depositing such in a covered trash receptacle. No other form of disposal
including depositing of excreta in storm sewers shall be permitted.
e. Violations of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be punishable as
follows:
1. First Offense — a fine of not less than $25 or more than $100.
2. Second Offense — a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $150.
3. Third or Subsequent Offenses — a fine of not less than $150 nor
more than $500. In addition, the sentencing judge may impose a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
§ 9-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.4
AO:217
§ 9-3.4. Owner of Dog Responsible for Conduct. [1990 Code § 9-2.2]
The conduct of a dog shall be attributed to the owner thereof and the
owner shall be deemed to have permitted any dog who acts contrary to the
requirement of this chapter to act so and such owner shall be guilty of the
violation thereof.
§ 9-4. DOGS AND CATS AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
§ 9-4.1. Barking; Creating Conditions Hazardous to Safety and
Health. [1990 Code § 9-6]
No person shall permit any dog or cat owned, harbored, possessed or
controlled by him to become an annoyance or interfere with the comfort
and general well being of the inhabitants of the City of Lambertville. Such
annoyance or interference shall include, but shall not be limited to, barking,
crying, whining, howling, causing injury to person or property, or creating
a condition hazardous to safety and health and shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
§ 9-5. through § 9-6. (RESERVED)
§ 9-3.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 9-5
AO:218
ARTICLE IV
Impoundment
§ 9-7. IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 9-7.1. Authority to Seize; Reclamation; Disposal. [1990 Code
§ 9-7.1; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16]
Any dog or cat found running at large, causing a public nuisance, or under
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 may be seized and impounded by the
Animal Control Officer, Police Officer or other authorized person appointed
by the Mayor and Council to enforce this article. Any dog or cat so seized
and impounded may be reclaimed by the owner. If not reclaimed within
seven days by the owner, the said dog or cat may be offered for adoption
or euthanized. The expense encountered in holding and keeping the dog or
cat, and if necessary, destroying the dog or cat, shall be paid by the owner
of the dog or cat if such can be determined.
§ 9-7.2. Notice to Owner. [1990 Code § 9-7.2; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16]
If any dog or cat so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or has a
registration tag of the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog or
cat is known, or has a microchip with an identification number or the owner
or the person charged with the care of the animal is otherwise known, any
person authorized by the Mayor and Council, shall forthwith serve on the
person whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the person
keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that the
dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for adoption, disposed of
or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
Any person so authorized by the Mayor and Council shall further comply
with all provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
§ 9-7.3. Authority to Enter Premises. [1990 Code § 9-7.3]
The Animal Control Officer or other person appointed by the Mayor and
Council to enforce this article when in immediate pursuit of a dog or cat,
which he may lawfully seize or impound under the provisions of this article
or under the Statutes of the State of New Jersey, is hereby authorized to go
upon or into any premises but not into an inhabited dwelling house without
permission of the owner to seize such dog or cat for impounding. Any such
entry shall not be deemed trespassing except that he may not go upon any
premises if the owner thereof or the owner's representative is present and
forbids him to do so.
§ 9-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-7.3
AO:219

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 9-8. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
§ 9-8.1. Enforcement of Chapter. [1990 Code § 9-1.1]
The Mayor and Council shall have power to enter into a contract with one
or more persons for the exercise of the duty of Animal Control Officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-8.2. Animal Control Officer's Report to Health Department.
[1990 Code § 9-1.2]
The Animal Control Officer shall submit a report to the Official of the Health
Department, which report shall contain a description of each animal seized,
the license number, if any, the reason for seizure, and the disposition made
of such animal.
§ 9-8.3. Quarterly Report from Dog Control. [1990 Code § 9-1.3]
The official representative for dog control shall render a quarterly report to
the Health Official which report shall contain the following information:
§ 9-9. through § 9-10. (RESERVED)
a. The number of dogs captured.
b. The number of dogs destroyed.
c. The number of dogs redeemed and the amounts paid for redemption.
d. The number of dog bite investigations and dogs quarantined.
§ 9-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-9
AO:221

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 9-11. VIOLATIONS.
§ 9-11.1. Violations and Penalties. [New; 1990 Code § 9-9]
a. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2, Dogs; license and metal registration tag required; placing
tag on dog, N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.4, Time for applying for license; N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.6, Dogs brought into State; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.7, Removing tag
from dog without owner's consent; attaching tag to another dog;
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8, License for kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound;
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.10, Kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; permitting
dogs to go off premises; and N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.18, Interfering with
persons performing duties under act, or the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Health pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.14, shall be liable to a penalty of $50 for each offense. (N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.19)
The fine for violating the provisions of subsection 9-2.12 regarding the
transferring of a cat license shall be $50.
b. Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who violates or who fails
or refuses to comply with this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not
less than $10 nor more than $500 for each violation, to be recovered in
the name of the municipality.
c. Any person who violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is established shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 9-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.1
AO:223
Chapter 10
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 10-1. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 10-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established. [1990 Code § 10-1.1]
§ 10-1.2. Appeals. [1990 Code § 10-1.2]
Persons aggrieved by a decision of the enforcing agency may appeal such
decision to the Construction Board of Appeals established by the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of Hunterdon County.
§ 10-1.3. Fees for a Construction Permit. [1990 Code § 10-1.3; Ord.
No. 2004-06; Ord. No. 2004-15; Ord. No. 2005-17; Ord. No. 2007-14;
Ord. No. 2008-02; Ord. No. 2009-02; Ord. No. 2009-17; Ord. No.
14-2011; Ord. No. 09-2013; Ord. No. 07-2016; Ord. No. 27-2017]
a. There is hereby established in the City a State Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency, to be known as the "Lambertville Construction
Code Agency," consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode
Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire
Protection Subcode Official, and such other subcode officials for such
additional codes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. The organization of the Lambertville Construction Code Agency, the
responsibilities and duties of the various officials and subcode officials
within the agency and the responsibility of such agency and the officials
thereof and various other municipal subdivisions, boards or agencies of
the City, shall be as may be defined and described by the Mayor and
Council.
c. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c., 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, to hold each such
position.
d. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. Fees. The fee for a construction permit in Lambertville or any interlocal
arrangement shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed in Subsection
§ 9-11.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-1.3
AO:224
a1(a) through a6(d) hereof and shall be paid prior to the issuance
of a permit. Twenty percent of the construction permit fee shall be
considered as the plan review fee, which will be paid at the enforcing
agency's office at the time the permit application is submitted and is
nonrefundable. The plan review fee for prototype plans shall be 5%
of the amount to be charged for a construction permit. [Amended
6-20-2019 by Ord. No. 13-2019]
1. Building Subcode Fees.
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. This fee shall be in the amount of $0.075 per
cubic foot, except that agricultural structures on farms shall be
in the amount of $0.025.
(b) Fees for renovations, alterations, repairs, commercial roofing,
commercial siding, and for foundations and on-site work for
premanufactured construction or relocated structures, the fee
shall be based upon the estimated cost of work. The City
reserves the right to require a copy of actual contracts or
current market price evaluation based on common estimating
practices; or an architect or engineer's cost estimate; or actual
third-party estimates. The cost shall include all labor and
material (including bartered, donated, free, etc., labor and/or
materials). This fee shall be as follows:
(1) $37 per $1,000 of estimated cost of work up to $50,000 of
estimated cost of construction;
(2) $33 per $1,000 for estimated cost of work from $50,001 to
$100,000 estimated cost of construction; and
(3) $29 per $1,000 for additional costs over $100,000
estimated cost of construction.
(c) The fee for temporary structures shall be based on the volume
of the structure. The building subcode fee shall be $0.025 per
cubic foot. Electric, plumbing and fire subcode fees shall be
based on the normal fee schedule. All structures for which
volume cannot be computed shall be $95.
(d) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction (volume) for the added portion.
(e) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection a1(a) and (b) above.
(f) The fee for construction or installation of a single-family
residential in-ground swimming pool shall be $250. The fee for
construction or installation of all other use group in-ground
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.3
AO:225
swimming pools shall be $350. The fee for aboveground pools
shall be $75.
(g) The fee for construction or installation of retaining walls shall
be as follows:
(1) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of 550
square feet or less that is associated with a single Class 3
residential structure shall be $150.
(2) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of more
than 550 square feet that is associated with a single Class
3 residential structure shall be $290.
(3) The fee for all other retaining walls shall be based on the
cost of work as follows:
(i) $20 per $1,000 of estimated cost of work up to
$50,000;
(ii) $16 per $1,000 of estimated cost of work from
$50,001 to $100,000;
(iii) $12 per $1,000 of estimated cost of work over
$100,000.
(h) In Use Groups R-3, R-4 or R-5 single-family detached dwellings
the fee for the construction and/or renovation of a deck up to
150 square feet shall be $150; 151 square feet to 250 square
feet shall be $240; and over 250 square feet shall be $350. All
other use groups shall be based on the cost of the work.
(i) The installation of sheds over 200 square feet shall be a
minimum of $175.
(j) The fee for a residential roof or siding replacement shall be
$110 and for commercial roof or siding replacement shall be
based on the cost of work.
(k) The fee for a demolition and/or removal permit of a building or
structure shall be $150 for Class 3 residential and $275 for all
other use groups, provided that the fee shall be $75 for
structures under 400 square feet in area.
(l) The fee for removal or abandonment of underground storage
tanks shall be $125 each for tanks up to 1,000 gallons and
$195 each for tanks over 1,001 gallons.
(m) The fee to construct or erect a sign shall be $3 per square foot
surface area of the sign, computed on one side only for doublefaced
signs. The minimum fee shall be $75.
(n) The minimum fee for the building technical section shall be
$75.
§ 10-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-1.3
AO:226
2. Plumbing Subcode Fees.
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of $26 per fixture or stack such
as sinks, water closets, urinals, bath tubs, showers, clothes
washers, dishwashers, hose bibs, gas piping per outlet,
condensate pump, etc., except as listed below in Subsection
a2(b) and (c)
(b) The fee for domestic hot water heater replacement shall be
$95.
(c) The fee for special devices shall be $110 for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, water-cooled air-conditioning
units, air-conditioning compressors, refrigeration units, hot
water boilers, fuel oil piping, new gas service and underground
gas lines, interceptors, water and sewer connections, active
solar systems, sewer pumps.
(d) For equipment listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(1) such as backflow
preventers, high pressure boilers, refrigeration systems, etc.,
the fee shall be $95 for the first device and $25 for additional
similar devices in the same building.
(e) The minimum fee for the plumbing technical section shall be
$75.
3. Electrical Subcode Fees.
(a) For from one to 25 devices, receptacles or fixtures, the fee
shall be in the amount of $75; for each additional device,
receptacle or fixture in addition to this, the fee shall be in the
amount of $1.25 per device, receptacle or fixture. For the
purpose of computing this fee, devices, receptacles or fixtures
shall include but are not limited to the following: lighting
outlets or fixtures, switches, fluorescent fixtures, receptacles,
light standards less than eight feet in height, communication
points, alarm devices, and other panels or devices rated less
than 20 amps, smoke and heat detectors, or similar fixtures,
and motors or devices of less than or equal to one horsepower
or one kilowatt.
(b) For each motor or electrical device greater than one
horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower; and for
photovoltaic system arrays, greater than one kilowatt and less
than or equal to 10 kilowatts, the fee shall be $35.
(c) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10
horsepower and less than or equal to 25 horsepower; for
photovoltaic system arrays, greater than 10 kilowatts and less
than or equal to 25 kilowatts or kva; the fee shall be $65.
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.3
AO:227
(d) For each motor or electrical device greater than 26
horsepower and less than or equal to 50 horsepower; and for
photovoltaic system arrays, greater than 26 kilowatts and less
than or equal to 50 kilowatts or kva, the fee shall be $125.
(e) For each motor or electrical device greater than 51
horsepower and less than or equal to 100 horsepower; and for
photovoltaic system arrays, transformers and generators
greater than 51 kilowatts and less than or equal to 100
kilowatts or kva, the fee shall be $200.
(f) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100
horsepower; and for photovoltaic system arrays, transformers
and generators greater than 100 kilowatts or kva, the fee shall
be $800.
(g) Equipment, devices rated by kilowatt or kva include but are not
limited to the following: electric ranges/receptacles, ovens,
surface units, electric hot water heaters, electric dryers/
receptacles, dishwashers, central AC units, baseboard heaters,
transformers, generators, steam shower units or any other
devices consuming or generating electrical current.
Equipment or devices rated by horsepower include but are not
limited to the following: garbage disposals, motors, etc. Space
heaters or air handlers may be rated by HP, kW or kva.
(h) For each service, panel or motor control and for inverters,
panels and disconnects for photovoltaic systems, rated up to
100 amps the fee shall be $95.
(i) For each service, panel or motor control and for inverters,
panels and disconnects for photovoltaic systems, rated 101
amps up to 200 amps the fee shall be $175.
(j) For each service, panel or motor control and for inverters,
panels and disconnects for photovoltaic systems, rated 201
amps up to 400 amps the fee shall be $360.
(k) For each service, panel or motor control and for inverters,
panels and disconnects for photovoltaic systems, rated over
400 amps the fee shall be $800.
(l) For all the following: signs; fire, security, burglar control
stations; communication control units; smoke, heat, fire,
burglar alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings; utility
load management devices; lighting standards over eight feet,
the fee shall be $75.
(m) For in-ground pools the fee shall be $225.
(n) For spas, hot tubs, or fountains the fee shall be $150.
(o) For storable or portable pools the fee shall be $75.
§ 10-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-1.3
AO:228
(p) For a swimming pool bonding certificate of compliance the fee
shall be $95.
(q) Transformers and generators less than or equal to 20kw shall
be $100. Transformers and generators greater than 20kw and
less than or equal to 50kw shall be $175. Generator panels
shall follow Subsection a3(h) through (k) above.
(r) The minimum fee for the electrical technical section shall be
$75.
4. Fire Subcode Fee.
(a) The fee for sprinkler systems shall be $125 for up to 12 heads.
(b) For 13 to and including 40 heads the fee shall be $200.
(c) For 41 to and including 100 heads the fee shall be $350.
(d) For all heads over 100 the fee shall be $2 per head.
(e) The fee for each standpipe shall be $325.
(f) The fee for each independent preengineered suppression
system shall be $225.
(g) The fee for each gas or oil-fired appliance shall be $75.
(h) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $225.
(i) The fee for spray booths exhaust system shall be $325.
(j) The fee for a wood/coal burning stove, fireplace inserts, pre-fab
or masonry fireplace shall be $75.
(k) The fee for dry pipe, pre-action or sprinkler alarm valves and
for smoke, heat detectors and manual fire alarms shall be $125
for up to 12 alarms, except that, for hard-wired and
interconnected alarms for one- and two-family residential, the
fee shall be $75 for up to 12 alarms.
(l) Each device over 12 shall be $8 each.
(m) The fee for R3, R4 and R5 fire alarm systems shall be $95.
(n) The fee for fire pumps shall be $425 each.
(o) The fee for incinerators shall be $425 each.
(p) The fee for crematoriums shall be $425 each.
(q) The fee for unit heaters shall be $75 each.
(r) The fee for chimney relining shall be $75.
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.3
AO:229
(s) The fee for the installation of any underground fuel storage
tank up to 550 gallons shall be $150. The fee for the
aboveground fuel storage tanks up to 550 gallons shall be $75.
For tanks 551 to 1,000 gallons, the fee shall be $200. For tanks
over 1,001 gallons, the fee shall be $400.
(t) The fee for a fire sprinkler water storage tank shall be $275.
(u) The minimum fee for the fire technical section for one- or twofamily
residential shall be $65 and for all other use groups
shall be $125.
5. Certificates and Other Special Fees. The fees for certificates shall
be as follows:
(a) Certificate of occupancy, residential (single-family): $175,
except the fee for a certificate of occupancy for pools, decks
and small additions (under 400 square feet) is $45.
(b) Certificate of occupancy, other than single-family: $350.
(c) Certificate of occupancy for changes in use group: $350.
(d) Certificate of approval: no fee.
(e) Continued certificate of occupancy: $350 per unit or tenant
space.
(f) Temporary certificate of occupancy, renewal fee shall be $30.
(g) Certificate of compliance: no fee.
(h) The fee for asbestos or lead abatement projects shall be as
follows:
(1) The administrative fee for each construction permit issued
for an asbestos hazard abatement project shall be as
specified at N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.9.
(2) The administrative fee for each certificate of occupancy
issued following the successful completion of an asbestos
hazard abatement project shall be as specified at N.J.A.C.
5:23-8.9.
(3) The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement projects
shall be $190.
(4) The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be
$35.
(i) The fee for a variation request application shall be $125 for
Class 3 residential; $300 for Class 3 other than residential and
Class 2; and $850 for Class 1 buildings. The fee for
§ 10-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-1.3
AO:230
resubmission of an application for a variation shall be 1/2 of
the original fee if required by the Construction Official.
(j) The fee for an application for the construction board of appeals
shall be as specified by the Hunterdon County Construction
Board of Appeals application.
(k) A fee of $110 per hour may be charged for review of any
amendment or change to a plan that has already been released,
or any other additional work required by ordinance or
interlocal agreement.
(l) The fee for a zoning permit is $50.
(m) The fee for a flood development permit shall be $175 plus any
applicable City engineering review costs, if required by the
City Engineer.
(n) The fee to reinstate a lapsed permit shall be 50% of the initial
permit fee provided such application is made within one year
from the date the initial permit lapsed. Thereafter, the fee to
reinstate a lapsed permit shall be based on the current fee
schedule.
(o) The fee for an annual permit shall be charged annually, and
shall be a flat fee based on the number of maintenance workers
(excluding managers, engineers and clerks) who are primarily
engaged in work governed by a subcode (building/fire,
electrical and plumbing). Fees shall be as follows:
(1) One through 25 workers (including foreman or
forewoman): $1,500 per worker.
(2) Each additional worker over 25: $450 per worker.
(p) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit a training
registration fee of $196 per subcode shall be submitted by the
applicant and shall be forwarded by the Construction Official
to the Department of Community Affairs, Construction Code
Element, Training Section, along with a copy of the
construction permit (Form F-170). Checks shall be made
payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey." The Department
shall register these individuals and notify them of the courses
being offered.
6. Exempt Fees.
(a) No fees shall be charged for construction of any permitted
building or structure owned by the City of Lambertville or any
of its respective agencies.
(b) Newly constructed and rehabilitated residential units that are
to be legally restricted to occupancy by households of low
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.3
AO:231
income may qualify for reduced fees or be exempt from
construction permit fees as authorized by City Council on an
individual basis, except for the state training fee.
(c) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e and 40:55D-8, no person
shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public
or private structure for any of the facilities contained therein.
A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person,
shall not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in
order to secure a construction permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement which promotes
accessibility to his or her own living unit. For purposes of this
subsection, the term "disabled person" means a person who
has the total and permanent inability to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically
determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident
of this state who is disabled pursuant to Federal Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231, et seq.), or is rated as
having a 60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law
administered by the United States Veterans Act. For purposes
of this subsection, the term "blindness" means central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a
correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in
the field of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual
field subtends an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered
as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
(d) Outside Agency Fees. Notwithstanding any other fee
hereinafter set forth, when the City has retained a private onsite
inspection or plan review agency to carry out subcode
official responsibility, no fee charged shall exceed the amount
paid by the City to that private agency plus 30%.
7. The mechanical inspector fee for construction Use Groups R-3 and
R-5 shall be:
(a) First device: $65.
(b) Each additional device: $30.
b. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the City, biannually, a report recommending a fee
schedule, based on the operating expenses of the agency and any other
expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of
the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 10-1.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-1.3
AO:232
§ 10-1.4. Fire Limits. [1990 Code § 10-1.4]
The establishment of fire limits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 is reserved and
shall be further established by amendment to this section on such date as
may hereafter be established.
§ 10-1.5. Violations and Penalties. [1990 Code § 10-1.5]
c. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee as specified in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19. Said
surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal
quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31, and June 30,
and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, the fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth
quarters only. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of
each fiscal year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than
July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective,
said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
a. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section or rules promulgated
hereunder;
2. Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit;
3. Fails to comply with any order issued by an enforcing agency or the
Department;
4. Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to an enforcing agency or the Department, shall be
subject to a penalty of not more than $500.
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
this chapter or who unreasonably interferes with such an inspection
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
c. With respect to paragraph a.3 above, a person shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stopconstruction
order validly issued by an enforcing agency or the
Department. With respect to paragraphs a.1. and a.4 above, a person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of any provision of
this chapter or rule promulgated hereunder and for each false or
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.5
AO:233
§ 10-1.6. Waiver of Construction Permit Fees. [New]
The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to waive construction
permit fees for residents and businesses when impacted by a natural
disaster such as a flood.
§ 10-2. UNFIT DWELLINGS.
§ 10-2.1. Adoption of New Jersey State Housing Code as Standard.
[1990 Code § 10-2.1; New]
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1) the
"New Jersey State Housing Code" under N.J.A.C. 5:28.1 et seq. is hereby
accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in
determining the fitness of a building for human habitation or occupancy or
use.
§ 10-2.2. Purpose. [1990 Code § 10-2.2]
Whenever there is found to exist within the limits of the City of Lambertville,
any building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy,
or use, due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents
or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities or due
to other conditions rendering such building or buildings, or part thereof,
unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety
or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City, the City of
Lambertville, in the exercise of its police power, as conferred upon it under
the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. shall take such action as necessary
to repair, close or demolish, or cause or require the repairing, closing or
demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof in accordance with
the procedures set forth herein.
§ 10-2.3. Definitions. [1990 Code § 10-2.3]
As used in this section:
misleading written statement or omission of required information or
statement made in any application or request for approval to an
enforcing agency or the Department. With respect to paragraph a.2
above, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation
of the conditions of a construction permit.
d. The penalties pursuant to this subsection may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties is
hereby conferred upon judges of the Municipal Court in addition to the
courts specified by N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11. Suit may be brought by a
municipality or the State of New Jersey. Payment of a money judgment
pursuant hereto shall be remitted in the case of a suit brought by a
municipality to the Chief Financial Officer and in the case of a suit
brought by the State of New Jersey, to the State Treasurer.
§ 10-1.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-2.3
AO:234
BUILDING — Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Lambertville.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are in
actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer who
is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the City,
County or State relating to health, fire, building regulations, or to other
activities concerning buildings in the City.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer, officers, board or body
authorized by ordinance adopted hereunder to exercise the powers
prescribed by such ordinances and by this act.
§ 10-2.4. Enforcement Officer. [1990 Code § 10-2.4]
The Construction Official shall be the public officer designated to exercise
the powers prescribed by this section.
§ 10-2.5. Complaint Process. [1990 Code § 10-2.5]
a. Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the City charging that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever
it appears to the Construction Official, on his own motion, that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the
Construction Official shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of
and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges
in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before
the Construction Official (or his designated agent) at a place therein
fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving
of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the Construction Official.
b. If, after such notice and hearing, the Construction Official determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his finding of fact in support
of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 10-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.5
AO:235
1. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or
have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order; and
2. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove
or demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in
the order of removal.
c. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Construction Official may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed. The Construction Official may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
d. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
e. The amount of:
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section determined in favor of the
municipality, and
2. Such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or
3. The amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof,
shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such
cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Construction Official, he shall sell the materials of such building.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, including the clearance and, if necessary,
leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or
any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of
the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such
costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner
§ 10-2.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-2.5
AO:236
§ 10-2.6. Actual and Immediate Danger. [1990 Code § 10-2.6]
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the Construction
Official may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such
building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the
demolition thereof.
§ 10-2.7. Alternative Remedies. [1990 Code § 10-2.7]
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the City's power to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement, by summary proceeding or otherwise, nor is anything in this
section intended to limit the authority of the Construction Official under the
State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. c.217 (C.52:27D-119 et. seq.) or
any other rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 10-2.8. Standards. [1990 Code § 10-2.8]
The Construction Official may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the City; such conditions may include the following (without
limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the
hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation,
light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects;
uncleanliness.
§ 10-2.9. Service of Complaints and Orders. [1990 Code § 10-2.9]
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail,
but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot
be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Construction
Official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same
once in a newspaper printed and published in the municipality, or, in the
absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the County and
by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such costs,
the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by
the Construction Official, shall be secured in such manner as may
be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed according to the
order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or judgment of such court. Any owner or
party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of
the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy
of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.9
AO:237
circulating in the municipality in which the buildings are located. A copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the County Recording Officer of
the County in which the building is located.
§ 10-2.10. Remedies. [1990 Code § 10-2.10]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Construction Official under
this section may, within 30 days after the posting of service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Construction Official from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The court may proceed on the action in a summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an
order of the Construction Official shall be entitled to recover any damages
for action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any
person with any order of the Construction Official.
§ 10-2.11. Additional Powers of the Construction Official. [1990
Code § 10-2.11]
The Construction Official shall have the following additional powers to
enable him to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
section:
§ 10-2.12. Administration. [1990 Code § 10-2.12]
The Mayor and Council shall as soon as possible prepare an estimate of the
annual expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies
necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the buildings
in the City for the purpose of determining the fitness of such buildings
for human habitation or occupancy or use, and for the enforcement and
administration of this section, and may make such appropriations from
revenues as may be necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply
grants and donations to assist in carrying out the provision of this section.
a. To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the section; and
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under the section to such
officer and agents as he may designate.
§ 10-2.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-2.13
AO:238
§ 10-2.13. Nonexclusive Remedy. [1990 Code § 10-2.13]
Nothing in this section shall preclude the City from enforcing any other
section or regulations; nor from punishing violations thereof. The powers
conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the power
conferred by any other section.
§ 10-3. OPEN HOUSING.
§ 10-3.1. Title. [1990 Code § 10-3.1]
The Mayor and Council ordains that this section shall be known as "The
Lambertville Open Housing Regulations."
§ 10-3.2. Definitions. [1990 Code § 10-3.2]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL HOUSING — Shall mean housing accommodations held or
offered for sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesman or agency, or by any
other person pursuant to authorization of the owner, by the owner himself,
or by legal representative, but shall not include any personal residence
offered for rent by the owner or lessee thereof or by a broker, salesman,
agent or employee.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Shall mean and include:
PERSON — Shall mean and include one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, organizations, corporations, legal representative, trustees in
bankruptcy or receivers.
It also includes, but is not limited to, any owner, lessor, assigner, builder,
manager, broker, agent, employer, lending institution and all political
subdivisions, authorities, boards, and commissioners.
PERSONAL RESIDENCE — Shall mean a building or structure containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than two
individuals, two groups or families living independently of each other and
used by the owner or lessee thereof as a bona fide residence.
§ 10-3.3. Prohibition of Discriminatory Practices. [1990 Code
§ 10-3.3]
It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice for any persons to:
Any building or structure or portion thereto which is used or occupied
or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the
home, residence or sleeping place of one or more individuals, groups or
families whether or not living independently of each other; and
a.
b. Any vacant land offered for sale or lease for commercial housing.
a. Refuse to sell, lease, finance or otherwise to deny or withhold
commercial housing from any person because of race, color, religious
§ 10-2.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.3
AO:239
§ 10-4. SCAFFOLDING AND OTHER TEMPORARY PLATFORMS.
§ 10-4.1. Declaration of Intent. [1990 Code § 10-4.1]
The Mayor and Council hereby declare the intent to regulate, in a manner
consistent with the interests and to insure the protection and safety of
the citizens of the City, the location, use, placement and construction of
temporary construction platforms.
creed, ancestry, sex or national origin of any prospective owner,
occupant or user of such commercial housing to any person due to use
of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
b. Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise
for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of commercial housing from any person because of the race, color,
religious creed, ancestry, sex or national origin of any present or
prospective owner, occupant or user of such commercial housing.
c. Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling or
leasing of any commercial housing or in furnishing facilities, services or
privileges in connection with the ownership, occupancy or use of any
commercial housing because of race, color, religious creed, ancestry,
sex or national origin or any present or prospective owner, occupant or
user of such commercial housing, or to discriminate against any person
in terms of leasing any commercial housing or in furnishing facilities,
services or privileges in connection with the occupancy or use of any
commercial housing due to use of guide dog because of the blindness of
the user.
d. Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan
of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, or repair or maintenance of
commercial housing because of the race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin of any present or prospective owner,
occupant or user of such commercial housing.
e. Print, publish or circulate any statement or advertisement relating to
the sale, lease or acquisition of any commercial housing or the loan of
money, whether or not secured by mortgage, or otherwise for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
specification, or discrimination based upon race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin, or to print, publish or circulate any
statement or advertisement relating to the lease of any commercial
dwelling which indicates any preference, limitation, specification or
discrimination based upon use of a guide dog because of the blindness
of the user.
§ 10-3.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-4.2
AO:240
§ 10-4.2. Compliance Required. [1990 Code § 10-4.2]
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street, highway, public lane,
alley, sidewalk or other public place in the City by placing therein or
thereon any scaffolding or other temporary construction platforms used in
the construction, repair or maintenance of buildings except in compliance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 10-4.3. Definitions. [1990 Code § 10-4.3; Ord. No. 2010-13]
As used in this chapter:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the Construction Code Official of
the City of Lambertville.
SCAFFOLDING — Shall mean a temporary platform, manlift, ladder and
planks, pump jacks, frame or similar means used chiefly to support
workmen and materials in the construction, maintenance and/or repairs of
buildings.
§ 10-4.4. Encroachments. [1990 Code § 10-4.4; Ord. No. 2010-13]
§ 10-4.5. Application for Permit. [1990 Code § 10-4.5; Ord. No.
2010-13]
An application for a permit pursuant to subsection 10-4.4 shall be made
on forms approved and made available by the Construction Official. Such
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. The placement of a scaffold upon a sidewalk, street, highway or any
other public place within the limits of the City, by any person other than
agents or employees of the City is hereby prohibited unless a permit for
the placement of the scaffold is obtained from the Construction Official,
pursuant to this section, and evidence of such permit is displayed
conspicuously on the building for which the scaffold is being used by
means specified by the Construction Official.
b. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of a
scaffold on private property except for scaffolding in close proximity to
a sidewalk, street, or other public place such that it may pose a hazard
to the safety of the public as determined by the Construction Official.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. A description or diagram of the location where the applicant proposes
to place the scaffold. A signed sealed engineers drawing may be
required as determined by the Construction Official.
c. A description of the scaffold which the applicant proposes to place on
the sidewalk, street or any other public place in the City, which includes
the name of its manufacturer and its capacity.
d. The circumstances necessitating the use of the scaffold.
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.5
AO:241
§ 10-4.6. Fee. [1990 Code § 10-4.6; Ord. No. 2007-27; Ord. No.
2010-13]
§ 10-4.7. Insurance. [1990 Code § 10-4.7]
Each application for a permit authorized under this section shall be
accompanied by a policy or certificate of insurance, including the applicant
and the City as named insured and evidencing general liability coverage
to protect the public from bodily injury or property damage sustained as a
result of the use of the scaffold. Such policy or certificate shall contain limits
of at least $500,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 for property damage and
shall provide at least 30 days' notice of cancellation to be afforded to the
Construction Official.
§ 10-4.8. Permit Term; Expiration. [1990 Code § 10-4.8; Ord. No.
2010-13]
§ 10-4.9. Revocation of Permit. [1990 Code § 10-4.9]
e. The length of time the applicant plans to place the scaffold on the site,
such time not to exceed 30 days.
a. A minimum fee of $50 is required before any permit is issued pursuant
to this section. The Construction Office shall approve the subsequent
renewals and an additional minimum fee of $25 shall be due and
payable upon issuance of all renewals.
b. The minimum fee shall be charged for all scaffolding 15 feet or less in
height and 30 feet or less in length. An additional $10 per foot for each
additional foot of height and/or length shall be charged for the
application and $5 per foot for each renewal with a maximum fee of
$600 for any single scaffold for any one month.
a. No permit shall be granted by the Construction Official for a term
longer than required for the project. This time frame shall be
determined by the Construction Official upon the initial issuance of the
permit. Initial fees and renewal fees to be as stated in this chapter up to
the term required for the project. Permit fees for renewals after the
initial term will be increased by 50% and the maximum fee of $600 shall
no longer apply.
b. Upon the expiration of the permit or any renewals thereof, the applicant
shall remove, or cause to be removed, the scaffold from the sidewalk,
street or any other public place.
a. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be
revoked by the Construction Official if:
1. The permit holder has made any false statements in his application
for a permit; or
2. The permit fails to conform to the provisions of this section; or
§ 10-4.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-4.9
AO:242
§ 10-4.10. Violation and Penalties. [1990 Code § 10-4.10]
Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction in
Municipal Court, be liable to the penalty in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. A person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day he fails to comply with an
order of the Construction Official validly issued requiring the scaffold to be
removed.
§ 10-5. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 10-5.1. Purpose. [1990 Code § 10-5.1]
The purpose of this section is to require clear display of authorized and
assigned house or building numbers on every dwelling house, store or other
principal buildings fronting on any street in the City of Lambertville in order
to assist the general public and emergency services, public and private, in
identifying the property in case of emergency or otherwise.
§ 10-5.2. Applicability. [1990 Code § 10-5.2]
All dwelling houses, stores or other principal buildings erected or to be
erected within the City shall display house numbers assigned by the Tax
Assessor as provided herein and in conformity with the specifications set
forth in subsection 10-5.4.
§ 10-5.3. Responsibility of Owner for Placement of Number and
Time Limit. [1990 Code § 10-5.3]
The owner of every dwelling house, store or other principal building which
now fronts or which may hereafter front upon any public or private street
within the City shall, at his own expense, cause the authorized and assigned
number of such house or building to be permanently and conspicuously
placed in accordance with the specifications set forth herein.
3. In the opinion of the Construction Official, the work necessitating
the use of scaffold is not proceeding in a normal fashion.
b. A decision by the Construction Official to revoke any permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be submitted in writing
to the permit holder by registered or certified mail. Such decision shall
state clearly the grounds for the revocation.
c. The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the Mayor and Council.
An appeal must be filed by the permit holder with the City Clerk within
seven days after the notice of revocation was mailed to him. Such
appeal must state in writing the grounds for the appeal. The Mayor and
Council shall then set a time and place for the hearing and notify the
permit holder in writing at least five days in advance of the hearing by
mailing a notice to his last known address. The decision and order of
the Mayor and City Council shall be final and conclusive.
§ 10-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.4
AO:243
§ 10-5.4. Specifications. [1990 Code § 10-5.4]
§ 10-5.5. Assignment of Numbers; Application for Number. [1990
Code § 10-5.5]
House numbers shall be assigned by the Tax Assessor. Every owner of a
building constructed or to be constructed in the City shall apply to the
Tax Assessor for an authorized number in accordance with this section
and the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of
Lambertville.
§ 10-5.6. Conformance to Numbering System and Adoption of Map.
[1990 Code § 10-5.6]
The number of houses and buildings on the various streets in the City shall
be in conformance with the Tax Map of the City of Lambertville and with
the current Tax Records which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk and
will remain on file in that office for the use and examination of the public.
The Tax Map and Tax Records are annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without inclusion thereof herein.
§ 10-5.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 90-11; 1990 Code § 10-5.7; New]
Upon the failure of an owner to ascertain and affix upon any building to
which this section applies the assigned and authorized number within 30
days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or notification by the City
a. House or building numbers shall be:
1. In Arabic numerals.
2. A minimum height of three inches.
3. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the
building or other fixed appurtenance in the front of the building so
as to be clearly visible from the street.
4. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement,
spacing and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
5. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
b. Visibility of numbers on building which is set back. If the dwelling
house, store or principal building has such a setback location that the
provisions cannot be complied with, then the owner shall provide a
post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial nature, including a
mailbox, with the number affixed thereon and so located on the
premises that the number shall be conspicuous and visible from the
street upon which the building fronts.
§ 10-5.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-5.7
AO:244
Clerk to affix the building number, the City Clerk may enforce the provisions
herein.
§ 10-5.8. Violations and Penalties. [1990 Code § 10-5.8]
Any person who violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 10-6. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 10-6.1. Purpose. [1990 Code § 10-6.1]
The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the installation,
operation and maintenance of private alarm systems within the City in
order to insure that the quality of alarm responses rendered to the public
will be maintained at a high level, to eliminate potential harm resulting in
responses to false alarms, and to alleviate conditions otherwise leading to
unnecessary drain on the manpower, time, space, facilities and finances of
the City of Lambertville and its Police and Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 10-6.2. Scope. [1990 Code § 10-6.2]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglary, fire and other emergency alarm
equipment which produce a visual or audible signal or function by direct
line, radio, telephone or by any other means requiring a response by the
Police Department, volunteer Fire Department or other municipal agencies.
The provisions of this section shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
and designed to summon or alert, directly or through others, the Police
Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies in response to
any type of alarm signal.
§ 10-6.3. Definitions. [1990 Code § 10-6.3]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this section unless otherwise specifically stated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Shall mean any business, operated by a person,
partnership, corporation or other individual or entity which engages in the
activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing,
selling, servicing or responding to a fire or burglar alarm system(s) or
which causes any of these activities to take place. Excluded from this
definition, however, are retail establishments which sell alarm systems over
the counter and do not service same.
ALARM DEVICE — Shall mean any type of alarm-activating equipment
which provides warning of burglary, intrusion, fire, flood or like peril.
§ 10-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.3
AO:245
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean equipment or a device, or an assembly of
equipment and devices to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department, Fire
Department or other municipal agency may be expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization or entity of any kind in control of
any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm device or system is
maintained, and including; but not limited to, owners, tenants, subtenants
or otherwise.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean the individual designated
by the Police Director or the Fire Official who performs a function required
or permitted by this section under the supervision of the Police Director or
the Fire Official.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean any type of alarm system using telephone lines,
transmitting an alarm directly through the communications switchboard,
answering service or alarm company console, providing warning of
intrusion, fire or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated
by inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person,
domestic animal and/or household pet other than an intruder; and including
alarms caused by mechanical failure, malfunction or improper installation
of the alarm system and related equipment. It shall further include improper
adjustment (sensitivity) to suppress false indications due to short flashes of
light, wind, noises, rattling or vibrations of doors or other forces.
FIRE ALARM EQUIPMENT — Shall mean and include the following:
FIRE OFFICIAL — Shall mean the individual appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of Council pursuant to Chapter 11 of the Lambertville City Code
or his designated representative.
FIRE SERVICES — Shall mean the authorized fire companies providing fire
protection and suppression to the City of Lambertville under the direction
of the Fire Chief and the Board of Fire Commissioners.
INDEPENDENT SMOKE DETECTOR — Shall mean a device having an
audible alarm indicating smoke and/or fire within a structure and not
connected to an alarm system or to any external sounding device outside of
the structure.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person who holds the license to install,
operate and maintain the alarm/alarm console pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
Devices which automatically detect heat, smoke or other products of
combustion.
a.
b. Manual systems which actuate a fire alarm signal.
Mechanical systems designed and equipped to detect fires, actuate an
alarm, and suppress such fires, to include "water flow alarms."
c.
§ 10-6.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-6.3
AO:246
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm system, which, when activated,
produces a signal not connected to an alarm console or the communications
switchboard, including, but not limited to business burglar alarms actuating
bell or other sound generating devices and/or light emitting devices
providing warning of intrusion or other peril. The term "local alarm" shall
not include an alarm system solely connected to a registered motor vehicle,
nor shall the term include equipment designed to signal solely within a
building or series of buildings and which does not emit signals, visible or
audible, to persons outside such building or buildings, i.e. "independent
smoke detector."
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person who owns an alarm device who has
obtained a permit according to the provisions of this section. All permits
shall be issued and fees paid therefor on a one time basis.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person or individual, or any firm,
partnership, association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship,
corporation or any other business entity.
POLICE DIRECTOR — Shall mean the individual appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council pursuant to Chapter 3, Article I
of the Lambertville City Code, or his designated representative.
WRITTEN NOTICE — Shall mean notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
§ 10-6.4. Registration of Alarm System. [1990 Code § 10-6.4; New]
a. No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless
the alarm system has been registered with the Lambertville Police
Department. The Police Department shall provide a copy of all approved
registration forms to the Lambertville Fire Official, Fire Chief and the
Construction Official.
b. An alarm system shall be deemed registered at such times as a
registration form supplied by the Police Department is completed as to
all information requested therein. Among the information to be
provided on the registration form is the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the owner and tenant
or occupier of the property if other than the owner, upon which the
alarm system is installed.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the installer of the
system.
3. The type of system.
4. A list of names, addresses and telephone number of the person(s) to
be contacted in the event of an alarm or in an emergency situation
determined by the Police or Fire Department.
5. The names, address and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of
the persons or company maintaining the alarm system.
§ 10-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.4
AO:247
§ 10-6.5. General Provisions Regarding Installation Activation and
Operation of New Alarm System. [1990 Code § 10-6.5]
c. No further renewal registration shall be required unless and until there
has occurred any material change in the information previously
submitted with respect to any alarm system in which event it shall be
the duty of the owner and user of the alarm system within 10 days of
such material change, to file a supplemental or revised registration
containing accurate, current information.
d. A one-time fee in the amount of $25 shall accompany each registration.
Change or reregistration for new owners or users, there shall be a fee
of $10. Upon payment of the fee and filing of the registration, two
decals will be issued. The decals will be placed in plain view, near the
front/main entrance and rear/secondary entrance of the premises.
e. All pre-existing alarm systems shall comply with the requirements of
this section within 60 days of the date of the final adoption of this
section.
f. Excluded from this provision are "independent smoke detectors" that
do not emit an audible or visible signal outside of the structure.
g. No person shall install any alarm system without first filing an
application with the Construction Official or the appropriate subcode
officials, in writing and obtaining the required permit, therefor,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14.
h. Any pre-existing alarm system that was installed without the required
inspection and approval of a construction permit pursuant to the
Uniform Construction Code shall obtain said permits and inspection
approvals.
a. Each "alarm system" as defined herein and installed after the effective
date of this section shall utilize discrete circuitry for multi-purpose
alarm systems to insure appropriate emergency response.
b. Any alarm system which requires for its operation electricity supplied
by a public utility may be equipped with a battery rendering it operable
in the event of a power outage if so desired by the property owner. Such
a battery back-up shall be required for any alarm system which will
trigger itself automatically in the event of a power outage.
c. Every alarm system must be provided with a device which will shut off
the alarm after 10 minutes of activation.
d. Every burglar alarm system shall be equipped with a time delay of at
least 15 seconds which may include an audible signal of the same
length of time, said time delay to be designated to prevent accidental
activation of the system. The 15 second audible signal, if utilized, shall
be audible only within then structure and not externally.
§ 10-6.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-6.5
AO:248
e. No alarm system may be connected directly or indirectly to the Police or
Fire Department.
f. No person shall install, cause to be installed or permit to be installed,
any alarm device by whatever name known, which automatically selects
a telephone line dedicated to the Police or Fire Department for the
purpose of playing a recorded message to report any emergency. All
alarm systems shall be programmed to dial Hunterdon County
Communications at 908-782-0911.
1. All central station and proprietary alarm systems, including
automatic systems shall have the responsibility to identify and
communicate the nature of the alarm; burglar alarms to Police
Department and fire alarms to the Fire Department.
g. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
the Police Department or Hunterdon County Communications in the
event of a false alarm.
h. No Police, Fire or other public department or official shall be
responsible in any way for the resetting or maintenance of any alarm
system.
i. No alarm business or person owning, using or possessing an alarm
system shall cause or permit the giving of repeated false alarms, for test
purposes or otherwise, whether intentional, accidental or otherwise.
Owners and operators of such alarms shall be governed by the false
alarm procedures and penalties set forth in this section.
j. If any person has any dial alarm connected at the time of the effective
date of this section, it shall be reprogrammed within 30 days of said
effective day to comply with this ordinance. (Refer to subsection
10-6.5k below.)
k. The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clear and intelligible and
in the format approved by the Police Director or Fire Official. No such
message shall be transmitted more than two times as a result of a single
stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15 seconds and
the time gap between each shall not exceed 10 seconds.
l. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to short
flashes of light, wind, noises, rattling or vibration of doors or the forces
unrelated to general alarms.
m. Permits for local alarm systems shall not be issued with respect to
buildings which are not owner-occupied, prior to receipt by the Police
Director of satisfactory proof that the occupant(s) of the building have
been notified of the existence of such alarm system, or of the intent to
install a local alarm system and the provisions of this section.
§ 10-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.5
AO:249
§ 10-6.6. Confidentiality. [1990 Code § 10-6.6]
All information submitted in compliance with this section shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public
disclosure pursuant to State Statute. Any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
§ 10-6.7. Penalties for Owners, Users, Alarm Businesses Engaged in
the Operation, Installation or Maintenance of Alarm Systems or
Devices. [1990 Code § 10-6.7; Ord. No. 2005-05 § 1]
n. By installing an alarm system and registering same with the City of
Lambertville Police Department, each permittee agrees to indemnify
and hold harmless the City of Lambertville and the Volunteer Fire
Companies and Fire Department of the City of Lambertville and mutual
aid departments, their agents, servants and employees from and
against any and all claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses
and to release the City of Lambertville, the Volunteer Fire Companies,
the Fire Department and the Board of Fire Commissioners and mutual
aid departments, their agents, servants and employees from any and all
liability or damages in any way resulting from or arising out of or
connected with the installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm
system or any act or omission connected therewith.
o. Any alarm business and/or property owner having knowledge of the
sale or change of tenants in a property shall be responsible for notifying
the Police Department when one of its customers possessing an alarm
system sells the property or changes tenants. The alarm business shall
notify the Police Department of the name of the new owner or tenant
and whether or not the new owner or tenant is continuing with an alarm
device or system within the property.
a. Any person who fails to register an alarm system as required by the
provision of this section is subject to a minimum of $50 and maximum of
$500 fine to each and every violation.
b. Any owner, user or alarm business who installs such a system that is not
in compliance with this section is subject to a fine of $50 and may be
required to remove such alarm systems.
c. In the case of each false burglary alarm which summons the Police
Department to respond, the Police Director shall cause an investigation
to be made and shall keep a record of such false burglary alarms on file.
d. In the case of each false fire alarm which summons the Fire Department
to respond, the Fire Official shall cause an investigation to be made and
shall keep a record of such false fire alarm on file.
e. In the event of a false burglary alarm, excluding acts of God, the
permittee shall, within three days to complete a written report setting
forth the causes of the false burglary alarm, the corrective action taken
§ 10-6.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-6.7
AO:250
and a statement as to whether the burglary alarm system has been
inspected and/or serviced by an alarm service company and such other
information as the Police Director may reasonably require.
f. In the event of a false fire alarm, excluding acts of God, the permittee
shall be responsible within three days to complete a written report
setting forth the cause or causes of the false fire alarm and such other
information as the Fire Official may reasonably require. Furthermore,
within 10 business days the fire alarm company must submit to the Fire
Official the corrective action taken and a statement as to whether the
fire alarm system has been inspected and/or serviced by an alarm
service company.
g. If a report is not filed or insufficient action is taken to resolve the
problem, in cases of false burglary alarm report the Police Director may
file action in Municipal Court for violation of this section. In cases of
false fire alarm report the Fire Official may file action in Municipal
Court for violation of this section.
h. Owners and/or users of alarm systems shall be subject to the following
minimum fine schedule for false alarms within a twelve-month period.
Number of False Burglary
Alarms Within a Twelve-
Month Period Minimum Fine/Penalty
1-2 Provide written report as per
subsection 10-6.7
3 $50
4 $100
5 $200
6 $400
More than 6 $500 per occurrence
Number of False Fire
Alarms Within a Twelve-
Month Period Minimum Fine/Penalty
1 Provide written report as per
subsection 10-6.7
2 $250
More than 3 $500 per occurrence
The calculation of the number of false alarms, for both burglary and
fire shall be without regard to whether the false alarms involved
intrusion alarms or fire alarms.
§ 10-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.8
AO:251
§ 10-6.8. Penalty for Intentional False Alarm. [1990 Code § 10-6.8;
New]
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who intentionally causes
the giving of false alarm shall be in violation of this section and subject
to a penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $2,000 and/or
imprisonment for any term not to exceed 90 days, and/or by a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days for each such offense12.
§ 10-6.9. General Regulations. [1990 Code § 10-6.9]
§ 10-6.10. Enforcement. [1990 Code § 10-6.10; Ord. No. 2005-05
§ 2]
The Police Director is hereby designated as officer in charge of the
enforcement of this section, excluding false fire alarms. The Fire Official is
hereby designated as officer in charge of the false fire alarms. The Mayor
and Council may designate such assistant enforcement officers for purposes
of the enforcement of this section as are needed for such purposes. The
enforcement officer shall have the authority to use the services of the Police
Department or any public authority to enforce this section.
§ 10-7. RENTAL OF HOUSING UNITS.13
§ 10-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT TENANT — Shall mean a person over the age of 18 years not
previously occupying a dwelling unit.
a. Testing Alarms. Any person testing an alarm system covered by the
provisions of this section shall notify the Police Department and
Hunterdon County Communications immediately prior to and
immediately after the testing is completed. Failure to do so shall
constitute a violation of this section and subject such person to the
penalties set forth herein.
b. The Police Director, Fire Chief and Fire Official shall cooperate in all
respects in connection with the administration of this section and the
forms, permits, decals, records and other documents used by the Police
Director.
c. Rules and Regulations. The Police Director may, from time to time,
promulgate rules and regulations in furtherance of the administration
of this section which shall be enforced through the Police Department.
Said rules and regulations shall become effective upon approval by
resolution adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
12.Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 and 2C:33-3.2.
13.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2010-23 Superseded Ordinance Nos. 2006-06 and 2007-07.
§ 10-6.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-7.1
AO:252
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, used for
human habitation, use, or occupancy and includes any accessory buildings
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or structure or part thereof containing
one or more dwelling units which are to be leased or rented to a person
other than the owner or provided to any occupant as compensation for
services rendered to the Landlord or any third party. A dwelling shall not
include a State licensed group home operated by a non-profit corporation or
public entity.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms or any part
thereof located within a building containing habitable space and forming
a single housekeeping unit with facilities which are used or designed to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating for a single family or the
functional equivalent thereof.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.11, are hereby
adopted as the standard governing supplied utilities, facilities and other
physical things and conditions to make buildings and dwellings, both
residential and nonresidential, safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation,
occupancy or use.
DWELLING, STANDARDS TO BE APPLIED — For all dwellings in the City of
Lambertville the following standards are adopted by reference:
HABITABLE SPACE — Shall mean the space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space in similar areas are not considered habitable space.
HOUSING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the person authorized
by this section to issue Notice of Violations or Summons to enforce
compliance with this section and to investigate and/or inspect complaints
and possible unsafe conditions and includes the Rental Housing Officer,
Zoning Official, Fire Official, Construction Official, and any Police Officer of
the City of Lambertville.
LANDLORD — Shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the
premises or lessor estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, or
their duly authorized agents, firm or corporation in control of a building,
dwelling, apartment house or habitable space of premises.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person, including minors, who reside or
intends to reside in a dwelling unit.
RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER — Shall mean the person authorized by this
section to issue permits and conduct inspections and shall include the
Construction Official, the Police Director or his designee and the Zoning
Officer of the City of Lambertville.
TENANT — Shall mean any person, including minors, who reside in a
dwelling unit on a continuous basis for more than 30 days.
VACANT DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit where the
previous tenants have vacated, or where more adult tenants than permitted
§ 10-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.1
AO:253
by the Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with
Chapter 11 of the City Code, seek to occupy the dwelling unit.[Amended
12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
§ 10-7.2. Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA)
Required. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No.
28-2019]
Within 90 days of the effective date of this section, adopted October 18,
2010, every landlord in the City of Lambertville shall make application for,
and file with the Rental Housing Officer, an Annual Landlord Registration
Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, for
every building containing one or more dwelling units occupied by one
or more tenants. Thereafter the Annual Landlord Registration Addendum
(ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, shall be renewed
annually each March 1st. All Annual Landlord Registration Addenda
(ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, received after April
1st of each year shall be considered late and are subject to applicable late
fees.
§ 10-7.3. Application for Annual Landlord Registration Addendum
(ALRA); Affidavit of No Change. [Ord. No. 2010-23; Ord. No.
04-2014; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
a. Application, Information Required. An application form for an Annual
Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA) shall be available from the
City Clerk and shall not be deemed complete unless the applicant
provides the following for each building containing one or more
dwelling units rented to one or more tenants owned by the landlord in
the City:
1. Name, address and phone number of the landlord.
2. Address of building ("building") and dwelling unit number or other
identifying information for the dwelling unit.
3. Number of dwelling units in the building.
4. For each dwelling unit in the building:
(a) Identify the unit number or other identifying information.
(b) Set forth the gross floor area in square feet of each room
occupied for sleeping purposes.
(c) Set forth the total gross floor area in square feet of habitable
rooms.
(d) Total number of tenants permitted in the dwelling unit.
(e) Total number of occupants who are to reside in the dwelling
unit.
§ 10-7.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-7.3
AO:254
§ 10-7.4. Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA)
Required. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No.
28-2019]
No landlord shall permit a tenant to occupy, let or sublet to a tenant,
nor shall any person or persons lease or occupy any vacant dwelling unit,
without receiving a Landlord Registration Certificate which certifies that
the dwelling unit complies with the provisions of the most current revision
of the Zoning Ordinance, this section and any other applicable laws and
regulations.
§ 10-7.5. Procedure Upon Increase of Occupants. [Ord. No.
2010-23]
(f) The date tenancy commenced or will commence.
5. Proof of current payment of property taxes, assessments against
property, sewer charges, or other municipal charges, or
assessments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
6. Payment of Registration Fees.
7. A certification from the landlord that the dwelling unit to be rented
complies with this section.
8. A certification from the landlord that he/she will not authorize more
than the maximum permitted tenants to occupy the dwelling unit.
9. In the event of a change in landlord of the dwelling unit, a new
Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance
with Chapter 11 of the City Code, shall be filed with the City Clerk.
10. Proof of approval to operate as a multi dwelling such as Board of
Adjustment approval or proof of operation prior to the adoption of
the 1971 Zoning Ordinances.
11. In the event of a change in tenants, a new Annual Landlord
Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of
the City Code, must be completed within 10 days of the occurrence.
12. SDCMFX Inspection which requires smoke detector and carbon
monoxide fire extinguisher certification.
b. Renewals with no changes; Affidavit. Landlords who have experienced
no changes to the application filed the previous year, may certify the
information (items a.1 through a.12) is correct and has not changed by
completing an affidavit of the full application.14
a. Every landlord shall have the obligation to monitor any increase in the
number of tenants in each dwelling unit and prevent any increase in
14.Editor's Note: The Affidavit of No Change for Landlord Registration can be found at the
end of this Section 10-7.
§ 10-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.5
AO:255
§ 10-7.6. Limitations of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended
12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
The maximum number of persons which may inhabit a dwelling unit shall
be computed as follows and certified in the Annual Landlord Registration
Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code:
§ 10-7.7. Minimum Standards for Room Occupancy: Light,
Ventilation, Bath and Kitchen Requirements, and Decks. [Ord. No.
2010-23]
tenants that exceeds the number of tenants permitted in the Landlord
Registration Certificate. In addition, the landlord shall have the
obligation to alert the Rental Housing Officer within 10 days of increase
in the number of tenants in a dwelling unit above that permitted in
the approved Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in
accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code. [Amended 12-19-2019
by Ord. No. 28-2019]
b. Every tenant shall have the obligation to notify the landlord of any
increase in the number of tenants within 10 days of the arrival of a new
tenant.
c. Neither the tenant nor the landlord shall permit more tenants to occupy
the dwelling unit than the maximum number of tenants set forth in the
approved Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in
accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code. [Amended 12-19-2019
by Ord. No. 28-2019]
a. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
b. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted
by the minimum occupancy area requirements.
c. Maximum Occupancy. The maximum number of tenants inhabiting a
building rented for residential purposes shall be stated in the approved
Annual Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with
Chapter 11 of the City Code.
a. Light and Ventilation. Every room containing habitable space must have
at least one window capable of being opened or other opening directly
upon a street, yard, court or other open space. The total area of such
opening shall be not less than 12% of the floor area of such room and in
no case less than 12 square feet.
b. Bathroom and Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall contain a full bathroom
(including a water closet, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower) and
a kitchen meaning an area for the preparation of food (including a stove
and sink).
§ 10-7.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-7.7
AO:256
§ 10-7.8. Violation of Occupancy Requirements, Inspections,
Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
c. Maximum Deck, Balcony or Porch Space. The maximum allowable
number of people on any deck, balcony or porch shall be one person per
nine square feet in accordance with the maximum standing room space
allowed as per the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq.
d. Structures that preexisted the adoption of the 1971 Zoning Ordinance
may continue to be used as a dwelling unit notwithstanding they do not
meet the requirements of this section, provided their continued use is
permitted by and the Uniform Fire Safety Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq., and New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.
(jointly referred to as "Uniform Fire Safety Code"). The Landlord shall
submit a written request with the application for the Rental Certificate
of occupancy for such continued use along with a written explanation as
to how compliance with the Uniform Fire Safety Code creates practical
difficulties.
a. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for a landlord, owner
or a tenant of a dwelling unit to allow a greater number of people than
the permitted maximum number of tenants listed in the Annual
Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter
11 of the City Code, to rent or occupy any dwelling unit. [Amended
12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
b. It shall also be unlawful and in violation of this section for a tenant,
landlord or an owner to allow a number of people greater than the
maximum number of people permitted to occupy the deck, balcony or
porch of said dwelling unit to occupy the deck, balcony or porch of said
dwelling unit.
c. The Housing Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue summons for
violations of this section to any owner, landlord or tenant found to be in
violation of this section.
d. Inspections. The Rental Housing Officer or his agents or duly
designated designee may make inspections to determine the condition
of dwellings containing a dwelling unit to be rented to a tenant prior to
the issuance of an approved Annual Landlord Registration Addendum
(ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code. For the
purpose of making inspections, the Rental Housing Officer is authorized
to enter and examine any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises at such reasonable hours as the circumstances of the case
permit with the permission of an occupant, tenant, owner or landlord.
In the event entry is denied, then, upon advice of the municipal
attorney, recourse to a court of competent jurisdiction shall be pursued.
[Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
§ 10-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.9
AO:257
§ 10-7.9. Unlawful Activities. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for a landlord or owner of
a dwelling unit or tenant of a dwelling unit or apartment:
§ 10-7.10. Reporting of Violations. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended
12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
It shall be the legal duty of each holder of an Annual Landlord Registration
Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, to
immediately report any breaches of the peace or violations of this section
which he may know or believes to have occurred on the leasehold premises,
which report shall be made to the Rental Housing Officer or the Police
Department of the City of Lambertville by the most expedient means.
§ 10-7.11. Violation for False Information. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
Any person who is found to have submitted false information,
documentation or identification in connection with an application for a
Landlord's Registration Statement shall pay a minimum fine of $250, plus
court costs for the first offense, second offense a minimum of $1,225 and
third offense or more $2,000 for each document containing false
information, documentation or identification. Any person who submits a
false certification or documentation shall be subject to criminal prosecution,
in addition to the penalties contained herein. In addition to the foregoing,
a certificate of occupancy that is issued on the basis of information or
a. To permit or allow people to reside in a dwelling unit in a number in
excess of the number of people for which sleeping accommodations are
provided in accordance with this section.
b. To lease or rent a dwelling unit where the number of tenants exceeds
the total number of sleeping accommodations as set forth in subsection
10-7.6.
c. To knowingly permit a number of people, greater than the maximum
number of occupants or tenants permitted, to occupy a dwelling unit.
d. For the landlord to fail to file with the Rental Housing Officer an Annual
Landlord Registration Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter
11 of the City Code, as required by Subsection 10-7.2 for each building
owned by him in the City of Lambertville containing a dwelling unit.
[Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
e. To violate any other provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq., and/or the Uniform Fire Safety Code.
f. To enter into a lease agreement without at least one tenant being an
adult, and requiring all adult tenants to sign the lease.
g. To violate any subsection of this section.
h. Filing a false certification.
§ 10-7.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-7.11
AO:258
documentation that is knowingly false or fraudulent when made, shall be
subject to revocation pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
herein.
§ 10-7.12. Fees. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 28-2019]
There shall be an annual fee of $50 to file an Annual Landlord Registration
Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, for each
building containing one or more dwelling units.
A late fee of $50 shall be applied to all registrations or renewals filed after
April 1 of each year.
§ 10-7.13. Tenant Subject to Removal. [Ord. No. 2010-23; amended
12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
Any tenant renting premises in the City of Lambertville who occupies
the premises prior to obtaining an approved Annual Landlord Registration
Addendum (ALRA), in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code, shall be
subject to immediate removal from the premises. Any costs associated with
the removal and subsequent relocation of tenants that are incurred by the
City of Lambertville shall be the responsibility of the landlord and/or tenant.
§ 10-7.14. (Reserved)
§ 10-7.15. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
a. In addition to the penalties as set forth in subsection 10-7.11, any
owner, agent, landlord, tenant and any person or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this section or fail to comply therewith or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be liable for one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the County Jail for any term not exceeding
90 days; by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days; a fine
not less than $100 nor more than $2,000. Each and every day such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Each violation of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct violation.
The imposition of a fine in amount greater than $1,250 upon an owner
for violation of this section shall provide for thirty-day period in which
the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the
condition and shall also be afforded the opportunity for a hearing in the
Municipal Court for an independent determination concerning the
violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine
greater than $1,250 (up to a maximum of $2,000 may be imposed if the
Court has not determined otherwise, or, upon reinspection of the
property it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
b. Refusal of Entry. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to any
lawfully authorized housing enforcement officer of the City of
Lambertville for the purpose of inspection pursuant to this section or
§ 10-7.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.15
AO:259
§ 10-7.16. Severability. [Ord. No. 2010-23]
If any paragraph, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court
or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining paragraphs or sections hereof.
LANDLORD REGISTRATION
AFFIDAVIT OF NO CHANGE
NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER/CORPORATION:
MAILING ADDRESS:
CITY: ________________________________________________________STATE:
__________ ZIP CODE:
PHONE NUMBER:
EMAIL:
PROPERTY ADDRESS:
BLOCK: ______________________________________________________LOT(S):
I, ________________________________ (insert name) certify that the information
contained on the application filed covering the ______ calendar year, which
is on file in the City's Clerk's Office of the City of Lambertville, for landlord
registration of block _____ lot _____ has not changed.
I understand that should a representative of the City find there is a change,
I will be subject to fines and penalties as outlined in the City of
Lambertville's General Ordinances, Chapter 10, Building and Housing,
Section 10-7, Rental of Housing Units.
Signature of Property Owner or Principal
Please print your name and title
State of New Jersey
County of
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ________ date of ________, 20 _____.
Notary Signature
who unreasonably interferes with such inspection shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $250 for each offense.
§ 10-7.15 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 10-7.16
AO:260
Notary Name
Commission Expires
Notary Seal
§ 10-8. REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE OF THE SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD AREA. [Ord. No. 22-2015]
Disclosure of a property's potential flood hazard to prospective buyers
must be made by the owner, his/her representative or real estate agent.
Notification to the prospective buyer or tenant includes a clear statement
in writing informing him/her if the building or structure is all or in part
mapped within the Special Flood Hazard Area (1% annual chance flood) on
the effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map and if the prospective buyer
would have a potential obligation to purchase flood insurance (structure
and/or contents) to satisfy a Federally backed mortgage. The words "Flood
insurance is required for a Federally backed mortgage" must be used on
the disclosure if the building or structure is all or in part of the Special
Flood Hazard Area. The disclosure must be a separate document from the
seller's disclosure and is distinct from whether the seller experienced a
flood while in ownership of the building or structure; for potential renters,
the disclosure shall note if the landlord has experienced flooding during
his/her ownership. The notice should state that additional information is
available from the City of Lambertville's Construction Office.
Chapter 11
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 11-1. NEW JERSEY UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Local Enforcement. [1990 Code § 11-1.1; Ord. No.
03-2012]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202 et seq., the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
shall be locally enforced in the City of Lambertville.
§ 11-1.2. Agency Designation and Duties. [1990 Code § 11-1.2; Ord.
No. 03-2012]
a. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention which
is hereby created in the City. The agency shall have at least one paid fire
official and shall enforce the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act15 and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the City as required
by law, and all codes and regulations in this any other applicable
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 10-7.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.2
AO:261
§ 11-1.3. Organization. [1990 Code § 11-1.3; Ord. No. 03-2012;
amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
The local enforcing agency established by Subsection 11-1.2 of this section
shall be a part of the City and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Official who shall report to the Business Administrator
and Mayor.
§ 11-1.4. Appointments, Qualifications, Term of Office, Removal.
[1990 Code § 11-1.4; Ord. No. 03-2012]
§ 11-1.5. Life Hazard Uses (LHU). [1990 Code § 11-1.5; Ord. No.
2005-07; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
The local enforcing agency established by Subsection 11-1.2 of this section
shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses, as defined under
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-196 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192
et seq., and as required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of Community Affairs. Permits for the required inspections
shall be as mandated and set forth in the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.
§ 11-1.6. Non-Life Hazard Uses. [1990 Code § 11-1.6; Ord. #2003-08
§ 1; Ord. No. 03-2012; Ord. No. 02-2017]
chapter of municipal code. [Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord. No.
28-2019]
b. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
a. Appointment of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be certified by the
State and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council.
b. Appointment of Inspectors and Other Employees. Inspectors and other
employees of the enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council upon recommendation of the Fire Official. All inspectors shall
be certified by the State.
c. Appointment of Legal Counsel. Legal counsel to assist the agency to
enforce the Uniform Fire Code shall be the City Attorney.
d. Term of Office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of three years.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
e. Removal from Office. The Fire Official shall be subject to removal by the
Mayor and Council for just cause. Inspectors and other employees of
the agency shall be subject to removal by the Fire Official with the
consent of the Mayor and Council for just cause. All persons removed
from office shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Mayor
and Council or a hearing officer designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 11-1.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 11-1.6
AO:262
a. In addition to the regulations required by the Uniform Fire Safety Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., the following non-life hazard uses shall
register with the Bureau of Fire Prevention and pay annual fees
pursuant to the Non-LHU Fee Structure: [Amended 12-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 28-2019]
1. Where a building or structure has more than one use which may
include a business use as defined herein, then each separate use
shall be subject to the appropriate fees and registration as set forth
in this chapter.
2. Where two or more of the same use or different uses exist in the
same building or premises, each use shall be considered as
separate and distinct and shall be subject to the appropriate fees
and registration as set forth in this chapter.
All of the foregoing uses shall be inspected for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter periodically, but not less than once every 24
months, such inspections to be performed under the City of Lambertville
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
b. (Reserved)16
c. (Reserved)17
d. UCC Code Type:
1. Uses not classified above will be classified as business uses.
2. Uses required to be registered with the State of New Jersey as life
hazard uses shall not be required to register under this subsection.
3. Any buildings, structures or premises that are "tax exempt"
according to the official tax records of the City of Lambertville will
be exempt from non-life hazard use registration fee. However,
these buildings will be inspected as required by the Uniform Fire
Code.
4. Vacant buildings will be charged and inspected according to the
previous use of the building.
e. Inspections of Non-Life-Hazard Units: [Amended 12-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 28-2019]
1. Definitions. Unless expressly defined under this subsection, any
and all terms relevant to this section shall be the same as those
definitions as set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, and such definitions are specifically incorporated
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection b, Residential Use Group, was repealed 12-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 28-2019.
17.Editor's Note: Former Subsection c, regarding a smoke detector/carbon monoxide fee, was
repealed 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019.
§ 11-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.6
AO:263
into this section by reference herein. Additionally, the following
terms shall be defined as follows:
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any one- or two-family dwelling
unit that includes or provides for the rental of any space or room
within the dwelling unit or on the property of the dwelling unit,
in exchange for consideration, for any period of time, by a nonimmediate
family member.
2. Inspections. Each non-life hazard unit shall be inspected at least
once during each twenty-four-month period by a City of
Lambertville Fire Official or Fire Inspector for the purpose of
determining the extent that the non-life hazard unit complies with
the City's fire and safety codes or state UFC. All such premises or
buildings shall be subject to such inspection and registration,
regardless of any other state or municipal inspections which may
be conducted of such premises.
3. Inspection Fee. The owner of each non-life hazard unit shall pay a
fee for inspection of the subject premises.
(a) Multifamily. The fees are hereby established at $100 for the
inspection of the common areas in premises with more than
three dwelling units and $10 per unit of dwelling space for all
premises.
(b) Residential Rental Unit. The fees are hereby established at $50
annually for the inspection of each premises.
(c) All other non-LHU fees are as follows:
Non-LHU Fee Structure
UCC Code Type 2020 Annual Fee
Business Use Group
Under 2,500 square feet $55
2,500 to 4,000 square feet $105
5,000 to 9,999 square feet $130
10,000 square feet and over $155
Factory Use Group
Under 5,000 square feet $105
2,500 square feet and over $130
Mercantile Use Group
M-1 under 6,000 square feet $80
M-2 6,000 to 11,000 square
feet
$155
Storage Use Group
§ 11-1.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 11-1.6
AO:264
§ 11-1.7. Complaints; Violations. [1990 Code § 11-1.7; Ord. No.
2005-07; Ord. No. 03-2012; Ord. No. 02-2017]
Issue any and all complaints necessary against any person violating
provisions of this section or any other section of the City's ordinances and
to prosecute or cause to be prosecuted any violations of this section or any
other section of the City's ordinances in any state or local court.
§ 11-1.8. Technical Amendments. [1990 Code § 11-1.8; Ord. No.
03-2012]
(Reserved)
Non-LHU Fee Structure
UCC Code Type 2020 Annual Fee
S-1 under 2,500 square feet $55
S-2 2,500 square feet and
over
$105
Utilities Use Group
U-1 under 2,500 square feet $105
U-2 2,500 square feet and
over
$205
(d) For each occasion that an owner fails to provide access after
receipt of two notices, a fee of $75 shall be imposed in addition
to the inspection fee.
4. Persons authorized to conduct inspections. The inspection shall be
conducted by a municipal official authorized by the City and
certified as a Fire Official or Fire Inspector. Such official may be
accompanied by any other City official necessary to conduct
adequate fire and safety inspections. Such inspections will be
performed under the direction of the Fire Official, Business
Administrator, and Mayor.
5. Powers of Inspectors. The inspectors under this section are hereby
granted all the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and
execute the purposes of this section, including, but not limited to,
the power to:
(a) Enter and inspect any multifamily dwellings and apartments
and to make such investigation as is reasonably necessary;
(b) Administer and enforce the provisions of any and all City
regulations or ordinances;
(c) Compel the owner of any non-life-hazard unit to produce any
and all files, books, documents or other objects which are
necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this section,
§ 11-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.9
AO:265
§ 11-1.9. Board of Appeals. [1990 Code § 11-1.9; Ord. No. 03-2012]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-208 any person
aggrieved by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right
to appeal to the local Construction Board of Appeals. If no such body exists,
appeals shall be made to the County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 11-1.10. Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties. [1990 Code
§ 11-1.10; Ord. No. 03-2012]
Enforcement, violations, and penalties shall be in conformity with the Act
and Regulations and Rules of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 11-1.11. Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide
Detector Compliance. [1990 Code § 11-1.11; Ord. No. 2003-08 § 2;
Ord. No. 2005-07; Ord. No. 03-2012; amended 12-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 28-2019]
The fee for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide compliance
as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 shall be $65.
§ 11-2. FIRE DISTRICT.
§ 11-2.1. Created. [1990 Code § 11-2.1; Ord. No. 03-2012]
There is created in the City one fire district to be known and designated as
"Fire District of the City of Lambertville, Country of Hunterdon."
§ 11-2.2. Boundaries. [1990 Code § 11-2.2; Ord. No. 03-2012]
Geographical boundary of the fire district shall be identical with the
geographical boundary of the City of Lambertville as now established or as
it may be changed in the future.
§ 11-3. FIRE ALARM SYSTEM.
§ 11-3.1. Established. [1990 Code § 11-3.1; Ord. No. 03-2012]
There shall be as established in the City a fire alarm system with necessary
wires for the same attached to the poles of the telephone, electric light
and telegraph companies in accordance with the reservation in the several
ordinances granting them the use and occupancy of the streets for their
poles and wires.
§ 11-3.2. Supervision. [1990 Code § 11-3.2; Ord. No. 2005-07; Ord.
No. 03-2012]
The fire alarm system shall be constructed and controlled under the general
supervision of the Chief Engineer and Board of Engineers of the City Fire
Department under such rules and regulations as may hereafter be adopted
or approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 11-1.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 11-4
AO:266
§ 11-4. DESIGNATION OF FIRE LANES. [Prior source history
includes 1990 Code § 11-4; Ord. No. 2005-07; Ord. No. 03-2012]
§ 11-4.1. Installation and Maintenance. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
The lanes shall be installed by the property owner utilizing regulations
signs and paint on the pavement areas, which signs and paint shall be
installed and maintained by the property owners under the direction and
supervision of the Lambertville Police Department in accordance with the
specification of the Lambertville Police Department in conjunction with the
recommendations of the Fire Chief.
§ 11-4.2. Parking Prohibited. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
No person or any agent or employee shall park, leave standing or cause to
be any vehicle in any lanes mentioned in this section, or cause any other
obstruction in the areas so designated as fire lanes.
§ 11-4.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
The Lambertville Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction with
Fire Official in enforcing this section.
§ 11-4.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be liable to the
penalties contained in N.J.S.A. 39:4-203 and court costs involved.
§ 11-4.5. Variances. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
If any person seeks a variance from this section, the Fire Official shall chair
a meeting with the Fire Chief, the Chairman of the Planning Board, the
Mayor and the Police Director. At that meeting, representatives of such
person may present concerns about the designation. Any decision will be by
affirmative vote of this group.
§ 11-4.6. Vehicular Traffic Prohibited. [Ord. No. 02-2017]
There shall not be allowed any vehicular traffic of any kind, except
emergency vehicles, on any property dedicated and designated fire lanes
throughout the City whether the lanes are so designated by order of an
official public agency or by owner of the private property.
§ 11-5. ANNUAL LANDLORD REGISTRATION ADDENDUM (ALRA).
[Added 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
The owner of any life hazard unit or non-life hazard unit in the City of
Lambertville that is offered for rental, whether in whole or in part, shall file
with the Fire Official an ALRA, which, when possible, shall be integrated by
the City into any existing annual filing requirements.
§ 11-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5
AO:267
Chapter 12
SANITATION; RECYCLING
§ 12-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 12-1.1. Word Usage. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-1; Ord. No. 22-2017]
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
— Not participating in the City of Lambertville's garbage collection may
participate and pay the fees as by resolution of the Governing Body
annually.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Are defined as any sheetrock, wood,
cinder block, insulation or other refuse removed from a property during the
construction/reconstruction phase of a project.
CONTAINERS — Shall mean a receptacle or a flexible covering with a lid
and drainage for the purpose of storing garbage or recycling.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the refuse of animal and vegetable matter which
has been used or intended for food, unwanted useless material that cannot
be recycled.
MISCELLANEOUS REFUSE — Shall mean all daily waste from private
residences, hotels, restaurants, and other places of business and applies
particularly to such articles as old shoes, carpets, broken crockery or glass,
and such other articles that cannot be recycled; but it does not include
anything like building materials.
RECYCLING — The City shall collect and recycle the items which are listed
under Appendix B. All recycling items must be kept separate from the
garbage and refuse in a container with a lid and must be marked with a
large "R" or label or other means which identifies the contents as recycling
materials. (Appendix B may be found at the end of section 12-4.)
THIRD CAN FOOD WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM — Residents participate
at will; Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Establishments
participating in the City of Lambertville's garbage collection are required
to participate in the Third Can Food Waste Recycling Program and pay an
a. The ALRA shall be filed annually by January 1 and any ALRA received
after February 1 shall be considered late and subject to applicable late
fees.
b. All ALRAs must be filed electronically pursuant to instructions that the
City will distribute annually to all landlords. The City has absolute and
sole discretion to determine whether a filed ALRA is complete. If the
City notifies a landlord that additional information or resubmission is
required, the landlord must respond to the City's notice within five
business days, otherwise late fees may be assessed.
§ 11-5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-1.1
AO:268
annual fee. The following fees will be set by resolution of the Governing
Body annually:
§ 12-2. GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
§ 12-2.1. Number of Receptacles; Maintenance. [Ord. No. 16-2013
§ 12-1.1]
The occupant of every dwelling unit, office and business where garbage is
accumulated shall be entitled to place four bags or containers of regular
household trash, which cannot be recycled, each week on their designated
day for collection by the City of Lambertville. Each bag or container shall:
weigh less than 40 pounds, be less than four feet in any dimension, have
a means of draining water and have a lid. The receptacles along the street
are for use by visitors to the City and not for placement of household or
commercial trash.
§ 12-2.2. Time and Manner of Placement; Penalty for
Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-1.2]
Each container shall be placed on the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the designated
collection day for that area. The container shall not be placed on the curb
before 5:00 p.m. of the day before the designated collection day and shall be
removed by 7:00 a.m. of the day after the designated collection day. Failure
of a residence to abide by the rules and regulations of this section may be
fined up to $250 for each violation of noncompliance.
§ 12-2.3. Collections of Miscellaneous Refuse. [Ord. No. 16-2013
§ 12-1.3]
Miscellaneous refuse shall be collected and removed from all private
residences, and other places of business in the City which comply with the
established regulations. All refuse intended for collection must be deposited
by householders in receptacles suitable for that purpose and which can be
readily handled by one man, and have a lid. All such receptacles shall be
placed at points accessible to collectors.
i. Participation Fee;
ii. Fines and Penalties for not participating;
Any other fee the Governing Body deems necessary for the success of
the program18.
iii.
18.Editor's Note: Prior source history for this chapter includes 1990 Code §§ 12-1 to 12-4;
Ord. No. 2004-18; Ord. No. 2005-03; Ord. No. 2006-13; Ord. No. 2007-28; Ord. No.
2010-10; Ord. No. 2010-20; Ord. No. 2011-12.
§ 12-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:269
§ 12-2.4. Rules for Collection Established. [Ord. No. 16-2013
§ 12-1.4]
The Mayor and Council shall have the power and duty to establish proper
rules and regulations governing the collection of garbage and miscellaneous
refuse not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, and to fix the time
for such collections and to change the time of such collections whenever in
their judgment, such changes shall be necessary or advisable.
§ 12-2.5. Authorized Persons Only to Handle Collection. [Ord. No.
16-2013 § 12-1.5]
No person other than the owner or authorized collector shall interfere with
or disturb any garbage or miscellaneous refuse after it shall have been put
in a receptacle as aforesaid and placed in an accessible place for collection,
nor shall any unauthorized person molest, burden, delay or in any manner
interfere with any collector of garbage or refuse in the discharge of his duty.
§ 12-2.6. Containers to Have Lids. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-1.6]
All containers used for the purpose of storing garbage or recycling must
have a lid and not hold water or liquids.
§ 12-2.7. Trash Material to Be Drained of Liquids. [Ord. No.
16-2013 § 12-1.7]
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any dwelling, house, store or other
building to place on any public street or other public place, any garbage or
other waste containing water, unless such garbage or other waste has been
thoroughly drained of its moisture and wrapped up in substantial paper, and
deposited in a suitable receptacle.
§ 12-2.8. Trash Materials to Be Tied or Fastened Securely. [Ord. No.
16-2013 § 12-1.8]
All waste paper, excelsior, rags, old clothes, bedding or other rubbish or
refuse of a like nature, which will scatter if loose, shall not be placed on any
public street, or place for collection, unless it is fastened together securely
by tying or otherwise.
§ 12-2.9. Weeds, Shrubbery Clippings, Limbs, Branches and other
Garden Waste; Collection to Be Made by Public Works Department.
[Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-1.9]
a. Beginning November 1 and ending December 31 of each year, leaves
shall be placed in piles along the curb line of the street. The piles shall
not exceed five feet in width from the curb line. The Director of Public
Works of the Mayor's designee may require that leaves be bagged and
shall provide the public with notice of such requirement.
§ 12-2.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-2.9
AO:270
§ 12-2.10. Grass Clippings. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2]
§ 12-3. DUMPSTERS.
§ 12-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.1]
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or other public place
in the City by placing therein or thereon any dumpster or other similar
container commonly used for the collection of building materials, except in
compliance with the provisions of this section and with a permit issued in
accordance herewith.
§ 12-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.2]
As used in this section:
CITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville.
DUMPSTERS — Shall mean a container or debris-transfer body commonly
used for the placing and/or collection of debris and building materials
during building construction and/or renovations.
§ 12-3.3. Permit Application. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 2.3]
b. All weeds and similar growth clippings shall be placed in a container so
that they may be easily emptied in the collector's vehicle.
c. Hedge and shrubbery clippings, tree trimmings and garden waste will
be collected if tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in length and not
to exceed two feet in diameter. The total volume placed at the curb for
one day's pickup will not exceed 10 bundles and must be placed so that
they will not spill out in the gutter, street or on sidewalks.
d. The City will not remove and/or chip trees.
a. Beginning April 15 through October 15 of each year, the residents and
businesses of the City can drop off grass clipping at the Public Works
Department between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and noon Monday through
Saturday.
b. Grass clippings shall be kept separate from not disposed of with regular
garbage and refuse which is collected by the Public Works Department.
a. Any person desiring a permit shall make written application therefor to
the City Clerk specifying the exact proposed location of such dumpster,
container or other receptacle, the size and capacity thereof, the name of
the owner of the abutting property, the length of time that the use is
required, and such other information as may be required by the City
Clerk.
b. All such dumpsters or similar containers shall bear an identification
number assigned by the State, and the name, address and telephone
number of the person responsible therefor.
§ 12-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.3
AO:271
§ 12-3.4. Fees and Deposits. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.4]
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $50. In
addition, the City Clerk may in her discretion require an indemnity deposit
not to exceed $500 to reimburse the City for the cost of any extraordinary
cleanup or repairs which may be incurred by the City as a result of the use
permitted. This deposit, or any unused portion thereof, shall be refunded in
the event that there are no extraordinary cleanups or repairs.
§ 12-3.5. Insurance. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.5]
Each application for a permit authorized under this section shall be
accompanied by a policy or certificate of insurance, including the applicant
and the City as named insured's and evidencing general liability coverage
to protect the public from bodily injury or property damage sustained as a
result of the use of such dumpsters or other similar container. Such policy
or certificate shall contain limits of at least $100,000/$300,000 for bodily
injury and $50,000 for property damage and shall provide at least 30 days'
notice of cancellation to be afforded to the City Clerk.
§ 12-3.6. Permit Term; Expiration; Additional Fees. [Ord. No.
16-2013 § 12-2.6]
§ 12-3.7. Refusal or Revocation Permit. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.7]
c. All such dumpsters, containers or other receptacles that remain on the
public streets or sidewalks during the hours between sunset of one day
and sunrise of the next day shall be equipped with suitable reflectors, or
such other warning devices, as may be required by the City Clerk. Such
reflectors shall be capable of reflecting motor vehicle headlights at a
distance of 500 feet.
d. Unless the length of time on the subject permit is specified, any permit
issued pursuant to this section shall only by valid for 48 hours.
a. No permit shall be granted by the City Clerk for a term longer than
seven days.
b. Permit is renewable for additional seven-day period at the discretion of
the public Works Director for an additional fee of $100 for each
additional application for permit that is filed.
c. Upon the expiration of the permit, the permit holder shall remove or
cause to be removed the dumpster or similar container from the
sidewalk, street or public place.
a. The City Clerk may in her discretion refuse to issue a permit if she
deems same to constitute a danger to public safety, or an unwarranted
interference with the efficient movement of traffic.
b. The City Clerk may revoke a permit for the same reasons, and if the
dumpster or similar container is not removed within 24 hours after
§ 12-3.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-3.7
AO:272
§ 12-3.8. Restriction on Location and Placement. [Ord. No. 16-2013
§ 12-2.8]
§ 12-3.9. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-2.9]
§ 12-4. RECYCLING PROGRAM.
§ 12-4.1. Pickup by Unauthorized Person; Enforcement; Recycling
Plan. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-3.1; Ord. No. 22-2017]
notification, may arrange to have the same removed by the company at
the property owner's cost and expense.
c. If the City Clerk shall determine that an emergency situation exists with
regard to the dumpster or other similar container, she may remove
same without notice, at owner's expense.
a. No dumpster or other similar container shall be placed within 10 feet of
a fire hydrant.
b. No dumpster or similar container shall be placed within five feet of an
adjacent property owner's driveway.
c. No dumpster or other similar container shall be placed closer than 25
feet from an intersection or further than six inches from a curb.
d. The area beneath and surrounding the dumpster or other similar
container shall be kept cleaned, and upon removal of same, the street
or roadway shall be swept clean of all loose debris and restored to its
former condition.
e. The dumpster or other similar container shall not be filled higher than
four inches from the top edge to prevent debris or materials from falling
or being blown onto the streets.
a. Any dumpster or other similar container in violation of this section shall
be removed by the permit holder after 12 hours oral notice given to the
owner thereof by the City Clerk.
b. Notwithstanding paragraph a above, any dumpster or other similar
container situated in such a manner as to obstruct an adjacent owner's
driveway or create traffic or road hazard shall be moved immediately
upon notice given to the owner thereof by the Police Department.
c. Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. The rules and regulations of this section are mandatory for all
occupants of residential, commercial and institutional establishments
located in the City of Lambertville.
b. Any recyclable placed at the curbside for pickup or deposited at a
residential complex depot shall be and become the property of the City
§ 12-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.1
AO:273
§ 12-4.2. Designation of Recyclable Materials; Fine. [Ord. No.
16-2013 § 12-3.2]
Because of changing markets for recyclable materials, a long-term
discussion on which solid waste materials should be designated as
recyclable is not possible. Appendix C and Appendix D of this section
contain a list of those materials which are designated as recyclable.
or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person or company unauthorized by the City to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable. Each such
collection or pickup in violation hereof is an offense subject to a fine
of up to $200. Multiple collections or pickups are deemed multiple
separate and distinct offenses.
c. The provisions of this section may be enforced by the Recycling
Coordinator and/or the Recycling Enforcement Specialist of Hunterdon
County, the Municipal Building Code Official or a designated officer of
the City.
d. No recyclable that is being collected as part of the municipal recycling
program may be donated or sold to or received by any person,
partnership or corporation (whether operating for profit or not for
profit) unless said person, partnership or corporation has first received
written authorization from the Recycling Coordinator of the City of
Lambertville.
e. The Recycling Coordinator of the City is hereby authorized and directed
to establish and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to the
recycling plan for the City. The recycling plan shall include Appendices
B, C, and D of this section. Such rules and regulations shall be effective
no earlier than 30 days nor later than 90 days from the date of
promulgation and publication of said rules and regulations. The Mayor
and Council of the City may, by majority vote, change, modify, repeal or
amend any portion of said rules and regulations.
f. Appendix A which may be found at the end of this section creates the
position of Recycling Coordinator and contains the Recycling
Coordinator's Job description.
g. Appendix B which may be found at the end of this section establishes a
collection schedule and collection requirements for the City of
Lambertville.
h. Appendix C which may be found at the end of this section designates
materials that are required to be recycled by the occupants of
residential commercial and institutional premises pursuant to the
Hunterdon County Recycling Plan.
i. Appendix D which may be found at the end of this section designates
materials that are to be recycled in the City of Lambertville.
§ 12-4.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-4.3
AO:274
§ 12-4.3. Residential Recycling One-family to Four-family Dwellings.
[Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-3.3]
§ 12-4.4. Recycling in Residential Complexes. [Ord. No. 16-2013
§ 12-3.4]
§ 12-4.5. Recycling by Commercial, Industrial and Institutional
Establishments. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-3.5]
a. Residences are defined as single dwellings designed for occupancy by
from one-family to four-family.
b. Each family within a residence is required to recycle all materials
designated by Appendix C and Appendix D as "residential recyclables."
(Appendix C and D may be found at the end of this section.)
c. Each category of recyclable material must be prepared for collection as
specified in Appendix B as found at the end of this section.
d. Failure of a family within a residence to abide by the rules and
regulations of this section may be fined up to $250 for each month of
noncompliance.
a. Residential complexes are defined as single or multiple dwellings
designed for occupancy by more than four families.
b. Each family within a residential complex is required to recycle all
materials designated by Appendix C and Appendix D as "residential
recyclables." (Appendix C and D may be found at the end of this
section.)
c. Each category of recyclable material must be prepared for collection
specified in Appendix B as found at the end of this section.
d. The owner of each residential complex is responsible for providing a
recycling depot for the entire complex. The depot shall be equipped
with owner or contractor supplied receptacles for each category of
designated recyclable material. Access to the depot shall be controlled
by the owner or his agent(s); however, access to the depot for the
families of the residential complex must be scheduled at least once a
week for at least a two hour period and access to the depot must be
made available to the recyclables collector between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on collection days.
e. Failure of a family within a residential complex to abide by the rules and
regulations of this section may be fined up to $250 for each month of
noncompliance. Failure of an owner (or his agent) to abide by the rules
and regulations of this section may be fined up to $250 for each month
of noncompliance.
a. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments are defined as
all entities which operate or conduct any business whatsoever which
§ 12-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.5
AO:275
§ 12-4.6. Ban on Certain Packaging for Food Sold to the Public;
Plastic Bags, Styrofoam, Polystyrene Foam Containers, Plastic
Straws. [Ord. No. 22-2017;Ord. No. 16-2018]
cannot be included within the definitions of a residential premises or
complex.
b. Each commercial, industrial and institutional establishment is required
to recycle all materials designated by Appendix C and Appendix D as
"commercial, industrial and institutional recyclables." (Appendix C and
D may be found at the end of this section.)
c. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments may be
exempted from recycling all materials designated by Appendix C and
Appendix D as "commercial, industrial and institutional recyclables"
provided at least one commodity is recycled. This exemption must be
applied for and approved by the Recycling Coordinator and must be
made in writing. Included with the request must be evidence showing
that the applicant will implement an individual establishment's
alternate recycling plan identifying the material(s) that will be recycled
and presents that an excess of 50% of the solid waste generated by the
applicant will be recycled. A temporary one time three-month
exemption may be granted without supporting evidence at the
discretion of the Recycling Coordinator; however, at the end of the
three-month period the establishment must reapply for exemption with
evidence collected during the three-month period. All regular
exemptions (non temporary exemptions) will expire December 31 of
each year. Exemptions must then be reapplied for no later the January
31 of the next year.
d. Designated recyclables as described in Appendix C and Appendix D
must be delivered to a State approved recycling facility at least once a
month. Weight slips detailing the date, type of recyclables and the
weight (in pounds or tons) must be delivered to the City Clerk no later
than the 15th of the month for the preceding month.
e. Failure of a commercial or industrial establishment to abide by the rules
and regulations of this section may be fined up to $250 for each month
of noncompliance.
a. Intent; Phases.
The intent of this subsection is to adopt regulations relating to and
limiting the use of single-use plastic bags, polystyrene foam and
Styrofoam containers and plastic straws by businesses in the City of
Lambertville. The regulations are intended to assist the City with the
elements in the PARIS Accord and in reducing our carbon footprint by
promoting products that will protect the environment, wildlife, and the
public health and welfare and safety of our community as a whole. The
process will be phased in with Phase I as a voluntary opt-in program
§ 12-4.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-4.6
AO:276
beginning October 1, 2018, and Phase II will be mandatory beginning
on January 1, 2020.
b. Definitions.
BUSINESS OR STORE — Shall mean for the purpose of this subsection,
any retail. The definition shall mean and include, but is not limited
to pharmacies, supermarkets, farmers markets, grocery stores,
convenience stores, clothing stores and food service establishments.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment
which serves made-to-order food or beverages for dine-in, takeout, or
delivery.
GOODS AND PRODUCTS — Shall mean things and items that are
prepared and made to be sold, including, but not limited to, clothing,
groceries, farmers markets, prepared food, foodstuffs, meat, dairy,
beverages, merchandise, books, jewelry, alcohol, tobacco products,
toys, and any and all other things and items sold at retail by businesses
and stores.
PRODUCE BAG OR PRODUCT BAG — Shall mean any bag without
handles that is used exclusively to segregate produce, meats, other food
items, and merchandise to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent
such items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items,
where such contact could damage or contaminate other food or
merchandise when placed together in a reusable or recycled bag.
RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG (PREFERRED, NOT
REQUIRED) — Shall mean a paper bag that meets all of the following
requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber; (2) is 100% recyclable
overall and contains a minimum of 40% postconsumer recycled
material; (3) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and
specifications of American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
Standard 06400; (4) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in
the City; (5) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer,
the location where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage
of postconsumer recycled material used; and (6) displays the word
"Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag.
RETAIL — Shall mean the sale of goods and products for use and/or
consumption.
REUSABLE BAG — Shall mean a bag that is designed and
manufactured to withstand repeated uses over a period of time, is
machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned and
disinfected regularly, is at least 2.25 mil thick if made from plastic, has
a minimum lifetime of 75 uses, and is capable of carrying a minimum of
18 pounds.
SINGLE-USE, PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG — Shall mean a bag, sheet or
receptacle produced or manufactured from material commonly known
as "plastic" or "polyethylene" provided at the check-out stand, cash
register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose
§ 12-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.6
AO:277
of transporting goods or products out of the establishment. The term
single-use, plastic carryout bag does not include reusable bags or
garment bags.
c. Regulation of Single-Use, Plastic Carryout Bags.
The regulation of Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bags shall be phased in
as follows:
1. PHASE I (opt-in beginning October 1, 2018).
Voluntary: During the first 10 months of the program, participation
shall be voluntary. Businesses or Stores will be solicited by the
Environmental Commission to participate on a voluntary basis. The
Environmental Commission shall track progress and work with the
Recycling Coordinator to create a tracking mechanism.
All data collected will be used to reinforce and assist with the
enaction of Phase II of this program (the required participation).
2. PHASE II (mandatory beginning January 1, 2020).
Required:
No business or store shall provide any single-use, plastic carryout
bags, Styrofoam and polystyrene foam container and/or plastic
straws to a customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale,
as otherwise provided in this subsection.
d. Permitted; Paper Carryout and Reusable Bags.
All stores shall provide or make available to a customer recyclable
(preferred, not required) paper carryout bags or reusable bags.
e. Exceptions.
Plastic straws may be provided to customers upon request.
f. Violations and Penalties.
A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Section 1-5, General Penalty and shall be
enforceable by the Zoning Officer of the City of Lambertville.
g. Education/Best Practices.
The Environmental Commission of the City of Lambertville will work
to educate local businesses on the components of this subsection and
will report back to the Governing Body on the Best Practices and the
progress made by September of 2019.
APPENDIX A
Recycling Program
§ 12-4.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-4.6
AO:278
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE POSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECYCLING
COORDINATOR
1. In order to carry out the requirements of the New Jersey Mandatory
Source Separation and Recycling Act and the Hunterdon County
Recycling Plan, the position of Municipal Recycling Coordinator is
hereby established.
2. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will be annually appointed
by the Mayor and will serve a term of one year. The Mayor will
annually affirm in writing the name of the person holding the position
of Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
JOB DESCRIPTION FOR THE POSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECYCLING
COORDINATOR
1. The Recycling Coordinator will report to the Governing Body and/
or the City Clerk at least once annually on the status of the Municipal
Recycling Program including:
a. Tonnages that have been recycled by the Municipal Program since
the last report.
b. Any additional materials that can reasonably be considered to be
recycled as part of the Municipal Program.
c. The impact that the Municipal Recycling Program has had upon the
amount of solid waste generated within the Municipality.
d. Report on financial or technical assistance that is available to the
Municipal Recycling Program.
e. Recommending revisions of the rules and regulations of the
Municipal Recycling Program as developed by the Recycling
Coordinator in Appendices B, C, and D of this section.
2. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will attend all Municipal
Recycling Coordinator meetings that the Governing Body deems to be
important. This includes meetings that may be conducted by the State,
the County or other appropriate organizations.
3. Promote the Municipal Recycling Program by educating citizens,
businesses, institutions and organizations to the need to participate in
the Municipal Recycling Program.
4. Explain to citizens, businesses, institutions and organizations the
provisions of the mandatory recycling ordinance and assist in the
enforcement thereof.
APPENDIX B
Recycling Program
PICK-UP DAYS: The City of Lambertville is divided into four zones for
the trash and recycling collection.
§ 12-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.6
AO:279
ZONE ONE, TUESDAY PICKUP: Begins at Church Street and goes
south to Route 29, includes Bridge Street, Ferry Street, Swan Street,
Mount Hope Street and Canal Street. It also includes Curley Lane,
Grants Alley and Washington Street.
ZONE TWO, WEDNESDAY PICKUP: Includes Cottage Hill, Connaught
Hill and Music Mountain.
ZONE THREE, THURSDAY PICKUP: Begins at Church Street, runs
north to Delaware Avenue.
ZONE FOUR, FRIDAY PICKUP: Begins the north side of Delaware
Avenue, runs north to Cherry Street, and includes Lamberts Hill and
Blair Tract.
The following is a list of MATERIALS THAT MUST BE RECYCLED,
which may be updated by the Recycling Coordinator based on the
materials currently recycled.
APPENDIX C
Recycling Program
CURBSIDE SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING
Recyclable Examples Preparation Not Recyclable
NEWSPAPERS Clean newsprint and
the inserts that come
with newspapers such
as comics, glossy
coupons, magazine
sections and colored
ads.
Do not tie or place in
plastic bags. Contain
in brown bags or
boxes or place loose in
approved collection
container or bucket,
remove samples and
plastics from junk
mail.
Newspapers in plastic
film weather bags.
Remove from plastic
bag and recycle
separately
BUSINESS PAPER
AND JUNK MAIL
Magazines, writing
and school paper,
envelopes with or
without windows,
shredded paper
(contained), copy
paper, paperback
books, hardcover
books with covers
removed, catalogs,
phone books, store
fliers, office papers,
file folders, greeting
cards, nonmetallic gift
wrapping paper and
boxes.
Contain in brown bags
or boxes or place
loose in approved
collection container or
bucket, remove
samples and plastics
from junk mail.
Tissue and toilet
paper, photographs
§ 12-4.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-4.6
AO:280
Recyclable Examples Preparation Not Recyclable
CARDBOARD PAPER
AND CHIPBOARD
Corrugated
cardboard, boxes and
brown paper grocery
bags, cereal and other
non-wax coated food
containers, tissue
boxes, shoe boxes,
clean corrugated pizza
boxes and paper egg
cartons.
Flatten boxes, remove
and discard Styrofoam
and other packing
materials.
Wax coated containers
and frozen food boxes,
milk and juice
containers, Styrofoam
containers, plastic egg
cartons and similar
food containers
GLASS Bottles and Jars of all
colors with labels.
Rinse clean, metal lids
and tops acceptable.
Plastic caps and tops,
drinking glasses,
Pyrex, vases, dishes,
bake ware, china.
Containers without a
Recycling Triangle #1
through #7
PLASTICS Bottles, Jars and Tubs
with a #1, #2, #3, #4,
#5, #6, and #7 in the
Recycling Triangle
such as Beverage,
Milk, Detergent,
Shampoo, Margarine,
and Yogurt.
Rinse clean, remove
all caps, lids and tops
and dispose with
regular trash.
Containers without a
Recycling Triangle #1
through #7
ALUMINUM, TIN,
STEEL AND BIMETAL
Soda, Beverage and
Food Containers,
bimetal cans, aerosol
containers (shaving
cream, mousse, etc.)
Rinse clean, metal lids
acceptable, empty
aerosol containers.
Aerosol cans that
contain product,
aluminum foil and pie
plates, cooking pots
and pans
Batteries — Low voltage and rechargeable*
Batteries — Lead acid motor vehicle*
Corrugated cardboard*
High Grade and/or Office Paper*
USED MOTOR OIL: You can take used motor to any authorized New
Jersey Motor Vehicle re-inspection station for disposal. There is a fee
charged for this service. The City does not accept used motor oil.
§ 12-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.6
AO:281
HUNTERDON COUNTY HAZARDOUS WASTE COLLECTION DAYS
AND ELECTRONIC DROP OFF DAYS: Please contact the Hunterdon
County Utilities Authority, Division of Solid Waste and Recycling, at
908-788-1110, FAX 908-788-1662, for additional information or visit
their website at: http://www.co.hunterdon.nj.us/solidwaste/
cleanup.htm.
MEDICINE DROP: Both residents and nonresidents may now dispose
of medications anonymously, seven days a week, 365 days a year, at
the new drop box in the lobby of Police Headquarters located at 349
North Main Street, Lambertville. The drop box is accessible weekdays
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. At all other times people wishing to
dispose of medications will be provided access by reaching an officer
via the call box located next to the entrance door to headquarters.
ELECTRONICS AND CLOTHING: Residents and business may dispose
of used electronics and/or clothing, Monday through Saturday from
8:00 a.m. to Noon, by taking the items to the Public Works Department
located at 120 Quarry Street and placing their items in the respective
bins.
FOOD WASTE (Third Can Food Waste Recycling Program):
• Materials that must be recycled by Commercial, Industrial and
Institutional Establishments are hereby amended to include Food
Waste including those who participate in community events with trash
collection through the City.
• Residents may participate in the Third Can Food Waste Recycling
Program.
• Commercial establishments shall participate in the Third Can Food
Waste Recycling Program.
• The fees to participate will be set by a resolution of the Governing
Body.
Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Establishments Only:
Beginning January 1, 2020, all Commercial, Industrial and Institutional
Establishments: the following items shall be added to the list titled:
NOT RECYCLABLE:
Plastic bags, plastic straws, polyethylene products, Styrofoam
products for the use of packaging food products for sale to the public.
APPENDIX D
Recycling Program
§ 12-4.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 12-4.6
AO:282
§ 12-5. FEES FOR COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
§ 12-5.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-4.1]
A solid waste collection system has been established within the Department
of Public Works, and there is a need for collection services for curbside
pickup of four bags/receptacles per unit, placed to the curb in a prescribed
manner which has been established for each residential or commercial unit.
Receptacles are defined in subsection 12-1.1 "as each bag or container shall
weigh less than 40 pounds and be less than four feet in any dimension and
be totally enclosed." The receptacles along the street are for use by visitors
to the City and not for placement of household or commercial trash.
(Materials that are not required to be recycled but may be considered
mandatory by a municipality by a municipality and/or alternate
recyclables for residential, commercial and industrial and institutional
establishments.)
Yard Waste
Bi-Metals/Steel Cans
White Goods
Plastics - #'s 1 + 2 at present (may be expanded in the future)
Waste oil*
Tires*
Construction/Demolition Debris** (components resulting from the
construction and/or demolition of a building or structure, both
residential and commercial, including but not limited to brick,
sheetrock, glass, wood, tree stumps, logs, branches, and other like
material found in the demolition and/or construction industry.)
Any material that can unquestionably be recycled of a non-traditional
nature that is generated by a commercial/industrial or institutional
establishment provided that there is a proven, viable market for the
said materials.
* Mandatory for commercial, industrial and institutional
establishments.
** The construction and building permits that are issued may require
performance bonds and/or escrow accounts that are returned to the
permit holder when receipts are shown documenting the proper
disposal at the appropriate solid waste facility or approved recycling
center.
§ 12-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.1
AO:283
Units are defined as Commercial or Housing Units which house one
business or family per unit.
§ 12-5.2. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 16-2013 § 12-4.2]
Chapter 13
SEWER AND WATER
§ 13-1. MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTION.
§ 13-1.1. Installation and Connection of Sanitary Facilities. [1990
Code § 13-1.1]
The owner of any dwelling or other building occupied by persons and
located upon any street in which a sanitary sewer is now constructed, shall,
within 60 days after the date of completion of construction of a sewage
treatment plant in this City, install a toilet in such dwelling or other building
unless a toilet is now installed therein or shall have been installed therein
prior to that date, and shall, prior to that date, connect such toilet therein
or so installed therein, and such dwelling or other building with such sewer.
§ 13-1.2. Connection Required for Houses to Be Erected. [1990
Code § 13-1.2]
The owner of any dwelling or other building to be occupied by persons
hereafter erected upon any street in which a sanitary sewer is constructed,
shall, prior to occupancy of such dwelling or other building or within
a. The fees for collection and disposal services in excess of four bags shall
be established by resolution annually for the public's convenience in
disposing of items which are not included in the weekly collection. The
Public Works Director in conjunction with the City Clerk shall submit a
list of recommended items which will be approved by resolution of the
Governing Body annually.
b. All additional service shall be arranged through the City Clerk's Office
with payment prior to the service being provided.
c. A tag for additional service will be provided by the City Clerk's Office
upon payment for the services listed in paragraph a and shall be affixed
to the item when it is placed at the curbside.
d. Annually, the City of Lambertville may conduct a Sparkle Week and may
collect additional fees by permit. The rate will be established based on
the current rate paid by tonnage, set and approved by Resolution of
Mayor and Council with input from the Public Works Director and City
Clerk.
e. Electronics can be picked up at the curb for recycling for a fee which
will be established by resolution.
§ 12-5.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 13-1.2
AO:284
60 days after the date of the completion of construction of the sewage
treatment plant, whichever date shall be later, install a toilet in such
dwelling or other building and shall connect such toilet and dwelling or
other building with such sewer.
§ 13-1.3. Owner of Building Required to Connect When Sewer Is
Constructed. [1990 Code § 13-1.3]
The owner of any dwelling or other building occupied by persons, now
located upon any street in which a sanitary sewer may hereafter be
constructed, shall, within 60 days after the date of the completion of such
sewer or within 60 days after the date of the completion of the sewage
treatment plant, whichever date shall be later, install a toilet in such
dwelling or other building, unless a toilet is now installed therein or shall
have been installed therein prior to that date, and shall connect such toilet
therein or so installed therein, and such dwelling or other building with the
sewer.
§ 13-1.4. Owner Fails to Connect; Connection Made by City. [1990
Code § 13-1.4]
If the owner of any property shall fail to make any connection or installation
required by this section within the time herein required, the City may
proceed to make such connection or installation, or cause the same to be
made, and assess the cost thereof as a lien against such property, pursuant
to State Law.
§ 13-2. ORDER TO CONNECT FROM CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL.
§ 13-2.1. (Reserved)
§ 13-2.2. Order from the Construction Official to Connect. [1990
Code § 13-2.2]
All owners of property situated along the lines of any sewers now or
hereafter constructed in any of the streets or highways, or other places, of
and in the City shall cause the houses or buildings located thereon to be
connected with the sewer line in the street, or other place adjoining the
property upon order from the Mayor and Council to be given by the City
Construction Official requiring such connection to be made.
§ 13-2.3. Form of Notice. [1990 Code § 13-2.3]
The notice shall be addressed to the owner of the property as the name of
the owner appears in the last tax duplicate of the City, shall describe the
property by lot and block designation as the same appears on the tax map
of the City and by the street address thereof, if a street address exists, and
shall state that by order of the Mayor and Council, the owner is required
to connect the house or other building or buildings on the property with
the sewer line, and the notice shall inform the owner of the penalty to be
§ 13-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.3
AO:285
imposed for failure to comply with this notice and order, in accordance with
the terms of this section.
§ 13-2.4. Serving of Notice. [1990 Code § 13-2.4]
The notice may be served on the owner personally or by leaving it at his
usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age of 18 years.
If the owner is not a resident of the City a copy of the notice may be left
with the tenant or occupant of the house or building on the property, and a
copy of the notice shall be sent to the owner by registered mail addressed
to the last known post office address of said owner as the name appears on
the last tax duplicate of the City.
§ 13-2.5. Penalty. [1990 Code § 13-2.5]
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order issued in accordance
with the terms of this section within 30 days after the notice has been
served, as aforesaid, shall upon conviction be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 13-3. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
§ 13-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 14-2018]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the test of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or non-physical
connection that discharges storm water, groundwater, or non contract
cooling water to the sanitary sewer system operated by the Lambertville
Municipal Utilities Authority. Non physical connections may include, but
are not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows into the sanitary sewer system.
Sump pump discharges, cellar drains floor drains, and roof drains that
convey groundwater or storm water to any part of the WTP, sanitary sewer
system or plumbing system or are also considered illicit connections.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual corporation, company, limited liability
company, partnership, firm, business entity, association or political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 13-2.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 13-3.1
AO:286
WTP — Shall mean the Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority
Wastewater Treatment Plant including all components of the associated
collection system and infrastructure.
§ 13-3.2. Incorporation of Regulations. [Ord. No. 14-2018]
The Lambertville Municipal Utilities Authority Use, Rules and Regulations,
as amended and supplemented from time to time (the "Regulations"), are
hereby incorporated by reference in this Section. A copy of the Regulations,
including all current amendments and supplements, shall be maintained in
the office of the Clerk and made available to the public for inspection and
copying during regular business hours.
§ 13-3.3. Prohibited Conduct and Discharges. [Ord. No. 14-2018]
No person shall engage in improper use or construction of sanitary sewers.
No person shall construct, operate, utilize or own an illicit connection.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to correct a violation
of any provision of the Regulations within 30 days after delivery to such
person or entity of a written notice of violation from the Authority, except
that committing or causing the commission of a prohibited discharge as
defined in the Regulations shall be an unlawful act at the time it occurs.
§ 13-3.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 14-2018]
The provisions of this Section may be enforced by the Executive Director
of the Authority. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-20, representatives of the
Authority shall have the power to enter, at all reasonable times, any
premises on which such a prohibited discharge pursuant to Section
17.48.030 is supposed to exist, for the purpose of inspecting, rehabilitating
or securing samples of any such prohibited discharge.
§ 13-3.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 14-2018]
In addition to the penalties provided in the Regulations for violation of
any provision of this Section or of the Regulations, the maximum penalty,
upon conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding $2,000, or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day on which any
waters or wastes are discharged in violation of Section 17.48.030 shall
constitute a separate violation.
In addition to the penalties provided in Regulations and in this Section for
violation of any provision of this Section or of the Regulations, the City may
require the installation or connection to a sewer line to be made and recover
the cost as an assessment upon the premises for which the connection was
made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54, et seq.
Chapter 14
§ 13-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.5
AO:287
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 14-1. STREET OPENINGS.
§ 14-1.1. Permit Required for Street Opening. [1990 Code § 14-1.1;
Ord. No. 09-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening through or under
the surface of any public City street or right-of-way for any purpose
whatsoever without first obtaining a permit from the City. This includes
construction of new sidewalks as well as openings in the cartway.
§ 14-1.2. Application. [1990 Code § 14-1.2; Ord. No. 09-2011]
An application for the permit shall be made in writing to the Director of
Public Works and shall be forwarded to and filed with the City Clerk. The
application, accompanied by a plot plan, diagram or drawing, shall set forth
the exact location, nature and extent of the opening to be made together
with a statement of the purpose or purposes thereof. The drawing shall be
drawn to scale. The Public Works Director shall respond within 48 hours to
the Office of the City Clerk advising of his approval and/or requirements of
all applications.
§ 14-1.3. Fees. [1990 Code § 14-1.3; Ord. No. 2007-29; Ord. No.
09-2011; Ord. No. 05-2016]
§ 14-1.4. Discharge of Bond. [1990 Code § 14-1.4; Ord. No. 09-2011]
When the Public Works Director is satisfied that the street opened has been
replaced in the same or as good condition as it was before the opening, on
the account of which the bond was given, the Director shall direct the City
Clerk to cancel or discharge the bond.
If the Public Works Director finds that the street has not been replaced in
the same or as good condition as it was before the opening, the Director
shall give notice to the applicant to correct same within 30 days. If the
a. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.
b. If the application is for a project costing in excess of $15,000 then the
application shall include an escrow agreement, a preliminary fee of
$1,000 to cover costs to review and inspect the project by the City
Engineer and a performance bond in the amount of 10% of the costs as
certified by the City Engineer based on documentation submitted by the
applicant. 20% of the bond shall be in cash.
c. If the application is for a project on a street that was the subject of a
reconstruction project within the past five years, the applicant shall, in
addition to complying with all requirements of the City Engineer and
the Public Works Director, post a maintenance bond guaranteeing the
work for a period of two years.
§ 13-3.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 14-1.4
AO:288
applicant fails to correct same within 30 days, the cash bond shall be
utilized by the Public Works Department to correct the same. In the event of
a corporate bond, the City Clerk shall be authorized to take the necessary
steps to collect payment from the bonding company.
§ 14-1.5. Construction of a New Driveway. [1990 Code § 14-1.5; Ord.
No. 2003-22]
§ 14-2. SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
§ 14-2.1. General. [1990 Code § 14-2.1]
There shall be curbs and sidewalks on the streets of the City presently
opened or that may be opened in the future, when for reasons of public
safety and convenience, such are deemed necessary. The necessity for such
a. Standards for a New Driveway.
1. The use of the property must be in conformity with the Zoning
Ordinance.
2. The driveway shall be located a minimum of three feet from any
property line.
3. The driveway shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet long
not including that portion located within the street right-of-way.
4. The total lot coverage as stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance shall
not be exceeded.
b. Notice to Public. Any application for the creation of a new driveway that
has not been subject of a public hearing before either the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment or is located within the
Historic District of the City of Lambertville as designated by the State
of New Jersey shall be accompanied by proof of publication of a notice
in The Beacon that the applicant has applied for permission to construct
a driveway and that the Mayor and Council will hold a public hearing on
the application at the next regular meeting and that any interested
party can be heard at that time. The applicant must obtain a list of
property owners within 200 feet of the property upon which the
driveway is proposed. A notice of the filing of the application and the
date of the public hearing shall be served on each property owner on
the list by certified mail or personal service at least 10 days before the
scheduled hearing.
c. Hearing. The comments from the Public Works Director, Police Director
and adjacent property owners will be considered by the Mayor and City
Council in deciding on the application.
d. After favorable decision of the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk is
authorized to issue a permit for the construction of the new driveway
subject to the conditions, if any, imposed by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.1
AO:289
curbs and sidewalks and the repair of the same shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
Where curbs are required, depressed curb ramps shall be installed at the
radii curb in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 14-2.2. Curb Specifications. [1990 Code § 14-2.2]
a. If curbs are to be concrete the curbing shall meet the following
specifications:
1. The concrete to be used for curb shall be Class B (minimum 4,000
PSI) as specified in New Jersey State Highway Specifications for
Curbs and Gutters.
2. Curbs shall be constructed using ten foot sections, expansion joints
shall be provided at a maximum interval of 30 feet and the
expansion joint material shall meet the requirements of the City
Engineer. If the joints are 30 feet apart the material shall be 1/2
inch, if 20 feet apart shall be 3/8 inch.
3. Openings for driveway access shall be in such width as shall be
determined by the City Engineer. The curb at such driveway
openings shall be depressed to the extent that 1 1/2 inch of the face
of the curb be extended above the finished pavement. The rear top
corner of the curb shall have a radius 1/4 inch and the front top
corner shall have a radius of 1 1/2 inch.
4. Concrete curbs shall be nine inches wide at the base, not less than
six inches wide at the top and the height shall not be less than 18
inches and be constructed to show a vertical face above the road
pavement of six inches, or as approved by the City Engineer. Curbs
at driveway openings shall be constructed to the full depth of 18
inches which depth shall extend a minimum of six inches on either
side of the depression.
b. If curbs are to be belgian block the curbing shall meet the requirements
of the following specifications:
1. The stone block shall be new or used granite or other stone as
approved by the City Engineer. The block shall be sound and
durable, reasonably uniform in quality and texture throughout, free
from shale, excess mica, seams, scaling or evidence of
disintegration. The color shall be light gray with medium or fine
grain. Samples of the stone must be submitted to and be approved
by the City Engineer prior to beginning any work.
The block shall be rectangular in shape with the following
dimensions:
Ten inches to 12 inches in length, three inches to five inches in
width, and three inches to five inches in depth, unless otherwise
§ 14-2.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 14-2.2
AO:290
approved by the Engineer, and dressed so that they may be laid
with a maximum of 1 1/4 inch joints or as approved by the City
Engineer, prior to beginning the work.
2. The stone block curbing shall be laid in a bed of Class C concrete a
minimum width of 12 inches wide, eight inches under the block and
extend up on the front of the block to within eight inches of the top
and on the back of the block to within four inches of the top. Joints
shall be filled with cement mortar.
3. Openings for driveway access shall be such width as shall be
determined by the City Engineer. The curbs at such driveway
openings shall be depressed to the extent that 1 1/2 inch extends
above the finished pavement.
c. If curbs are to be granite curb the curbing shall meet the following
specifications:
1. Stone curb shall be approved granite from acceptable sources. The
stone shall be sound and durable, free from seams which impair its
structural integrity, and of a smooth splitting and machining
character. Natural color variations that are characteristic of the
deposit will be permitted. It shall be of the depth called for in
quantity sheets, not less than 15 inches deep throughout, and not
less than three feet long.
Top surfaces shall be sawed or hammered to approximately true
planes with no projection or depression greater than 1/8 inch. Saw
marks normal to the sawing process will be permitted if within
the one-eighth 1/8 inch tolerance. The front and back arris lines
shall be pitched straight and true. There shall be no projection on
the back surface for three inches down from the top which would
exceed a batter of one inch horizontal or three inches vertical.
The front face shall be smooth quarry split, free from drill holes
in the exposed face. There shall be no projection greater than 3/4
inch or depression greater than 1/2 inch measured from the plane
or planes of the face through the front arris lines for a distance of
eight inches down from the top. For the remaining distances there
shall be no projection or depression greater than one inch variation
from the plane of the face.
The ends of all curb sections shall be square with the plane of the
top and face and, so finished that when the sections are placed end
to end, as closely as possible, no space more than 3/4 inch shall
show in the joint for the full width of the top or down on the face
for eight inches. The remainder of the end may break back not over
nine inches from the plane of the joint.
2. The granite curbing shall be laid so that six inches of the face is
extended above the finished road pavement. The granite curb shall
be laid in Class C concrete at a minimum of 12 inches wide at the
§ 14-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.2
AO:291
§ 14-2.3. Sidewalk Specifications. [1990 Code § 14-2.3]
base and four inches under the granite curb and extended up on
both the front and back approximately six inches. The Class C
concrete shall be a very stiff mix so that it will support the granite
curbs.
a. Sidewalks shall adhere to the following specifications unless otherwise
specified by the City Engineer. Sidewalks shall have the minimum width
of four feet and a maximum of 10 feet wide or as directed by the City
Engineer.
b. If the sidewalks are to be concrete they shall meet the following
specifications:
The concrete to be used for sidewalks shall be Class B concrete
(minimum 4,000 PSI) as specified in New Jersey State Highway
Specifications for sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed using
twenty foot sections with contraction joints every four feet. An
expansion joint shall be placed every 20 feet or where the concrete
sidewalks abut other structures. The expansion joint material shall
be at least 3/8 inch thick and shall be bituminous impregnated. The
concrete shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and shall be
laid on compacted select material, except in aprons where driveways
cross the sidewalks the thickness should be a minimum of six inches
thick, and shall be laid on compacted select material. The surface shall
not vary more than 1/8 inch under a ten-foot straight edge. The surface
shall have a granular or matter texture which will not be slick when
wet. The sidewalk surface shall be laid out in blocks with an approved
grooving tool as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. If
the sidewalks are to be paved with pavers (brick, flagstone, tile or stone
block) the sidewalks shall meet the following specifications:
1. Material:
(a) If pavers are paving brick the brick shall have a fine grain,
uniform, and dense structure free of lumps of lime,
laminations, cracks, checks, soluble salts, or other defects
which may in any way impair their strength, durability,
appearance, or usefulness for the purpose intended. The bricks
shall emit a clear, metallic ring when struck by a hammer.
(b) If pavers are flagstone or block, the stone should be slate,
bluestone or granite and shall be tough, dense, sound and
durable, resistant to weather action, reasonable fine grain,
uniform in color and free from seams, cracks or other
structural defects. All stone material should be approved by
the City Engineer prior to installing.
(c) Concrete base: Concrete for the base course of three inches
thick shall be Class C concrete (3,500 PSI concrete). In apron
§ 14-2.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 14-2.3
AO:292
§ 14-2.4. Duty of Owner. [1990 Code § 14-2.4]
The owners or owner of all lots of land in the City of Lambertville who
already have paved sidewalks and curbs shall keep the same in repair so
that the same shall at all times present an even surface and conform to
area the concrete base should be five inches thick, and in
roadway eight inches thick.
2. Method to Install Brick, Flagstone or Stone Block, (Pavers).
(a) The base concrete slab shall be brought to an elevation of one
inch plus the thickness of the pavers below the finished grade
elevation. The concrete slab should have a rough broom finish.
(b) The surface of the concrete slab shall be thoroughly cleaned of
all loose material and free of dirt, mud and other fine material.
Hose dampen the surface of the slab and apply liberally a
sprinkling of Portland cement over the area to be paved. Broom
the cement and water slurry over the surface of the concrete to
be paved.
(c) Place mortar bed at a minimum of one-inch thick, comprised of
one part Portland cement to three parts clean sharp sand
thoroughly mixed with only sufficient water to form a stiff
mortar mix. Pavers shall be firmly bedded into the mortar bed
bringing the upper face of the pavers to the proper grade.
(d) Pavers shall be spaced to provide joints as follows:
(1) For Brick: The space to provide joints of not less than 3/8
inch wide and not to exceed one-half inch wide.
(2) For Flagstone and Stone Block: Pavers shall be spaced to
provide joints of not less than 3/4 inch wide and not to
exceed one-inch wide. Joints shall be broomed filled with a
dry mortar mix, consisting of one part Portland cement
and three parts clean sharp sand thoroughly mixed. Broom
off excess mortar mix with a fine hair broom to assure that
the surface of the pavers is entirely clean. Spray water
over the entire surface of the paving treating only a small
area at one time using a fine mist spray to completely
saturate the joints. Spray shall be carefully controlled to
prevent redistributing of the mortar mix and to ensure that
no flooding of the joints occur. Continue this process until
the joints have been saturated to the full depth of pavers.
On completion of the saturation, inspect the area to insure
that no joints have settled beyond the normal depth not to
exceed 1/4 inch below the normal face of the pavers. Any
joints showing excess settlement shall be filled to the
proper level with a stiff mortar mix by trowel and finished
to match the balance of the joints.
§ 14-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.4
AO:293
the established grade and full established width of any sidewalks and curbs
within the block in which the particular sidewalks or curbs are located. The
owners may make their repairs with the same type of material used in said
sidewalks.
§ 14-2.5. Approval of Plans. [1990 Code § 14-2.5]
Before any new curbing and sidewalks are constructed, or any present
curbing or sidewalks are to be repaired, a plan incorporating the
requirements of subsection 14-2.2 as to curbs, the requirements of
subsection 14-2.3 hereof as to sidewalks or the provisions of subsection
14-2.4 as to repairs, must be submitted to the Director of Public Works,
at the City Hall, setting forth the details of the work to be done. If the
Director finds the plan meets the requirements of this section, he shall
issue an approval of the same and provide therein the line and grade to
be followed in the construction of the curbing and sidewalks. If the said
Director deems it necessary, he may consult with the City Engineer before
issuing the approval of any such plan.
§ 14-2.6. Inspection, Notice. [1990 Code § 14-2.6]
The Director of Public Works shall periodically inspect the properties in the
City and determine, that for reasons of public safety and convenience, it is
necessary to construct, repair or alter or relay any curbing or sidewalks,
and submit a report of any such inspection to the Governing Body of the
City. The Governing Body may then, by resolution, order the Director to
serve a notice in writing upon the owners or occupants of the land requiring
the necessary specified work to such curbs or sidewalks to be done by the
owner and occupant in accordance with the provisions of this section within
a period of not less than 60 days from the date of service of such notice.
When the land is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, or his post
office address is unknown, then such notice shall be given in accordance
with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:65-3, Service of Notice.
§ 14-2.7. Work Done by City. [1990 Code § 14-2.7]
If the owner or occupant of such lands does not comply with the
requirements of such notice, the Director of Public Works shall cause the
required work to be done and paid for out of the City funds. In the case of
sidewalks, the material used shall be brick, flagstone or Class C concrete.
The cost of such work shall be certified by the Director to the City Tax
Assessor and upon the filing of such certificates, the cost of such work shall
be a lien upon the abutting lands in front of which such work was done,
pursuant to the provisions of the State Statutes.
§ 14-2.8. Reconstruction. [1990 Code § 14-2.8]
If any street, or part of a street, in the City is to be entirely reconstructed
and new curbs and sidewalks are included as part of such reconstruction,
§ 14-2.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 14-2.8
AO:294
the specifications for the curbs and sidewalks shall be in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
§ 14-3. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
§ 14-3.1. Time Allowed to Clear Sidewalks. [1990 Code § 14-3.1]
The owners or tenants of any lands abutting upon the streets of the City
shall remove all snow and ice from their sidewalks which abut upon the
streets within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed
thereon.
§ 14-3.2. Failure to Remove; City to Cause Removal; Cost to Be Tax
Lien. [1990 Code § 14-3.2]
In addition to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, if any owner or
tenant of such lands shall fail to remove such snow or ice, the Director of
Public Works may cause the same to be removed and certify the cost of the
removal to the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall examine
the certificate, and if they find the same to be correct, cause such cost of
removal to be charged against the real estate abutting upon the sidewalk;
the amount so charged thereupon shall become a lien and tax upon such
real estate and shall be added to and be part of the taxes next to be levied
and assessed thereon, to be enforced and collected with interest by the
same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 14-3.3. Penalty. [1990 Code § 14-3.3]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 15
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 15-1. AIR BNB, HOME TO GO, PRICELINE, HOTEL AND MOTEL
ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 15-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2003-07]
It is the purpose of this Section 15-1 to implement the provisions of P.L.
2003, c. 114, which authorizes the Governing Body of a municipality to
adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to
exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003,
but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for
every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 14-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.2
AO:295
§ 15-1.2. Tax Established. [Ord. #2003-07; Ord. No. 15-2018;
amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 24-2019]
There is hereby established a transient occupancy tax for the rental of
transient accommodations obtained through transient space marketplaces,
as defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48E-2, and which include, but are not
limited to, Air BNB, Home to Go, Priceline, Hotel and Motel in the City
of Lambertville, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel
or motel room in the City of Lambertville, of a room or rooms, is hereby
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 15-1.3. Tax in Addition to Any Other Tax or Fee. [Ord. #2003-07;
Ord. No. 15-2018; amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 24-2019]
The transient occupancy tax for the rental of transient accommodations
obtained through a transient space marketplace, as defined pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48E-2, shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 15-1.4. Requirements. [Ord. #2003-07]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
§ 15-1.5. Collection of Tax. [Ord. #2003-07; amended 10-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 24-2019]
The tax imposed by § 15-1 shall be collected on behalf of the City by the
person collecting rent from the hotel or motel customer or the person
collecting payment for rental of a transient accommodation obtained
through a transient space marketplace. Each person required to collect the
tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected
or required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same
a. All taxes imposed by this Section 15-1 shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this section.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
e. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be as
provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the City Code for each offense.
§ 15-1.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 15-1.5
AO:296
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were
a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the Chief
Financial Officer of the City shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 15-1.6. Filing of Regulation. [Ord. #2003-07]
A copy of this Section 15-1, adopted by Ordinance No. 2003-07, shall be
transmitted to the State Treasurer and to each hotel or motel located within
the City of Lambertville.
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
Chapter 17
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.6
AO:297

ARTICLE I
Municipal Consent19
§ 17-1. PURPOSE OF THE ORDINANCE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 1]
The Municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its non-exclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the Municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 17-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 2]
For the purpose of this Ordinance (Chapter 17), the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
Such meaning or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of
the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47
C.F.R. Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act,
47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the Federal and State definitions:
a. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
b. APPLICATION — Shall mean the Company's Application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent.
c. BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Shall mean any service tier, which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by
the FCC.
d. BOARD OR BPU — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of
New Jersey.
e. CITY OR MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville, County
of Hunterdon, State of New Jersey.
f. COMPANY — Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Ordinance
and is known as Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC.
g. FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
h. OFFICE OR OCTV — Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the
Board.
19.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 9/4/79 (part), 96-23 and
97-12, previously codified in the 1990 Code as Chapter 17.
§ 17-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2
AO:299
§ 17-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the Municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the Municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 17-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 4]
The non-exclusive Municipal Consent granted herein is for a period of
15 years beginning as of the date of issuance of a renewal Certificate of
Approval by the Board, and shall thereafter be extended for, and end after,
an automatic renewal term of 10 years as provided by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and
25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 17-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 17-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 6]
The consent granted under this Ordinance (Chapter 17) to the renewal of
the franchise shall apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
i. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA — Shall mean the area of the
Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
§ 17-2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 17-7
AO:300
§ 17-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 7]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as
set forth in the Company's Application. Any extension of plant beyond the
Primary Service Area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension
Policy of 35 homes per mile.
Comcast will extend its plant along rights-of-ways to all residences and
business within 150 aerial feet or 100 underground feet of Comcast's active
cable distribution plant at no cost beyond the normal installation rate.
§ 17-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 8]
§ 17-9. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 9]
In providing service to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Municipality upon written request of
the Municipal Administrator or Clerk.
a. Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
c. Temporary Removal of Cables: Upon Request, the Company shall
temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow
for the moving of buildings, and machinery or in other similar
circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting such
action, except when requested by the Municipality, in which case the
company shall bear the cost.
d. Removal or Trimming of Trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
a. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
§ 17-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-9
AO:301
§ 17-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2010-05
§ 10]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipal customers from the OCTV.
§ 17-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 11]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 17-12. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 12]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 17-13. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 13]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ 17-14. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY.
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
b. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
c. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
d. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
Municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ 17-9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 17-14
AO:302
§ 17-15. GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL ACCESS. [Ord. No.
2010-05 § 15]
a. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the Municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
b. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service at
no cost on one outlet to City Hall, each police, fire, emergency
management facility and public library in the Municipality, provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the Municipality. Monthly service charges shall be
waived on all additional outlets.
c. The Company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable and modem, to one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future school in the City, public and private,
elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to the students and not for administrative use only.
d. The Company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable and modem on one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
e. Within 12 months of receipt of a Renewal Certificate of Approval, the
Company shall provide the City with a one-time technology grant in the
amount of $22,500 for the City's cable and technology related needs.
a. The Company will provide one channel for governmental access use
(sometimes, hereinafter, the "Governmental Access Channel").
Governmental access programming shall be provided by the governing
bodies of the City of Lambertville, West Amwell Township, the Borough
of Stockton, and Delaware Township (hereinafter, collectively, the
"Municipalities"). Unused capacity may be utilized by the Company
subject to the provisions for "fallow time" below. Comcast shall activate
the government channel within six months of a written request by the
Municipality. The request for activation shall not occur prior to receipt
of the Certificate of Approval from the NJ Board of Public Utilities.
The Company shall construct a dedicated fiber optic return line to
the City Municipal Building at 18 York Street in Lambertville and the
§ 17-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-15
AO:303
Justice Center, 25 South Union Street, Lambertville for cable casting
live and/or recorded programming on the Government access channel.
The Company will also provide a switching device for use by the
Municipality to change broadcast location between the York Street
and Union Street locations during emergencies. The Company will
not be responsible for providing or for the maintenance of any studio
equipment used for the access channel, including but not limited to
cameras, editing decks, monitors, character generators, etc.
b. The Company will continue to provide one channel for educational
access use (sometimes, hereinafter, the "Education Access Channel") by
the South Hunterdon Regional High School (hereinafter, the "High
School"). Educational access programming shall be provided by the
governing bodies of the City of Lambertville, West Amwell Township,
the Borough of Stockton, and Delaware Township (hereinafter,
collectively, the "Municipalities"), the High School (together with the
Municipalities, the "Users") or other designated educational
institutions within the Municipalities. Unused capacity may be utilized
by the Company subject to the provisions for "fallow time" below.
c. The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for governmental or
educational access use. A governmental or educational access user —
whether all or any of the Users or other educational or government user
— acquires no property or other interest by virtue of the use of a
channel so designated, nor may it rely on the continued use of a
particular channel number, no matter how long the same channel may
have been designated for such use.
d. The Company shall not exercise editorial control over any governmental
or educational use of channel capacity, except that the Company may
refuse to transmit any governmental or educational access program or
portion of a governmental or educational access program that contains
obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
e. Shared use of the channels shall be governed by mutual agreement
among the governing bodies of the Users. The Users shall be
responsible for developing, implementing, and enforcing rules for the
Access Channels.
f. "Educational Access" shall mean the noncommercial use by educational
institutions such as public or private schools, but not "home schools,"
community colleges, and universities.
g. "Government Access" shall mean noncommercial use by the governing
bodies of the City of Lambertville, West Amwell Township, the Borough
of Stockton, and Delaware Township for the purpose of showing the
public local government at work.
h. Company Use of Fallow Time. Because a blank or under utilized
governmental or educational access channel is not in the public
interest, in the event that the Users do not fully program the
§ 17-15 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 17-15
AO:304
§ 17-16. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 16]
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
§ 17-17. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 17]
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ 17-18. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No.
2010-05 § 18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State of Federal
law.
§ 17-19. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 19]
Should the Municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
Ordinance (Chapter 17) subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
Governmental or Educational Access Channel, the Company may
program unused time on said channel (at its discretion and for any
purpose), subject to reclamation by the Municipalities upon no less than
60 days' written notice.
i. Indemnification. The Municipalities shall indemnify the Company for
any liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to any violation of the
intellectual property rights of third parties on the Governmental or
Educational Access Channel and from claims arising out of the Users'
rules for or administration of access.
§ 17-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-20
AO:305
§ 17-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 20]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance (Chapter 17) is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court or Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its
validity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the Ordinance (Chapter 17).
§ 17-21. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 21]
Nothing in this Franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or Franchise.
§ 17-22. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2010-05 § 22]
This Ordinance (Chapter 17) shall take effect immediately upon issuance of
a Renewal Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
§ 17-23. through § 17-24. (RESERVED)
§ 17-20 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 17-23
AO:306
ARTICLE II
Advisory Committee
§ 17-25. CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 17-25.1. Established. [1990 Code § 17-15.1]
Cable Television Advisory Committee is hereby established consisting of five
residents of the City who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. The members shall serve for five year terms.
The first appointments shall be staggered.
§ 17-25.2. Function. [1990 Code § 17-15.2]
The function of the Committee shall be to monitor the compliance of the
Company with the terms of this chapter to assist the Mayor and Council to
adjudicate any difference on cable television issues and to coordinate the
ascertainment proceedings leading to a new agreement at the termination
of this franchise. The Committee shall keep abreast of changes in the
industry from new technology and amended Federal and State legislation.
§ 17-25.3. List of Civic and Service Organizations. [1990 Code
§ 17-15.3]
Annually the Committee shall provide a list of civic and service
organizations to the Company.
§ 17-25.4. Availability to Meet with Company. [1990 Code § 17-15.4]
The Company shall make itself available, upon reasonable notice, to meet
with the Committee on an annual basis for discussion of cable television
matters.
§ 17-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-25.4
AO:307
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 19-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 19-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [1990 Code § 19-1.1; Ord. No.
2009-12 § 1.1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Lambertville, of Hunterdon County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 19-1.2. Findings of Fact. [1990 Code § 19-1.2; Ord. No. 2009-12
§ 1.2; Ord. No. 24-2015]
§ 19-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [1990 Code § 19-1.3; Ord. No.
2009-12 § 1.3; Ord. No. 24-2015]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of City of Lambertville are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
c. The City of Lambertville participates as a Community in the FEMA
National Flood Insurance Program and the Community Rating System.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
§ 17-25.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-1.3
AO:308
§ 19-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [1990 Code § 19-1.4;
Ord. No. 2009-12 § 1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [1990 Code § 19-2; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 2.0;
Ord. No. 24-2015]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To reduce flood insurance premiums.
h. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
i. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 19-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2
AO:309
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FACILITY — Is one that provides essential community services.
Typically these are, but not limited to, fire and police stations, ambulance
squad, emergency operations center, city hall, electric substations, public
works yard, school and nursing homes and shelters.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
Critical Facilities:
Critical facilities shall be prohibited from the 0.2% annual chance
flood (equaled or exceeded in any given year) as defined on the
FEMA effective Flood Insurance Rate Map;
1.
If a critical facility must be located in the Special Flood Hazard
Area or the Shaded X Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (0.2%
annual chance flood; the "500-year" floodplain)
(a) It shall be elevated to the level of the 0.2% chance flood, or,
It shall be flood proofed up to the elevation of the 0.2% chance
flood.
(b)
2.
a.
§ 19-2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-2
AO:310
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
§ 19-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2
AO:311
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the Municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 19-2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-2
AO:312
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 19-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [1990 Code § 19-3.1;
Ord. No. 2009-12 § 3.1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Lambertville, Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
b.
§ 19-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-3.2
AO:313
§ 19-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[1990 Code § 19-3.2; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 3.2; Ord. No. 04-2012]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" dated May 2, 2012, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hunterdon County, New
Jersey (all Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s) 34019C0339G,
34019C0402G, 34019C0406F, whose effective date is May 2, 2012.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
Chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and Maps are on file at 18 York Street,
Lambertville, New Jersey 08530.
§ 19-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [1990 Code § 19-3.3; Ord.
No. 2009-12 § 3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Lambertville
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 19-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [1990 Code § 19-3.4;
Ord. No. 2009-12 § 3.4]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 19-3.5. Interpretation. [1990 Code § 19-3.5; Ord. No. 2009-12
§ 3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 19-3.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-3.6
AO:314
§ 19-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [1990 Code § 19-3.6;
Ord. No. 2009-12 § 3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lambertville,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 19-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 19-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [1990 Code
§ 19-4.1; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 4.1]
§ 19-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [1990 Code
§ 19-4.2; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 4.2]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
a. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in subsection 19-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and may include,
but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
b. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in subsection 19-5.2b and,
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 19-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-4.3
AO:315
§ 19-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [1990
Code § 19-4.3; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 4.3]
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 19-5.3a are met.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer subsections 19-5.2a Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 19-5.2b Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 19-4.1c
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 19-4.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-4.3
AO:316
§ 19-4.4. Variance Procedure. [1990 Code § 19-4.4; Ord. No.
2009-12 § 4.4]
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
19-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by City of
Lambertville shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Mayor and City
Council of Lambertville.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 19-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-4.4
AO:317
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 19-4.4a,4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
subsection 19-4.4a,4 (a-k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ 19-4.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-4.4
AO:318
§ 19-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 19-5.1. General Standards. [1990 Code § 19-5.1; Ord. No. 2009-12
§ 5.1; Ord. No. 04-2012]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
19-4.4a,4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters in the system;
§ 19-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5.1
AO:319
§ 19-5.2. Specific Standards. [1990 Code § 19-5.2; Ord. No. 2009-12
§ 5.2; Ord. No. 04-2012]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. For all new construction, substantial improvement and repetitive
loss properties (where technically feasible), the electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 19-5.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-5.2
AO:320
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 19-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
2. Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including the basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities:
1. Either:
(a) Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and
(b) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified
in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And,
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
2. Or:
(a) Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 19-4.3c,2(b)
§ 19-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5.2
AO:321
§ 19-5.3. Floodways. [1990 Code § 9-5.3; Ord. No. 2009-12 § 5.3]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
19-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Land Use - See Separate Volume
Chapter LS
LAND SUBDIVISION
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 19-5.1a,2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 19-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 19-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 19-5.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § 19-5.3
AO:322
ARTICLE I
TITLE OF ORDINANCE
§ LS-100. TITLE.
"An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
subdivision of land within the City of Lambertville pursuant to the authority
set forth in Chapter 433 of the laws of 1953, and amendments and
supplements thereto20, setting forth the procedure to be followed by the
Planning Board and Governing Body in applying and administering these
rules, regulations and standards and providing penalties for the violation
thereof.
§ LS-101. SHORT TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Lambertville.
20.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ LS-100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-101
AO:323

ARTICLE II
PURPOSE
§ LS-200. PURPOSE.
§ LS-201. PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.
The purpose of this Ordinance shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the City of Lambertville in order to
provide for the orderly growth and development of the City and to promote
the comfort, health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the City in
conformance with the City's Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Official
Map.
§ LS-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-201
AO:325

ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE
§ LS-300. APPROVING AGENCY.
§ LS-301. ADMINISTRATION.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the City Planning
Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. of the Municipal Land
Use Law, and amendments and supplements thereto.
§ LS-301.1. Planning Board Power to Grant Exceptions and
Variances. [Ord. 2/17/76]
The City of Lambertville Planning Board when acting upon applications for
the approval of subdivisions or a planned unit development plan shall have
the power to grant such exceptions and variances from the requirements of
The Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Lambertville and the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Lambertville as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards
established by both Ordinances. In order for such exceptions and variances
to be granted, the subdivider or his agent or the planned unit developer or
his agent must clearly demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board
that the literal enforcement of one or more of the provisions of either or
both said Ordinances is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ LS-300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-301.1
AO:327

ARTICLE IV
WORD USAGE
§ LS-400. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2000-01; Ord. 5/16/77]
APPLICANT — Any owner or authorized representative of the owner,
submitting plans for review and approval of a land subdivision in
accordance with this Ordinance.
COMMUNITY DESIGN — (1) The process of organizing the contextual
elements of the built environment such that the end result will be a place
with its own character or identity or will maintain an existing character
or identity; (2) planning the development of the built environment in a
comprehensive manner to achieve a unified, functional, efficient, and
aesthetically pleasing physical setting.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be permitted in a district through
the granting by the Planning Board of a special exception upon a finding
by the Board that it meets specified conditions and is capable of existing in
harmony with other uses situated in its immediate vicinity.
CROSSWALK OR WALKWAY — A right-of-way, dedicated for public use, to
facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision.
CUL-DE-SAC — See STREET.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands or interest in lands required for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or land or interests
therein required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein so as to safe guard the
public against flood damage in accordance with Chapter One of Title 58 of
the Revised Statutes.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or combination of rooms containing sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities intended to provide living accommodations
for a family or an individual.
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
local means to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation, or
particular persons for specified uses.
FAMILY — One or more persons customarily living together as a single
house-keeping unit related to each other by birth or marriage.
FEDERAL STYLE — One of the architectural styles built during the Colonial
Period between 1780-1820. Its characteristics are an elaborated entrance,
with sidelights (windows) centered in a symmetrical façade of a large boxshaped
(simple) mass. Federal style is also known as Adam style.
FENESTRATION — An opening in a building facade, such as a window or
door.
§ LS-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-400
AO:329
LOT — Any parcel, plot, site or portion of land separated or divided from
other parcels or portions on any filed map in the County Recording Office,
by description on a subdivision plat, deed, record of survey or by metes and
bounds.
MASSING — The 3-dimensional bulk of a building, often referred to as
either simple or complex massing. A simple massing has a box like
appearance. A complex massing is achieved through the use of various
building projections such as bay windows, turrets, and setbacks.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan consisting of mapped and written
proposals for the future growth, protection and development of the City of
Lambertville, recommending standards for the promotion of the comfort,
convenience, public health, safety and general welfare of the community,
and which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by the City of Lambertville in accordance
with the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1935) (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et
seq.) Such a map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and width of streets, drainage rights-of-way, and flood control basins, and
the location and extent of public parks and playgrounds, and scenic and
historic sites shown thereon.
OFFICIAL NOTICE — Notification of all property owners affected by a
proposed subdivision within the limits defined in this Ordinance by either
a personal visit or registered mail, and the requirement to have a notice of
the public hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the City at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation or legal entity having legal title to the land.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — The security which may be accepted to
guarantee the completion of the required improvements before the
Planning Board approves the plat and shall include performance bonds with
responsible surety authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, or
escrow agreements secured by cash, certified check or cashier's check.
PLANNING BOARD OR BOARD — The Planning Board, City of Lambertville,
New Jersey.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with the
regulations of section 503 of this Ordinance, and which, if approved, shall
be filed with the proper County Recording Officer.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements of
Section 502 of this Ordinance.
§ LS-400 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-400
AO:330
PLAT, SKETCH — The sketch map of a proposed subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification,
meeting the requirements of Section 501 of this Ordinance.
PROPORTION — The relationship or ratio between two dimensions, such as
the height and width of windows, doors and a building.
RHYTHM OF OPENINGS — The number and spacing of windows and doors
in a facade.
The first two buildings share a similar rhythm or spacing between windows
and doors. The third building is different because there are fewer windows
and the spacing between them is entirely different.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land and space required on the surface, subsurface,
and overhead for the construction and installation of materials necessary
to provide passage-way for vehicular traffic, pedestrians, utility lines, poles,
conduits and mains, signs, trees, and shrubbery and the proper amount of
light and air as established by local authorities. Street rights-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line.
ROOF, GABLE — A roof with a central ridge line and one slope on each side.
A gable is the triangular section of wall under the roof edge.
ROOF, MANSARD — A roof that is double pitched on all four sides, the lower
slope being much steeper.
SCALE — The degree of relatedness to the size and proportions of a known
unit of measurement, typically the human body. The size of the exterior
wall planes (or architectural features) is one of the most important
measurements of scale. If the wall plane is the approximate dimensions of
the human body, it is of a human scale. If the size of the wall plane greatly
exceeds the human body, it is referred to as a monumental scale. Most
Greek Revival buildings are of a monumental scale because the large pillars
usually extend to the roof line of the building.
§ LS-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-400
AO:331
Two buildings of a similar size can
have different scales. The building
on the right may have a lower roof
line, but the tall columns and the
long windows give it a larger
appearance and scale.
Human scale means that the
openings and architectural features
of a building are similar to that of a
human body. Likewise, humans can
readily relate to the building and are
not dwarfed by it.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley, or other way which is an existing state, county, or city road-way or
a street or right-of-way shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of
a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review
plats, and includes the land between street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
ordinance, streets shall be classified as follows:
STREET, ARTERIAL
Used primarily for fast or heavy volumes of traffic and are those used
generally to proceed between large areas of development such as
commercial centers, industrial areas, and concentrated residential
communities through or around the locality of the city.
STREET, COLLECTOR
Those which carry traffic from local streets to the arterial streets and
designed to have considerable continuity and traffic capacity.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC
A local dead-end street terminating in a circular, or other turn around area.
STREET, MINOR — Those streets which need be entered only for stopping
at a destination on that street and which need not be used for general traffic
circulation through the City.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this Ordinance to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, sites or other divisions of land or the combination of two or more
lots into one or more lots, for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of sale or building development; except that the following divisions shall
not be considered subdivisions, provided, however, that no new streets, or
roads are involved; divisions of land for agricultural purposes where the
resulting parcels are three acres or larger in size; divisions of property
by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court
§ LS-400 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-400
AO:332
order. Subdivision also includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to
the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory
divided.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivision containing not more than three
lots fronting on an existing street, or City maintained street, not involving
any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities or the
installation of any street improvements, and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel of adjoining property and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official
Map, the City of Lambertville Zoning Ordinance or this Ordinance. Any
subdivision which involves a lot which was previously approved as a minor
subdivision within a three-year period prior to the application for another
minor subdivision shall be classified as a major subdivision.
VERNACULAR STYLE — A building form native to a particular area based
on tradition, but without regard for formal or precise styles.
VICTORIAN, STYLE — A variety of architectural styles imported from
Europe during the reign of Queen Victoria. The styles are characteristically
romantic and include bargeboard, turrets, elongated windows and doors,
brackets and other ornamentation. Examples of Victorian styles include
Italianate, Second Empire and Queen Anne.
Italianate Second Empire Queen Anne
§ LS-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-400
AO:333

ARTICLE V
PROCEDURES AND DETAILS
§ LS-500. PROCEDURES AND DETAILS.
§ LS-501. SUBMISSION OF SKETCH PLAT.
§ LS-501.1. Purpose for Submission of Sketch Plat. [Ord. No.
18-2016]
A sketch plat is required of all owners, as herein defined, seeking a
subdivision for the purpose of classification and preliminary discussion so
that they may obtain the advice of the Planning Board and other City
Officials in the formative stages of the design, and for the purpose of
assuring coordination with the Master Plan.
§ LS-501.2. Procedures for Submitting Sketch Plat. [Ord. 4/16/73;
Ord. 2/17/76; Ord. No. 18-2016]
A. Submit to the Administrative Officer of the Planning Board at least 35
days prior to the regular meeting of the Board, two copies of the sketch
plat application and 11 copies of the sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision for the purposes of classification, preliminary discussion
and appropriate action.
B. Immediately upon receipt of the copies of the sketch plat, the Secretary
of the Planning Board shall forward one copy each to the County
Planning Board, the City Engineer, the City Planning Consultant, and
Zoning Officer for their review and comments, with the remaining
copies retained by the Planning Board. If within 30 days after receiving
said sketch plats, the County Planning Board, the City Engineer, the
City Planning Consultant, and the Zoning Officer do not return their
copies and any comments to the Secretary of the Planning Board, said
sketch plats shall be deemed to have been approved by them.
C. Whenever a sketch plat of a minor subdivision is submitted for review
which fronts on an existing street, three copies of deeds of dedication
shall be included in the application to provide sufficient right-of-way
where the existing street right-of-way is less than the minimum
requirements of this ordinance or the adopted Master Plan. Whenever
such land is dedicated in accordance with this section, the minimum
required lot depth and lot area as required by this ordinance, or the
Zoning Ordinance of the City shall be reduced by the same dimension
and area as dedicated to the City if the developer has no other adjacent
lands to provide the minimum requirements.
D. If the sketch plat is classified as a Major Subdivision, a notation to that
effect shall be made on the plat together with any recommendations
and comments from the Planning Board and returned to the subdivider
for compliance with §§ 502 and 503 of this Ordinance.
§ LS-500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-501.2
AO:335
§ LS-501.3. Details of Sketch Plat. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
The sketch plat shall be based on tax map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale preferably not smaller than 100 feet to the
inch to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or
include the following information:
E. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action
of the Planning Board, a notation to that effect will be made on the
sketch plat.
F. (Reserved)
G. Seven copies of the approved sketch plat of a Minor Subdivision shall
be prepared and distributed by the City Clerk as follows:
1. City Clerk: 1 copy.
2. City Planning Board: 1 copy.
3. City Engineer: 1 copy.
4. Zoning Officer: 1 copy.
5. Tax Assessor: 1 copy.
6. County Planning Board: 1 copy.
7. Applicant: 1 copy.
H. The approved sketch plat of a minor subdivision shall be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board and be returned to the
subdivider within one week following the next regular meeting of the
Planning Board.
I. The approval of a sketch plat of a minor subdivision shall expire 190
days from the date of approval unless within such period either a deed
or plat map drawn in compliance with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., as
amended, is filed by the subdivider with the County Recording Officer
and a copy of such deed or plat map together with the date and index
reference of the filing with the County Recording Officer is filed with
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor and
Administrative Officer of the Planning Board and the City Clerk.
J. At the time of submission of a sketch plat to the Administrative Officer
of the Planning Board a filing fee shall be paid to the Administrative
Officer of the Planning Board as stated in Zoning § 800 to cover the cost
of review.
A. A Key Map showing the location and approximate area of the
subdivision in relation to the City.
B. A map of the entire tract(s) of land being subdivided showing all
existing and proposed property lines, tax map sheet number, block
§ LS-501.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-501.3
AO:336
§ LS-502. SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
§ LS-502.1. Purpose for Submission of Preliminary Plat.
The preliminary plat and the supporting documents for a proposed
subdivision constitute the material to be officially submitted to the Planning
Board. They show the general design of the subdivision and its public
improvements so that the Planning Board can indicate its approval or
disapproval of the subdivision prior to the time that the final plat, including
the design and detailing of the public improvements and utilities, is
completed.
§ LS-502.2. Procedures for Submitting Preliminary Plat. [Ord. No.
18-2016]
number and lot numbers, easements, rights-of-way, street names,
power lines, structures, streams, drainage facilities, and wooded areas
within the area of the entire tract, and within 500 feet thereof.
C. A title block giving the name of the subdivision, the present owner of
the land present owner of all adjacent properties, name and license
number of the person who prepared the map, scale of the map, north
arrow, proposed number of dwelling units and type, if any, and space for
the signatures of the Chairman and Administrative Officer of the
Planning Board.
D. All plats shall conform to the requirements of the City Zoning
Ordinance.
A. A Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board at least 10 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which
consideration is desired. It shall be submitted in at least 11 blue or
black on white prints and shall be accompanied by three completed
copies of the application for preliminary approval as well as three
copies of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided. In addition, the subdivider shall make
applications to the County Planning Board for approval of the plat in
accordance with the procedures established by the County.
B. At the time of submission, a fee as established in Zoning § 800 for each
lot proposed in the subdivision shall be paid to the City to cover costs. If
upon tentative approval the number of lots is less than originally
proposed, a refund of $35 for each lot eliminated will be made to the
subdivider.
C. The Subdivider shall mail a notice at least 10 days prior to the public
hearing to all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of
the subdivision as their names appear on the City tax record and shall
furnish the Planning Board with proof of such service. The subdivider
shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10
§ LS-501.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-502.2
AO:337
days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing, a brief description of the property involved, a statement as
to its location, a list of the maps and other documents to be considered,
a summary statement of the matters to be heard and that a copy of
said subdivision has been filed with the City Clerk for public inspection.
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12). The subdivider shall furnish the Planning Board
with proof of publication.
D. Submission of the preliminary plat shall include a letter directed to the
Chairman of the Planning Board signed by a responsible official of: (1)
the State Commissioner of Transportation and/or County Highway
Department, approving proposed construction on State and/or County
rights-of-way and (2) the State and local agency approving of the
method of waste disposal and water distribution.
E. If the preliminary plat lies within 200 feet of another municipal
boundary, a copy of the plat shall be sent by the Administrative Officer
of the Planning Board to the Clerk of the adjoining municipality. A
written statement shall be requested from the adjoining municipality
indicating whether the proposed subdivision is in reasonable harmony
with its plans for development. The Secretary of the Planning Board of
the adjoining community shall be informed of the date of the public
hearing and any communications received prior to this date will be
considered in relation to the approval or disapproval of the plat.
F. A letter directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board signed by the
Secretary or a responsible official as designated by the Board of
Education shall be requested by the Planning Board acknowledging the
number of residential units and indicating the availability of school sites
and facilities which relate to the subdivision area.
G. The Administrative Officer shall retain one complete set of maps and
application forms of the preliminary submission for the Planning Board
and one complete set of plans shall be forwarded by the Secretary
immediately upon receipt of the plans to the following:
1. City Clerk.
2. County Planning Board.
3. City Engineer.
4. Zoning Official.
5. Secretary of the Board of Health.
6. Planning Board of adjoining municipality where applicable
according to § 502.2E.
7. Such other Municipal, County or State officials as directed by the
Planning Board.
§ LS-502.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-502.2
AO:338
§ LS-502.3. Details of Preliminary Plat.
H. The Planning Board shall take formal action either approving or
disapproving the preliminary plat within 45 days after its submission to
the Administrative Officer of the Planning Board, but in no case before a
public hearing is held or before the expiration of the thirty-day period
within which the County Planning Board may submit a report on said
subdivision. The recommendations of the County Planning Board shall
be given due consideration in the final decision on the plat.
I. If the plat is disapproved, by either the City or the County, the reasons
for disapproval shall be given in writing to the subdivider within the
ninety-day period, and, in appropriate cases, shall be remedied by the
subdivider prior to further consideration of the plan.
J. If the Planning Board acts favorable on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman and Administrative Officer shall affix their signature to the
plat with the notation that it has received tentative approval and the
plat shall be returned to the subdivider for compliance with final
approval requirements.
K. Tentative approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights
for a three-year period from the date of tentative approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions upon which the tentative
approval was granted will not be changed.
2. That the said applicant may submit on or before the expiration
date, the whole, or part or parts of said plat for final approval.
A. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet and shall be
designed by a licensed N.J. land surveyor, or a licensed N.J. professional
engineer. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions
of § 600 of this Ordinance and shall show or be accompanied by the
information required in § 502.3B.
B. The preliminary plat shall include the following information and shall
show the location of the proposed site and approximate area of the
subdivision in relation to the City.
1. Title Block.
a. Name of subdivision.
b. Name of address of subdivider.
c. Name and address of the owner of record.
d. Name and address of all property owners within 200 feet of the
extreme limits of the subdivision.
§ LS-502.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-502.3
AO:339
e. Name, address and profession of the person who prepared the
drawing together with his license number and seal.
f. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
g. Proposed number of dwelling units and type.
h. Scale.
i. Date of submission of each plat and of each subsequent revised
subdivision.
2. Sufficient elevation or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land to points extending 200 feet beyond
the subdivision boundary.
3. North Arrow.
4. Subdivision boundary line (heavy solid line).
5. The location of existing watercourses and any natural features such
as wooded area and rock formations to the proper scales both
within the proposed site and within 200 feet of its boundary.
6. a. Street rights-of-way of subdivision and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(1) Name of each street.
(2) Location and width.
(3) Centerline elevation at intersections and other critical
points.
(4) Typical cross sections and centerline profiles for all
proposed new streets.
b. Other rights-of-way and easements on the subdivision and
within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(1) Identification and description.
(2) Location and width.
(3) Restrictions of use, if any.
c. Drainage structures on the subdivision and within 200 feet of
its boundaries.
(1) Type of structure.
(2) Location, invert elevations, gradients, and sizes of all pipe
and of all other structures where applicable.
§ LS-502.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-502.3
AO:340
§ LS-502.4. Improvements or Guarantees Prior to Final Approval.
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have posted adequate performance guarantees to assure
the installation of the required improvements in accordance with § 700.
§ LS-503. SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.
§ LS-503.1. Purpose for Submission of Final Plat.
A final plat and supporting drawings and documents for a proposed
subdivision constitute the complete development of the subdivision
proposal and include the recommendations resulting from the Planning
Board review of the preliminary plat as well as the detailed layout drawings
for the public improvements and utilities. After public hearing and approval
by the Planning Board, this complete submission accompanied by the
performance guarantee according to § 700 and the provision of the liability
insurance policy as approved by the governing body according to § 800 of
this Ordinance, becomes the basis for the construction of the subdivision
and inspection service by the City and Planning Board. The plat itself
must be recorded at the County Recorder's Office to have legal status.
d. Other utility structures such as water, sewer and gas mains
and power lines on the subdivision and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(1) Location and size or capacity.
e. Marshes, ponds, streams and land subject to periodic flooding
on the subdivision and within 200 feet of its boundaries
showing the location and area covered and indicating apparent
high water level.
f. Lot Layout.
(1) Lot lines and dimensions of each lot to the nearest foot.
(2) Building setback lines (dashed) and its dimensions from
the street line.
(3) Existing zoning and the boundaries thereof.
(4) Identification of lots or parcels for land use and land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use, if any.
(5) Easements and restricted areas with notation as to
purpose of restrictions.
g. Building and other structures located on the subdivision and
within 200 feet of its boundaries.
h. All plats shall conform to the requirements of the City Zoning
Ordinance.
§ LS-502.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-503.1
AO:341
An unrecorded plat is not a valid basis for site improvements or other
commitments which depend on its design characteristics.
§ LS-503.2. Procedures for Submitting Final Plat. [Ord. No.
18-2016]
A. A final plat shall be submitted by the subdivider or his agent to the
Secretary of the Planning Board within three years from the date of
approval of the preliminary plat. The final plat and all supporting
drawings and documents shall be submitted to the Administrative
Officer of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior to a meeting date in
order to be heard at that particular meeting. The Planning Board shall
act upon the final plat within 45 days after the regular meeting at which
it is presented for final approval or within such further time as the
applying party may agree to.
B. Before making application to the Planning Board for final approval, the
subdivider shall carry out the following steps:
1. Make all required corrections requested subject to preliminary plat
approval.
2. Complete three copies of an application for final approval.
3. Pay the required application and inspection fee at the City Clerk's
Office. (See § 503.2L).
4. Obtain a general liability insurance policy and submit a copy to the
City Clerk for submission to the City Attorney for approval as to
form. (See § 800)
5. Prepare prints for distribution and filing with the following:
a. County Planning Board 1 Copy.
b. City Clerk 1 Copy.
c. Planning Board 3 Copies.
d. City Engineer 1 Copy.
e. Zoning Officer 1 Copy.
f. Applicant 1 Copy.
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the City Engineer
certifying the accuracy of the details of the plat, and that he is in receipt
of a map or maps showing in exact location and elevation, the water,
sanitary and storm sewer mains and streets identifying those portions
already installed and those to be installed and that the subdivider has
posted the performance guarantee required in accordance with § 700 of
this Ordinance.
§ LS-503.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-503.2
AO:342
D. The final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the Chairman
of the Planning Board and signed by a responsible official of the water
company, government authority or district which provides water,
sanitary or storm sewer service that has jurisdiction in the area
approving each proposed utility installation design and stating who will
construct the facility so that service will be available when required in
conformity with the provisions of the filed rate schedule.
E. Submission of the final plat shall include of three copies each Deeds of
Dedication for all properties including any streets rights-of-way to be
offered to the City for dedication.
F. If the Planning Board approves a final plat a notation to that effect shall
be made on three copies of the plat and shall be signed by the Chairman
and Administrative Officer of the Planning Board.
G. Failure of the Planning Board to act within 45 days or a mutually agreed
upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable approval and the
Secretary of the Planning Board shall issue a certificate to that effect.
H. The final plat, after final approval shall be filed by the Subdivider with
the County Recording Officer within 95 days from the date of such
approval. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer unless it has been duly approved by the Planning Board and
signed by the Chairman and Administrative Officer. If any final plat is
not filed within this period, the approval shall expire.
I. Expiration of approval shall mean the previous approval by the
Planning Board is null and void and, in order to obtain a reapproval a
new filing fee as well as a review of all previous findings must be
conducted.
J. Upon application by the subdivider showing good cause, the Planning
Board may make a reasonable extension of the time within which the
subdivider must file with the County Recording Officer provided,
however, that the plat be revised according to any change in regulations
or ordinances applicable to the plat subsequent to the original time
period of 95 days or the extended period of time granted by the Board.
K. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board,
appeal in writing to the Governing Body may be taken within 10 days
after the date of the action of the Planning Board. A hearing thereon
shall be had on notice to all parties in interest who shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the Governing Body may
affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board by a recorded vote of
a majority of the total members thereof. The findings and reasons for
the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the
Governing Body, and the applying party shall be given a copy.
L. Each application submitted for final approval of final plat shall be
accompanied by a fee payable to the City of Lambertville as stated in
Zoning § 800 for each lot or dwelling unit shown on the final plat to
§ LS-503.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-503.2
AO:343
§ LS-503.3. Details of Final Plat.
cover costs. An additional fee of the amount of the performance
guarantee estimate shall be paid to the City upon approval of plans for
improvements and cost estimates by the City Engineer to cover the cost
of engineering inspections of construction work. If the inspection costs
exceed such fund, the subdivider shall deposit with the City additional
sums upon notice from the City Engineer. The Chief Financial Officer
shall return any balance of the inspection deposit to the subdivider
upon expiration of the maintenance bond.
A. The final plat for all, part, or parts of the subdivision shall be drawn in
ink on tracing cloth with 12 copies at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet and in compliance with all the requirements for filing a
map with the County Recording Officer and shall be designed in
compliance with the provisions of § 600 of this Ordinance. The final plat
shall show or be accompanied by the same information required for
preliminary approval in addition to the following:
1. Each block and lot shall be numbered in conformity to existing tax
map procedures.
2. Bearing or deflection angles and radii, arcs and center angles of all
curves.
3. Contours at two foot intervals extending 200 feet beyond the
boundary of the subdivision.
4. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement for
the dedication of streets, alleys, easements and other rights-of-way
and any lands for public uses.
5. Certification from the tax collector that all taxes are paid to date.
6. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be tied to a U.S.G.S.
benchmark or benchmarks with date on the plat as to how the
bearings were determined. Monuments, lots, corners and other
survey points shall be located and described. (See § 607)
7. When approval of the plat is required by any officer or body of the
City, County, or State, approval shall be certified on that plat.
8. Public Improvement and Utility plans and profiles are declared an
integral part of the final plat submission and compliance therewith
and with the final plat itself, this subdivision ordinance and the
City's specifications for public improvements and utilities as
mentioned in § 600 shall be secured by the performance guarantee.
The plans of the basic improvements and utilities shall include:
a. The same area with the same scale and title block as required
on the preliminary plat. (See § 502.3.B.1.)
§ LS-503.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-503.3
AO:344
§ LS-503.4. Distribution of Approved Plats. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
§ LS-504. CERTIFICATE SHOWING APPROVAL.
§ LS-504.1. Application; Issuance of Certificate. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which, since
the 13th day of June, 1951, formed part of such a subdivision, may apply
in writing to the Administrative Officer of the Planning Board, for the
issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has
been approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered by
the certificate, and the name of the owner thereof.
The Administrative Officer of the Planning Board shall issue such certificate
within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor and shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively
numbered in a binder as a permanent record of his office.
§ LS-504.2. Content of Certificate.
Each such certificate shall be designated a "Certificate as to Approval of
Subdivision of Land", and shall certify:
b. Other details as specified in §§ 608 and 609.
B. All plats shall conform to the requirements of the city Zoning
Ordinance.
A. The Administrative Officer of the Planning Board shall file copies of the
final approved plat with:
1. City Clerk.
2. City Engineer.
3. Zoning Officer.
4. Board of Tax Assessors.
5. County Planning Board.
6. Sanitary Inspector.
7. Planning Board.
8. Police Department.
9. Official issuing certificate for approved lots.
A. That there exists in said municipality a duly established Planning Board
which meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis and that
§ LS-503.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-504.2
AO:345
there is an ordinance controlling subdivisions of land, adopted under
the authority of state law.
B. Whether the subdivision or resubdivision, as it relates to the land shown
in said application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if so,
the date of such approval.
C. Whether such subdivision or resubdivision, if the same has not been
approved, is exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
the Subdivision Ordinance.
§ LS-504.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-504.2
AO:346
ARTICLE VI
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ LS-600. IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
The subdivider shall regard the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof. Prior
to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have furnished
performance guarantees for the ultimate installation or install, the following
items. The subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
on the Official Map and the Master Plan of the City.
§ LS-601. STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
§ LS-601.1. Subdivisions to be Served by the Paved Public Streets.
Subdivisions shall be served by paved public streets and all new streets
shall be graded and provided with an all weather base and pavement with
an adequate crown in keeping with City specifications and standards.
§ LS-601.2. New Streets; Continuation of Existing.
The arrangements of new streets constructed or to be constructed in
subdivisions shall be such as to provide for the continuous extension of
existing, mapped, or potential streets.
§ LS-601.3. Reserve Strips.
No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to another area,
either developed or undeveloped, shall be approved except where the
control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been given to the
Governing Body after recommendation by the Planning Board.
§ LS-601.4. Street Widths.
Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan, Official Map, or the street width
requirements of this ordinance, shall dedicate additional width along one or
both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
§ LS-601.5. Right-of-Way Widths.
The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall
not be less than the following:
A. Arterial streets: 80 feet.
B. Collector streets: 60 feet.
C. Minor streets: 50 feet.
§ LS-600 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-601.5
AO:347
§ LS-601.6. Street Intersections.
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. No more than two streets shall meet
or intersect at any one point and centerlines of both intersecting streets
shall pass through a common point. Measuring from this common point, two
intersections shall be spaced at a minimum of 125 feet. The block corners at
intersections shall be rounded at the curb line with a curve having a radius
of not less than 20 feet. No shrubbery, signs, trees, monuments or other
visual obstruction to signs or line of sight over three feet in height shall be
permitted along or within the street right-of-way line within 25 feet of any
intersection.
§ LS-601.7. Reserve Curves.
Where streets have a reserve curve, a tangent of at least 100 feet in length
shall be required.
§ LS-601.8. Street Grades. [Ord. 6/16/75]
Grades of arterial streets shall not exceed 6% and grades of collector streets
shall not exceed 10%. Grades of other streets shall not exceed 10%. No
street shall have a minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
§ LS-601.9. Changes in Grades.
All changes in grade where algebraic difference in grade is 1% or greater
shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth
transition and proper sight distance, but not so great as to create drainage
problems. Sight distance shall be at least 350 feet for local streets.
§ LS-601.10. Connecting Street Lines.
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by
more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a curve
with a radius of not less than 100 feet.
D. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multi-family
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design
to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs
and maximum access for fire fighting equipment.
E. Subdivisions abutting or containing existing or proposed arterial
streets should provide a marginal service road or service frontage with
a buffer strip for screen planting or some other means, such as reserve
strips, to separate through and local traffic and to provide for
protection of residential properties.
§ LS-601.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-601.11
AO:348
§ LS-601.11. Cul-de-sacs. [Ord. 6/16/75]
Cul-de-sac streets may be used to discourage through traffic. Where culde-
sac streets are used, they shall be designed so that adequate surface
drainage is provided and should be no longer than 600 feet. However, the
maximum length may be extended by the reviewing agency where cartway
capacity is not exceeded and site conditions dictate such extensions. A culde-
sac shall provide a turnaround at the end and the minimum right-of-way
at the turnaround shall be a radius of at least 50 feet and tangent, whenever
practicable, to the right side of the street.
§ LS-601.12. Driveway Aprons.
All driveways or other off-street parking areas shall have driveway aprons
extending from the curb line to the front property line. The driveway aprons
shall be at least 12 feet wide at the curb and a minimum of 10 feet at
the property line and meeting the same construction specifications as the
street. Continuous open driveways in excess of 15 feet resulting in the
elimination of curbing along city streets shall be prohibited.
§ LS-601.13. Street Names.
No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate the
name of an existing street that confusion results. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name. Curvilinear streets shall change
their names only at street intersections or in accordance with Section 602
of this ordinance.
§ LS-601.14. Block Size.
The length, width or acreage of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to the limitations and opportunities of topography and shall be such as to
be sufficient to meet all the area, yard, and parking requirements for such
particular uses as expressed in the zoning ordinance as well as providing
for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
§ LS-601.15. Lot Dimensions. [Ord. 9/20/01]
Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than 50 feet in width at the street
line by 100 feet in depth and 5,000 square feet or the requirements of the
zoning ordinance of the City and, in so far as is practical, side lot lines shall
be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
§ LS-601.16. Designation of Extra Width for Street Widening.
Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots
shall begin at such new line and all setbacks shall be measured from such
new line.
§ LS-601.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-601.17
AO:349
§ LS-601.17. Suitability of Lots.
Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold favorable referral of such lots.
§ LS-601.18. Railroad Right-of-Ways.
Where the property to be subdivided is next to or includes a railroad
right-of-way, suitable provisions shall be made for such things as road
crossings, screening or buffers, freight access, warning signals and signs in
recognition of the relationship between the railroad and the subdivision.
§ LS-602. STREET NAME SIGNS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS.
§ LS-602.1. Street Name Signs.
Street name signs meeting City specifications as to size, material and
location shall be installed at the intersection of all streets and at such places
on curvilinear streets as noted below:
Description Example
A. At right intersections.
B. When two roads
intersecting at right angles are
connected by a curve.
C. At the peak of the curve
connecting two parallel streets
when the length of the streets
exceeds the length of a loop.
§ LS-602.2. Traffic Control Signs.
Where traffic control signs are deemed necessary by the Planning Board
and City Engineer to city, county or state highways, the proper city, county
or state official shall be informed of the proposed installation in order that
the proper agency may consider the necessity of the installation at its own
expense.
§ LS-602.3. Installation of Traffic Control Signs and Street Name
Signs.
All street name and traffic control signs shall be installed free of visual
obstruction.
§ LS-603. CURBS AND GUTTERS.
§ LS-601.17 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-603.1
AO:350
§ LS-603.1. Curbing and Gutters Required. [Ord. 6/16/75]
Curbing and gutters shall normally be required along all public streets
within the subdivision. However, curbs and gutters may be eliminated along
private streets where an acceptable comprehensive drainage system is
provided. This system may include a system of swales, retention, detention
and recharge structures.
§ LS-603.2. Gutter and Curb Standards.
The minimum standards in regards to width of gutters, height of curbing,
base material, surface material, slope, depth of gutters crossing
intersections, and the installation of catch basins, shall be according to the
requirements of this ordinance (§ 608) and the specifications of the City
approved by the City Engineer or, in the case of county or state highways,
the proper County or State Official.
§ LS-603.3. Curbs and Gutters to Handle Water Run-off.
Curbs and gutters shall be adequate to handle the maximum water run-off
from tributary lands.
§ LS-604. SIDEWALKS.
§ LS-604.1. Minimum Width. [Ord. 6/16/75]
Minimum four-foot wide sidewalks shall be provided along all streets in
residential, commercial and industrial area. However, sidewalks adjacent
to circulation and collection streets may be eliminated where an alternate
pedestrian circulation system is provided to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board.
§ LS-604.2. Pedestrian Walkways.
In blocks over 1,000 feet long pedestrian cross-walks may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway shall be
10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
§ LS-604.3. Paving of Entrances to Buildings.
Continuous paving shall also be available from the sidewalk to the main
entrance or entrances of the building.
§ LS-604.4. Location of Sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be located a minimum of one foot within the street rightof-
way.
§ LS-604.5. Slopes.
All sidewalks shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot toward the gutter.
§ LS-603.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-605
AO:351
§ LS-605. SHADE TREES AND PLANTING STRIPS.
§ LS-605.1. Shade Trees and Plantings in Right-of-Ways.
Shade trees shall be provided in all major residential subdivisions and in
subdivisions of other kinds where deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board. Trees shall be planted within the subdivision along each side of the
street at proper intervals and in types, sizes and locations conducive to
healthy growth with graded and seeded or sodded planting strips within
street rights-of-way and according to any standards adopted by the
Governing Body so as not to interfere with street paving, sidewalks or
utilities.
§ LS-605.2. Size and Species of Trees.
All trees should be of nursery stock of no less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter
and of an approved species grown under the same climatic conditions as
at the location of the development. They shall be of symmetrical growth,
free of insect pests and disease, suitable for street use, durable under the
maintenance contemplated, and approved by the Governing Body.
§ LS-606. TOP SOIL PROTECTION.
No top soil shall be removed from areas intended for lawn or open space.
Top soil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed
within the subdivision so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
§ LS-607. MONUMENTS.
Monuments shall be of hard durable material, constructed in accordance
with City specifications and be firmly set in the ground in the required
locations so as to be visible at the points as required in Section 4 of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953.
§ LS-608. DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
§ LS-608.1. Preliminary Drainage System Plan Required.
A preliminary grading and drainage system plan shall be a part of the
preliminary plat. It shall indicate in general terms a proposal for an
adequate system of drainage structures to carry off and store or discharge
the storm water run-off and natural drainage water which originates not
only within the property boundaries, but also that which originates beyond
the property boundaries.
§ LS-608.2. Public Improvement and Utilities Plan.
The public improvement and utilities plan and profiles shall show the final
drainage plan and street profiles. They shall be prepared and submitted
§ LS-605 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-608.2
AO:352
with the final plat after the approval of the preliminary plat and drainage
plan. (See Section 503.3,a,8)
§ LS-608.3. Diversion of Storm Water.
No storm water run-off or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as
to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands
without proper and approved provisions being made for taking care of these
conditions.
§ LS-608.4. Drainage Ditch and Brook Right-of-Ways.
An existing ditch or brook right-of-way shall be offered for dedication to
the City for drainage purposes. Such right-of-way shall be shown on the
drainage plan and on the final plat and shall be of sufficient width to include
a ten-foot access strip in addition to the width of the ditch or brook as
measured from bank top to bank top.
§ LS-608.5. Drainage Structures on State or County Right-of-Ways.
Drainage structures which are located on state or county highway rightsof-
way shall be approved by the state or county highway departments and
a letter from that office indicating such approval shall be directed to the
Chairman of the Planning Board and shall be received prior to favorably
referring the final plat.
§ LS-608.6. Storm Water or Drainage Right-of-Way.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way channel,
or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse,
and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose.
§ LS-608.7. Lands Subject to Flooding.
Land subject to periodic or occasional flooding shall not be plotted for
residential occupancy nor for any other use which may endanger life or
property or aggravate the flood hazard. Such land within a plat shall be
considered for park purposes. However, nothing in this ordinance shall
be construed to prevent a developer from adequately filling the land or
constructing bulkheads, provided the bulkheads meet the requirements of
the City of Lambertville, the City Engineer and that the finished grade shall
be a minimum of five feet above mean high tide or the water surface, in
order to develop the land.
§ LS-609. PUBLIC UTILITIES.
§ LS-608.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-609.1
AO:353
§ LS-609.1. Installation of Public Utilities.
In large scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere, for utility installation, may be required. Such easements shall be
at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies and
City departments concerned.
§ LS-609.2. Specifications.
All public water, fire hydrants, storm sewer and sanitary sewer mains
shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the governmental
authority or utility company which has jurisdiction in the area.
§ LS-609.3. Letter of Approval.
A letter approving such a proposed installation and a statement as to
who will carry out the construction, signed by a responsible official of the
governmental authority or utility company which has jurisdiction in the
area, shall be directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board and shall be
received prior to favorably referring the final plat.
§ LS-609.4. Placement Underground.
All utilities, where economically feasible shall be placed underground. The
burden of proof to show that such placement is uneconomical shall be on
the applicant.
§ LS-610. NATURAL FEATURES.
§ LS-610.1. Preservation of Natural Features.
Natural features such as trees, views, natural terrain and brooks shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such
features. On individual lots or parcels, care shall be taken to preserve
selected trees to enhance the landscape treatment of the development.
§ LS-610.2. Top Soil Protection.
Natural fertility of the soil shall be preserved by disturbing it as little as
possible. The protection of top soil shall be enhanced by adhering to the
requirements of § 606 of this Ordinance.
§ LS-611. LAND USE.
§ LS-611.1. Land Use Conformance Required.
Proposed land uses shall conform to the City Zoning Ordinance, the Master
Plan, the Official Map and the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ LS-609.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-611.2
AO:354
§ LS-611.2. Relationship of Use to Adjacent Land.
Subdivision designs shall be related in a compatible fashion to adjacent land
uses indicating the location of buffer zones, where deemed necessary by the
Board, and the design and relationship of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
§ LS-612. COMMUNITY DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS. [Added 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-01]
§ LS-612.1. Purpose and Application.
§ LS-612.2. Goals.
The following goals and the Lambertville Master Plan provide the basis for
the community design guidelines.
§ LS-612.3. Historical Background.
There are many buildings in Lambertville's commercial and office districts
dating back to the 19th and early 20th century. These buildings noticeably
reflect the architectural elements and styles of the Victorian and colonial
revival period, such as the long arched or segmented windows, articulated
A. This section shall apply to all commercial and office zoning districts in
Lambertville: Service Commercial, General Commercial, and Central
Business District.
B. The purpose of the community design guidelines is to ensure that new
and redeveloped sites are compatible with existing sites in terms of
objective and measurable design concepts. Lambertville is a 19th
century historic town with many of its original buildings still intact.
These historic buildings and the scenic attractions of the hillsides,
forests and water bodies make Lambertville a unique and charming
place to live and work. The design guidelines in this section are
intended to guide new development and alterations to existing
buildings so that it complements and enhances the City's visual
environment.
C. It is intended that this section provide builders, landowners and
developers with clear and articulate advice for developing and building
in Lambertville. This predictable and objective process should not be a
hurdle in the planning review process, but provide direction to an
applicant before significant resources are committed to an application.
A. To maintain and/or increase property values;
B. To maintain the visual interest and diversity of the City;
C. To provide for social activities, such as places to walk, sit, and socialize;
D. To protect the character of the City by minimizing contrasting styles of
development.
§ LS-611.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-612.3
AO:355
cornices and architectural details such as dentils and brackets. The
buildings were typically constructed of natural building materials, such as
brick, stucco or clapboard. Many of the buildings also have landscaping,
street trees, and planter boxes. The use of flagstone and brick pathways and
wrought iron and wooden fences significantly adds a textural richness to
the building sites and the City landscape. This combination of architectural
detail and site design has made the buildings in the commercial and office
districts compatible with their residential neighbors and attractive sites in
their own right.
It is hoped that new buildings in the City be designed sensitively to respect
the City's context: a historic and natural landscape that is enjoyed by both
City residents and visitors. While it is not the intention of this ordinance
to inhibit architectural creativity or individuality, incorporating similar
architectural and site features in new and redeveloped sites will weave a
common thread throughout the City and protect the cohesive landscape that
gives Lambertville its unique and charming character.
§ LS-612.4. Site Planning and Architectural Standards.
§ LS-612.5. Landscaping.
A. New development shall resemble existing buildings in the district in
terms of roof shape, massing, orientation, proportion, scale, and rhythm
of openings.
B. The exterior walls of buildings shall be made of traditional building
materials such as stone, brick, wood, or stucco. Pole barns or
prefabricated metal buildings should be avoided. Modular structures
should only be permitted if their architecture follows all other
recommended guidelines and standards in this section.
C. The exterior walls of buildings, as seen from a public right-of-way, shall
be designed to provide a visual diversity that is consistent with
architecture found throughout the City. Blank exterior walls are
discouraged. Exterior walls shall include windows, doors, porches,
pilasters, horizontal/vertical building elements and/or other similar
architectural features to relieve the monotony of a blank wall.
D. Awnings/canopies should be made of canvas or modern materials that
mimic canvas with traditionally dyed colors in solids or stripes.
E. Street and site furnishings shall be incorporated into developments
within the central business district, such as flower boxes, arbors,
planters, benches, and waste receptacles.
F. The central business district shall include highly visible public spaces
within commercial areas for people to gather, rest and socialize.
G. All utility boxes and HVAC exterior equipment shall be screened by
architectural elements or landscape plantings.
§ LS-612.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-612.5
AO:356
§ LS-612.6. Vehicle/Pedestrian Circulation.
§ LS-612.7. Existing Building Guidelines.
Existing buildings in Lambertville that conform to design guidelines in this
section:
A. Landscaped buffers between non-residential and residential uses shall
be provided.
B. Landscaping, planters, and hedges shall be incorporated in to new
development proposals using native plant material.
C. Street trees shall be provided at the recommendation of the Shade Tree
Commission
D. Existing natural vegetation, hedgerows, tree lines, and stone rows shall
be incorporated into the landscape plan of the new development.
E. New development shall follow the existing grade of the land to the
greatest extent possible to minimize cut, fill and general alterations to
the landscapes. Limits of clearing should be shown on plans and no soil
or vegetation shall be disturbed beyond those limits.
F. Landscaping shall be used to soften the corners and edges of buildings.
G. A landscape design shall be provided as part of site plan and
subdivision submissions in accordance with Article VIII. Every
applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall comply with the
minimum standards as set forth in this section.
H. All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions. The use of
indigenous species is strongly encouraged. Exotic, non-native invasive
plant species shall not be permitted.
A. Edge of parking areas shall be landscaped to soften the view of the cars
and the asphalt.
B. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between all commercial
buildings. Sidewalks may be brick, edged in brick, edged in Belgian
block, concrete, patterned concrete, or a combination of these. The
color of concrete sidewalks should match the color of the closest
existing sidewalk.
C. Parking lots and pedestrian walkways shall be designed as attractive
elements of the site by their own right with the use of trees,
landscaping, pedestrian walkways, and various building materials and
textures.
D. Sidewalks shall be connected where there are gaps or missing links.
E. Locations for the parking of bicycles shall be clearly delineated.
§ LS-612.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-612.7
AO:357
Note the gabled roof line, the
traditional dormers, the
architectural style of the windows
and doors, and traditional building
materials.
The left side of this structure is a
recent addition to this former mill
building. Notice the similar rhythm
and size of window openings and the
continued use of brick. The canvas
awnings and window boxes are an
added attraction to the building.
§ LS-612.8. New Building Guidelines.
Examples of new development in the regional area that conform to
commercial design guidelines in this section:
Note the natural building materials,
modest scale, multi-paned windows,
brick walkways, public benches, and
the abundance of landscaping.
This new retail building mimics a
colonial style with a gabled roof line,
natural building materials, and
traditionally styled windows and
shutters.
This industrial building is located
directly across from a row of
townhouses. Its small scale, brick
facade and original multi-paned
windows make it compatible with its
residential neighbors.
This strip shopping center has a
variety of building materials and
projections which breaks up what
would otherwise be a large box. The
mature tree was successfully
preserved during construction and
softens the impact of the new
buildings.
This new bank building fits well into the surrounding residential
neighborhood of similarly styled homes. The combination of brick and wood
with the cupola, street trees and gabled roof is visually interesting.
§ LS-612.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-613
AO:358
§ LS-613. DESIGN STANDARDS AND VISUAL COMPATIBILITY
FACTORS FOR THE LAMBERTVILLE HISTORIC DISTRICT. [Added
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14]
A. General. In assessing the effect of any proposed change under an
application for any landmark or structure in the historic district, the
following general review criteria found in the U.S. Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and the following factors shall be
used to analyze the effect that any change would have on the landmark
or structure in the historic district, and on those structures to which it
is visually related. In the design of any addition or alteration to a
historic building or structure, the commercial design standards in § 612
shall also be used when undertaking such a project.
1. Every reasonable effort shall be made by a landowner to provide a
compatible use for a property that requires the minimum alteration
of the building, structure or site and its environment, or to use a
property for its originally intended purpose.
2. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural feature should occur only when all other reasonable
efforts to preserve such elements have been made.
3. All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that
seek to create an earlier or later appearance shall be discouraged.
4. Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance may be
recognized.
5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with
sensitivity.
6. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is
necessary, the new materials should match the material being
replaced in design, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or
replacement of missing architectural features should be based on
accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic,
physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or
the availability of different architectural elements from other
buildings or structures.
7. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other abrasive cleaning
§ LS-613 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-613
AO:359
methods that will damage historic building materials should not be
undertaken.
8. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
9. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size,
scale, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or
environment.
10. Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such manner that if such additions or alterations were to
be removed the historic structure would be unimpaired.
B. Visual Compatibility Factors. The following visual compatibility factors
shall be used in the design of additions or alterations to historic
buildings:
1. The height of the proposed building shall be visually compatible
with adjacent buildings.
2. Proportion of building's front façade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
3. Proportion of openings within the structure. The relationship of
window width to their height shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
4. Rhythm of solids to voids on the façades of historic structures. The
relationship of solids to voids in the facades of structures shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which they are
visually related.
5. Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and spaces to which it is
related.
6. Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and areas to which it is visually
related.
7. The relationship of materials and texture of the facade and roof of a
building shall be visually compatible with the predominant
materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related.
8. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with
buildings to which it is visually related.
§ LS-613 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-613
AO:360
9. The size and scale of a building, the mass of a building in relation to
open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and spaces to which
it is visually related.
10. A building shall be visually compatible with buildings and spaces to
which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this
is its vertical character, horizontal character or non-directional
character.
§ LS-613 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-613
AO:361

ARTICLE VII
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE AND INSPECTIONS
§ LS-700. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE AND INSPECTIONS.
§ LS-701. GUARANTEES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats, or as a condition of final site
plan approval, the approving authority may require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards adopted by this Ordinance for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements:
1. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the City in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate including:
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final
map and required by the "Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c. 141
(C.46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures,
erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only,
other on-site improvements and landscaping. The City Engineer
shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost
estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted
by the obligor.
2. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the
Governing Body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed of the improvements are covered by performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall
be required by the municipality for such utilities or improvements.
B. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Governing Body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of the performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation. The City Engineer shall determine the cost of
the improvements according to the method of calculation set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligator and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the City for the reasonable cost of the
§ LS-700 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-701
AO:363
improvements not completed or corrected and the City may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor may request of the Governing Body in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer prepare, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
subsection A.1 above, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory
completed improvements. The request shall indicate which
improvements have been completed and which improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the City
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's
request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Governing Body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect
to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory,
the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete
improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the
unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the City Engineer shall identify
each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together
with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared
by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to subsection A.1 above.
E. The Governing Body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the City
Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended
to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection A.1 above. This
resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the
list and report prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the Governing Body, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to those
approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements.
For the purposes of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee
§ LS-701 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-701
AO:364
attributable to each approved improvement shall be reduced by the
total amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection A.1 above, including
any contingency factors applied to the cost of installation. If the sum
of the approved improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount
of the performance guarantee, then the City may retain 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Governing
Body may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
G. The obligor shall reimburse the City for all inspection fees paid to the
City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements.
H. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
City on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Governing Body shall be
deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to subsection A.1 above, to accept dedication for public use of
streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according
to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority,
provided that such improvements have been inspected and have
received final approval by the City Engineer.
§ LS-701 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-701
AO:365

ARTICLE VIII
GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
§ LS-800. GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE.
§ LS-801. PROCEDURE.
The subdivider shall file with the governing body a general liability
insurance policy at the same time as he files his performance guarantee
covering all operations in the development including contractual liability
with limits of not less than $100,000 for bodily injury to each person
and $500,000 liability on the aggregate, for each accident and $100,000
aggregate property damage liability. The City Attorney shall approve the
policy for form and execution. The policy shall be of the same term in
conformance with any extension of the performance guarantee. The policy
shall name the City of Lambertville as an assured and provide that the City
of Lambertville may nevertheless assert claims against the other assured.
§ LS-800 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-801
AO:367

ARTICLE IX
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ LS-900. PENALTY.
§ LS-900.1. Sale or Transfer Before Subdivision Approval.
If before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision which, by ordinance, the Planning Board, or the Planning Board
and the governing body, or either of them are required to act, such person
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be
deemed a separate violation. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55)
§ LS-900.2. Streets to Meet Requirements for Building Permits.
In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such
that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet requirement for
a building permit under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended, the City may
institute and maintain a civil action:
§ LS-900.3. Purchaser/Grantee Rights; Time Limits to Bring Action.
In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to
a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that
remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors, to
secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense, and title closing expense, if any. Any
such action must be brought within two years after the date of the recording
of the instrument or transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years if unrecorded.
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued.
§ LS-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-900.3
AO:369

ARTICLE X
SEVERABILITY
§ LS-1000. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ LS-1000 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-1000
AO:371

ARTICLE XI
REPEALER
§ LS-1100. REPEALER.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ LS-1100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LS-1100
AO:373
Chapter LDR
LAND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
§ LS-1100 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LS-1100
AO:374
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ LDR-100. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ LDR-101. SHORT TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development
Review Ordinance of the City of Lambertville, New Jersey."
§ LDR-102. PURPOSES.
This Ordinance is hereby ordained to carry out the purposes set forth in
New Jersey Revised Statutes 40:55D-2.
§ LDR-103. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2002-13 § 2]
A. Word Usage. Any word or term not defined herein shall be as defined in
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A., 40:55D-1 et seq., or shall be
utilized in standard usage for the context in which the word is used. In
interpreting this Article, words in one tense shall include other tenses
or derivative forms; words in the singular shall include the plural and in
the plural, the singular; either gender shall include the other; the word
"shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
B. Historic District Definitions.
1. ADDITION: The construction of a new improvement to a historic
structure, which changes its exterior appearance.
2. ALTERATION: Any work done on a historic structure which
changes its exterior appearance, excepting paint color.
3. DEMOLITION: The razing or removal of a structure, or any part
thereof, of a historic structure.
4. HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any part of the City of Lambertville
identified as a historic district on the Zoning Map established
pursuant to § 301 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Lambertville.
5. HISTORIC SITE: Any real property such as a building, structure,
ruins, foundation, route, trail, place or object including but not
limited to a cemetery, burial ground or village area, or bicycle
pathway, or a natural object(s), configuration, geological or
geographical feature or formation which is not located in the
district and which:
a. Is of particular historic, cultural, scenic or architectural
significance to the City of Lambertville, and in which the broad
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation,
state or community is reflected or exemplified; or
§ LDR-100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-103
AO:375
§ LDR-104. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE.
The Governing Body, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
adopt, and may amend reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with the Municipal Land Use Law or this Ordinance for the administration
of their functions, powers and duties, and shall furnish a copy thereof to
any person upon request and may charge a reasonable fee, as established
by Zoning § 800, for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
§ LDR-105. MEETINGS QUORUMS.
Every City Agency shall by its rules fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by such agency.
Regular meetings of the City Agency shall be scheduled not less than
once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process. The City Agency may provide for
special meetings, at the call of the Chairman, or on request of any two of
its members and the public in accordance with the provisions of the "Open
Public Meetings Act," P.L. 1975, c.231, and agency regulations. No action
shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present. All sections
shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum except as otherwise required
by § 114E and § 207, of this Ordinance. Nothing herein shall be construed
to contravene any statue providing for procedures for governing bodies.
b. Is identified with historic personages or with important events
in the main current of national, state or local history; or
c. Shows evidence of habitation, activity or the culture of
prehistoric man; or
d. Embodies a distinguishing characteristic or an architectural
type valuable as representative of a period, style or method of
construction; or
e. Represents a work of a builder, designer, artist or architect
whose individual style significantly influenced the
architectural history of the City of Lambertville or other areas;
or
f. Is imbued with traditional or legendary lore.
6. IMPROVEMENT: Any structure or part thereof constructed or
installed upon real property and intended to be kept at the location
for a period of not less than 60 continuous days.
7. REPAIR: Any work done on any historic structure or historic site
that is not an addition and does not change its exterior appearance.
C. Other terms within this Ordinance that are not defined herein or by the
Municipal Land Use Law shall be as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Lambertville.
§ LDR-103 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-106
AO:376
§ LDR-106. PUBLIC MEETINGS AND MINUTES.
§ LDR-107. HEARINGS.
A. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
provisions of the "Open Public Meetings Act." P.L. 1975, c.231, (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.), and agency regulations.
B. Minutes of every regular or special meetings shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the City
Agency and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by
the City Agency, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefore.
The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection
during normal business hours at the office of the Administrative Officer.
Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the
subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a
fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
A. The City Agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development, or adoption, revision or amendment of the master plan or
any review undertaken by a Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-31.
B. The City Agency shall make the rules governing such hearings. Any
maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be
on file and available for public inspection at 10 days before the date of
the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the
Administrative Officer. The applicant may produce other documents,
records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or
supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
C. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the "County and Municipal investigations Law," P.L. 1953,
c. 38 shall apply.
D. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right to cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Chairman of the Agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
§ LDR-106 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-107
AO:377
§ LDR-108. CONTENTS OF NOTICE OF HEARING ON APPLICATION
FOR DEVELOPMENT OR ADOPTION OF MASTER PLAN.
Notices pursuant to §§ 109 and 110 shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered, and, in the case
of notices pursuant to § 109, an identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the City Tax Assessor's
office, and the location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought are available pursuant to § 107 of this Ordinance.
§ LDR-109. NOTICE OF APPLICATIONS.
Notice pursuant to § 109A, B, C, F and G shall be given by the applicant and
shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
F. The City Agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The City Agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recordings in
lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
G. Each decision on any application for development shall be in writing
and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g.
H. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Secretary of the City
Agency within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant, or if
represented then to his attorney, without separate charge, and to all
who request a copy of the decision for a fee. A copy of the decision shall
also be filed by the City Agency in the office of the Administrative
Officer. The Administrative Officer shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party for a fee and available for
public inspection at his or her office during City business hours.
I. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City, if there be one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Administrative Officer of the Approving Board. The applicant shall pay a
fee as designated for publication of such notice.
A. Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be
given except for (1) conventional site plan review pursuant to § 601A,
except as otherwise required by § 606; (2) minor subdivisions pursuant
to § 612; or (3) final approval pursuant to § 608; provided that public
notice shall be given in the event that relief is requested pursuant to
§ 206 as part of an application for development otherwise excepted
herein from public notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in
the official newspaper of the City, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
§ LDR-107 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-109
AO:378
§ LDR-110. NOTICE CONCERNING MASTER PLAN.
B. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to § 109A shall be
given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which
is the subject of such hearing and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12. Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on the
property owner as shown on the aid current tax duplicate, or his agent
in charge of the property, or (2) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail
to the property owner at his address as shown on the said current tax
duplicate. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Administrative Officer
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to § 109B. The applicant shall be
entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure
to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding. A fee of $10 shall be charged for such list.
D. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the City Clerk pursuant to § 107B.
H. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the City
Agency holding the hearing on the application for development in the
event that the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this
section.
A. The Planning Board shall give:
§ LDR-109 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-110
AO:379
§ LDR-111. EFFECT OF MAILING NOTICE.
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to §§ 109 and 110 of this
Ordinance shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ LDR-112. NOTICE OF HEARING ON ORDINANCE OR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM: NOTICE OF ACTION ON CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT OR OFFICIAL MAP.
1. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
the master plan; such notice shall be given by publication in the
official newspaper of the City, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing;
2. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an
adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoptions, revision or
amendment of a master plan involving property situated within 200
feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date
of any hearing;
3. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of (a) all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of the
City master plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing;
such notice shall include a copy of the master plan or revision or
amendment thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-13.
A. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the clerk of
an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of a development regulation involving property situated
within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to
the date of any such hearing.
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the county
planning board of (1) all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearings, and (2) the adoption, revision or amendment of the
City capital improvement program or City official map not more than 30
days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice
provided hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed development
regulation, the municipal official map or the City capital program, or
any proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be.
C. Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be
considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ LDR-110 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-113
AO:380
§ LDR-113. FILING OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The City Clerk shall file, with the County Planning Board as soon after
passage as possible, all development regulations, including this one and any
amendments or revisions thereto, and file and maintain for public inspection
copies of said regulations in his or her office.
§ LDR-114. APPEAL TO THE GOVERNING BODY: TIME, NOTICE,
MODIFICATION, STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the Governing Body any final
decision of the Board of Adjustment approving an application for
development pursuant to § 802D. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.). Such appeal
shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final
decision pursuant to § 107I. The appeal to the Governing Body shall be
made by serving the City Clerk in person or by certified mail with a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefore and the name and
address of the appellant and name and address of his attorney, if
represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the Governing Body only
upon the record established before the Board of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Governing Body by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to § 107H and to the
Board from which the appeal is taken at least 10 days prior to the date
of the meeting. The parties may submit oral and written argument on
the record at such meeting, and the Governing Body shall provide for
verbatim recording and transcripts of such meeting pursuant to § 107F.
C. The Governing Body shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the date of receipt of the transcript of the
hearing unless the appellant, together with the applicant, consents in
writing to an extension of such period. The appellant shall arrange for a
transcript pursuant to § 107F., or otherwise, for use by the Governing
Body. Failure of the Governing Body to hold a hearing and conclude a
review of the record below and to render a decision within specified
period, without such written consent, shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
D. The Governing Body may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the final decision of the Board of Adjustment approving a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Governing Body shall be necessary to reverse, remand or modify
any final action of the Board of Adjustment.
F. An appeal to the Governing Body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the Board of Adjustment certifies to the Governing
Body, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such Board,
§ LDR-113 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-114
AO:381
§ LDR-115. ENFORCEMENT.
The Governing Body shall enforce this Ordinance. In case any building
or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
Ordinance, the Governing Body and its agents or an interested party, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about such premises.
§ LDR-116. TOLLING OF RUNNING OF PERIOD OF APPROVAL.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any State agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval under
this Ordinance shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ LDR-117. CONDITIONAL APPROVALS.
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior
Court on application upon notice to the Board of Adjustment and on
good cause shown.
G. The Governing Body shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or
if represented then to his attorney, without separate charge, and for a
fee to any interested party who has requested it, not later than 10 days
after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the City, if there be one, or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such publication shall be
arranged by the City; provided that the applicant may arrange such
publication if he so desires.
H. Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the right of any party to
obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any State agency, political
subdivision or any other party to protect the public health and welfare
or by a directive or order issued by any State agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
§ LDR-114 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-117
AO:382
§ LDR-118. (Reserved)21
health and welfare, the Municipal Agency shall process such
application for development in accordance with this Ordinance, and
if such applicant for development complies with the requirements of
this Ordinance, the approving authority shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development requires an approval by a governmental
agency other than the approving authority, the approving authority
shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the
subsequent approval of such governmental agency; provided that the
approving authority shall make a decision on any application for
development within the time period provided in this Ordinance or
within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the
applicant unless the approving authority is prevented or relieved from
so acting by the operation of law.
21.Editor's Note: See Fees in § 800 of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ LDR-117 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-118
AO:383

ARTICLE II
PLANNING BOARD
§ LDR-200. PLANNING BOARD.
§ LDR-201. ESTABLISHMENT.
The Planning Board heretofore established is hereby continued pursuant to
the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.291.
§ LDR-202. MEMBERSHIP. [Ord. 5/15/78, Ord. 1/17/83, Ord. No.
88-28]
A. The Planning Board shall consist of nine members. For convenience in
designating the manner of appointment, the membership shall consist
of and be divided into the following 4 classes:
CLASS I - The mayor
CLASS II - One of the officials of the City, other than a member of the
Governing Body to be appointed by the Mayor.
CLASS III - A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
CLASS IV - Six other citizens of the City of Lambertville to be appointed
by the Mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, position
or employment, except that one such member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and
one Class IV member may be a member of the Board of Education. The
Member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board, as required by section 1 of P.L.1968, c.245 (N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1), shall be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless there be
among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member common to the Planning Board and municipal Environmental
Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board.
For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of municipal office. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23)
B. The Mayor may appoint to the Planning Board 2 alternate members
who shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2".
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
§ LDR-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-202
AO:385
§ LDR-203. TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL.
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
unexpired term only.
No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member, may after public hearing, if he requests one, be
removed by the Governing Body for cause.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of the
regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event
that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the
Mayor's official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at
the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first. The
term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first
appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointments; provided that the initial Class IV
term of no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the Class IV
term of each such member shall be four years. If a vacancy in any class
shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board term, it
shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired
term. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23)
B. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any
matter which he has, either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Any member other than a Class I member, after a
public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the Governing
Body for cause.
C. When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the
§ LDR-202 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-203
AO:386
§ LDR-204. (Reserved)
§ LDR-205. POWERS OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
§ LDR-206. ANCILLARY POWERS.
The Planning Board when reviewing applications for approval of subdivision
plats, site plans or conditional uses shall have the power to grant to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Board of
Adjustment.
meetings, shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing
was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the
meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has available to
him a transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent,
and certifies in writing to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
A. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this Ordinance and
shall accordingly exercise its power in regard to:
1. The master plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 et seq.
2. Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37 et seq.
3. The official map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
4. The zoning ordinance (including conditional uses) pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq.
5. Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan (and conditional use) approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 et seq.
B. The Planning Board may:
1. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulation;
2. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process; and
3. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and
assistance of the Governing Body or other agencies or officers.
A. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 from lot area, lot dimensional,
setback and yard requirements; provided that relief pursuant to this
subsection from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more
than one lot;
§ LDR-203 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-206
AO:387
§ LDR-207. REFERRAL POWERS.
Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision, or amendment
thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to the Governing
Body, within 35 days after referral, a report including recommendations
concerning the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment.
The Governing Body, when considering the adoption of a development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of the
Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a
vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in
its minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of
the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period
provided herein shall relieve the Governing Body from the requirements of
this section in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
B. Direction pursuant to § 502 of this Ordinance for issuance for a permit
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to
§ 501 of this Ordinance;
C. Direction pursuant to § 504 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
case may be.
§ LDR-206 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-207
AO:388
ARTICLE III
MASTER PLAN
§ LDR-300. MASTER PLAN.
§ LDR-301. PREPARATION; CONTENTS; MODIFICATION.
A. The Governing Body and the Planning Board of the City of Lambertville
hereby declare that they have reviewed the master plan adopted in
1970 and hereby further declare that the master plan meets the
requirements of the New Jersey Revised Statutes 40:55D-28b,c and d
and the same is hereby readopted as part of this Ordinance.
§ LDR-300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-301
AO:389

ARTICLE IV
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM AND PROJECT REVIEW
§ LDR-400. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM AND PROJECT
REVIEW.
§ LDR-401. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
Inasmuch as the Governing Body of the City of Lambertville do not deem
that a capital improvements program is needed for the City of Lambertville
at this time, the same will not be authorized under this Ordinance.
§ LDR-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-401
AO:391

ARTICLE V
OFFICIAL MAP
§ LDR-500. OFFICIAL MAP.
§ LDR-501. ESTABLISHMENT OF AN OFFICIAL MAP.
§ LDR-502. ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR BUILDINGS OR
STRUCTURES.
For purposes of preserving the integrity of the official map, no permit
shall be issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street or
public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to § 501 of this Ordinance as shown on the official map, or shown on a
plat filed pursuant to this Ordinance before adoption of the official map,
except as provided herein. Whenever one or more parcels of land, upon
which is located the bed of such mapped street or public drainage way,
flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to § 501 hereof, cannot
yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted,
the Board of Adjustment may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board, direct the issuance
of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of such mapped or public
drainage way or flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to
§ 501 hereof, which will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening
such street, or tend to cause a minimum change of the official map and
the Board shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting
the permit so as to promote the health, morals, safety and general welfare
of the public. Sections 804 through 808 of this Ordinance shall apply to
applications or appeals pursuant to this section.
§ LDR-503. BUILDING LOT TO ABUT STREET.
No permit for the erection of a building or structure shall be issued unless
the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or structure.
Such street shall have been duly placed on the official map or shall be (1)
an existing State, county or municipal street or highway, or (2) a street
A. There is hereby readopted, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32, the document known as "The Official Map of the City of
Lambertville" which was adopted by the Governing Body of the City of
Lambertville on November 15th, 1971.
B. Said official map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the
location and width of streets and public drainage ways and the location
and extent of flood control basins and public areas, whether or not such
streets, ways, basins or areas are improved or unimproved or are in
actual physical existence. Upon receiving an application for
development, the City may reserve for future use, the aforesaid streets,
ways, basins, and areas in the manner provided in § 603 of this
Ordinance.
§ LDR-500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-503
AO:393
shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board, or (3) a street on
a plat duly filed in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to
the passage of this Ordinance or its predecessor or any prior law which
required prior approval of plats by the Governing Body or other authorized
body. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Governing Body,
or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means of a
performance guarantee, in accordance with standards and specifications for
road improvements approved by the Governing Body, as adequate in respect
to the public health, safety and general welfare of the special circumstances
of the particular street and conforms with the standards of the Access
Management Codes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35.
§ LDR-504. APPEALS. [Ord. No. 2002-13 § 3a]
Where the enforcement of § 503 hereof would entail practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances or the case do not
require the building or structure to be related to a street the Board of
Adjustment may upon application or appeal vary the application of § 503
hereof and direct the issuance of a permit subject to conditions that will
provide adequate access for firefighting equipment, ambulances and other
emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and safety and
that will protect any future street layout shown on the official map or a
general circulation plan element of the municipal master plan.
Sections 804 through 808 of this Ordinance shall apply to applications or
appeals pursuant to this section.
§ LDR-503 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-504
AO:394
ARTICLE VI
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW AND CERTIFICATES OF
APPROVAL
§ LDR-600. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW AND
CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL.
§ LDR-601. REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2002-13
§ 3b]
A. Subdivision and Site Plan Review. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37,
approval of subdivision plats by resolution of the Planning Board shall
be required as a condition for the filing of such plats with the County
Recording Officer. Approval of site plans by resolution of the Planning
Board shall be required as a condition for the issuance of a building
permit or certificate of occupancy for any development, except that
subdivision or individual lot applications for detached one or two
dwelling-unit buildings shall be exempt from such site plan review and
approval; provided that the resolution of the Board of Adjustment shall
substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever the Board of
Adjustment has jurisdiction over a subdivision or site plan pursuant to
§ 808B of this Ordinance.
B. Certificates of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness issued
by the Historic Preservation Commission and signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the Commission shall be required before a
construction, demolition or sign permit may be issued and before the
following work may begin on any of the following activities on property
within the Lambertville Historic District:
1. Demolition or relocation of an historic site or of any structure in the
historic district.
2. Change in the appearance of an existing historic site or change
visible from the street of any structure within the historic district,
whether by addition, alteration or replacement.
3. Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure in the
historic district or a historic site.
4. Any sign erected, altered, located, relocated, constructed,
reconstructed, maintained, or changed in any manner within the
historic district or a historic site.
5. Exceptions. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required
for any repair in kind, or exact replacement of any existing
structure. If the repair or replacement does not conform to these
regulations, then a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
required.
6. The Certificate of Appropriateness shall constitute the written
report required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110. Nothing herein
§ LDR-600 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-601
AO:395
§ LDR-602. SUBMITTAL PROCEDURE. [Ord. No. 94-24 § 6; Ord. No.
18-2016]
shall be construed to limit the powers of the Planning Board and
Board of Adjustment to approve site plans, subdivisions and other
matters delegated to it by law within the historic district or
pertaining to historic sites outside of the district. In such
circumstance, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall constitute
advice and recommendation to the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment on applications for development.
C. County Planning Board Approval. Each application for subdivision
approval, where required pursuant to section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285, and
each application for site plan approval, where required pursuant to
section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285, shall be submitted by the applicant to the
County Planning Board for review or approval, as required by the
aforesaid sections, and the municipal Planning Board shall condition
any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
A. The applicant shall submit 15 copies of his complete application for
subdivision, site plan, or conditional use approval to the secretary of the
Planning Board. The time for the Board's review shall not begin to run
until the submission of a complete application with the required fee.
Unless the applicant is informed in writing by the Secretary of the
Planning Board within 45 days of the actual submission of the
application that it is incomplete, said application shall be deemed
complete as of the date it was submitted.
B. A complete application for preliminary approval shall consist of the
following:
1. A properly completed Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment application form and checklist(s).
2. The required fee.
3. A site plan or subdivision plot plan on which the following is set
out:
a. Scale, not to exceed one inch - 100 feet.
b. Locator map showing all road intersections within 500 feet or
the nearest intersection, whichever is greatest.
c. All structures, wooded areas and topography with two foot
intervals, except where the slope exceeds 15%, in which case
contour intervals may be five feet.
d. All lot lines and owners of lots within 200 feet of the site.
§ LDR-601 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-602
AO:396
§ LDR-603. RESERVATION OF PUBLIC AREAS.
e. Streets, easements, watercourses and rights-of-way.
f. Utility and drainage plans.
g. Any extension of off-tract improvements necessitated by the
proposed development.
h. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
i. In the case of a site plan, preliminary plans for elevations and
locations of structures, parking lighting, loading, signs and
landscaping.
j. "Will-Serve" letters from utility providers.
C. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall distribute the site plan,
subdivision and-or conditional use application for review and report,
and where required approval, as follows:
1. The Municipal Planner.
2. The Municipal Engineer.
3. The Municipal Utilities Authority.
4. The Municipal Health Officer.
5. The Municipal Fire Officer.
6. The Planning Board (Planning Consultant).
A. Before approving a subdivision or site plan, the approving authority
may require that streets, public drainage ways, flood control basins and
public areas, designated for reservation on the master plan or official
map, must be shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable to their
intended uses. The approving authority may reserve the location and
extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the plat for a
period of one year after the approval of the final plat or within such
further time as may be agreed to by the developer. Unless during such
period or extension thereof the City shall have entered into a contract
to purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law for
the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways,
basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations
shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in
accordance with applicable development regulations. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to streets and roads, flood control basins or
public drainage ways necessitated by the subdivision or land
development and required for final approval.
The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
§ LDR-602 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-603
AO:397
§ LDR-604. FINDINGS OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
Prior to approval of planned developments the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation; provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering, or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
B. Upon the submission to the approving authority of an application for
development showing development proposed for an area reserved on
the official map or master plan, the secretary of the approving authority
shall notify the Governing Body in writing of such application, and that
the approving authority intends to grant approval for said development
in the reserved area unless the Governing Body notifies the approving
authority prior to the date for final approval that it intends to reserve
the area in question and will provide compensation to the developer for
such reservation. Said notice of intent to reserve shall be in the form of
a resolution by the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall
thereupon proceed either to reach an agreement with the developer as
to the amount of compensation to be paid for such reservation, or
negotiate a purchase price for said reserved area. Upon the Governing
Body arriving at the amount to be paid the developer by way of
compensation for reservation or purchase, said amount shall be
deposited in escrow for the benefit of the developer.
A. That departure by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning
ordinance standards pursuant to Article VII of this Ordinance;
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate;
C. That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment are adequate;
D. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
§ LDR-603 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-604
AO:398
§ LDR-605. TIME FOR DECISION.
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. Application.
1. Less than 10 lots. Upon the submission to the secretary of the
Planning Board of a complete application for a site plan for 10
acres of land or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer, except that if the application for site plan approval also
involves an application for a relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
95 days of the date of the submission of a complete application to
the secretary of the Planning Board, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
2. More than 10 lots. Upon the submission of a complete application
for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to
by the developer.
B. (Reserved)
C. Failure of the reviewing board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the
subdivision and-or site plan and-or conditional use as submitted.
D. The Planning Board may waive site plan approval requirements if the
construction or alteration or change of occupancy or use does not affect
existing circulation, drainage, relationships of buildings to each other,
landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan
review.
E. If the reviewing board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application
for development. The reviewing board shall, if the proposed
development complies with the ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
grant preliminary subdivision or site plan approval.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plan to the reviewing board for informal review, and
neither the reviewing board nor the developer shall be bound by any
discussions or statements made during such review; provided that the
right of the developer at any time to submit a complete application for
subdivision or site plan approval shall not be limited by his submittal of
§ LDR-604 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-605
AO:399
§ LDR-606. PUBLIC HEARINGS. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
A public hearing shall be held on all applications for subdivision, site plan
and variance approvals. At the Zoning Officer's discretion, a public hearing
is not required for uses exempted from Site Plan Review per Section 516.2
of the Zoning Ordinance as long as the proposed project meets all of the
other requirements within the Zoning Ordinance.
§ LDR-607. RIGHTS UNDER PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan except as provided
in § 607D shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a threeyear
period from the date of the preliminary approval:
a sketch plan and the time for the reviewing board's decision shall not
begin to run until the submission of a complete application.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements;
and, in the case of a site plan, existing natural resources to be
preserved on the site; vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading; screening, landscaping and location of structures; exterior
lighting both for safety reasons and street lighting; except that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the City from modifying by
ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as
relate to public health and safety.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan; and
C. That the applicant may apply for and the reviewing board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of 50 acres or more,
the reviewing board may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs A, B
and C above for such period of time, longer than three years, as shall be
determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable taking into
consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, (2) economic conditions,
and (3) the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
apply for thereafter and the reviewing board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable taking into
consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, and (2) the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or
§ LDR-605 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-607
AO:400
§ LDR-608. FINAL APPROVAL OF SITE PLANS AND MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
§ LDR-609. EXCEPTION TO APPLICATION OF SITE PLAN
REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 18-2017]
sections awaiting final approval, (3) economic conditions and (4) the
comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards may govern.
A. The reviewing board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval; and, in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the "Map Filing Law," N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq., provided that in the case of a planned development,
the reviewing body may permit minimal deviations from the conditions
of preliminary approval necessitated by change of condition beyond the
control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without
the developer being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the secretary of the reviewing
board, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the reviewing board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval of the application for final
approval as submitted and a certificate of the secretary of the reviewing
board as to failure of the reviewing board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other required evidence of approval.
C. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following
where applicable:
1. A properly completed final subdivision site plan approval form;
2. The required fee;
3. A site plan in final form, including all the information shown on the
preliminary plan and conditions of preliminary approval;
4. A subdivision plat conforming with the "Map Filing Act," N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq.
A. The reviewing board when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval of this ordinance, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this Ordinance is
§ LDR-607 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-609
AO:401
§ LDR-610. EFFECT OF FINAL APPROVAL.
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
B. The reviewing board when acting upon application for preliminary site
plan approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this Ordinance is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
C. In accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 516 of the Zoning
Ordinance, upon submission of the applicant, the Zoning Officer shall
be authorized to perform an initial review of an application seeking
waiver of formal site plan review for compliance with the standards set
forth in these ordinances for granting of the waiver. If appropriate, as
set forth in Section 516 of the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer
may recommend in writing that the Board having jurisdiction formally
ratify the recommendation and grant the requested waiver, with or
without conditions, by itself or in connection with any other action to be
taken or relief to be granted with respect to the application.
D. Nothing herein shall otherwise limit the power of the Board having
jurisdiction to grant appropriate waivers, including waivers for
submissions in other contexts, as provided in the Municipal Land Use
Law and the City's Ordinances, such as waivers coupled with requests
for bulk variances or other appropriate relief.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
§ 607 of this Ordinance, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval;
provided that in the case of major subdivision the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period provided in § 613 of this Ordinance. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and, in the case of
a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in § 613 of this
Ordinance, the Planning Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the granting of
final approval terminated the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to § 607 of this Ordinance for the section granted final
approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more or conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, the reviewing board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraph A in this section for such period of time, longer than two
years, as shall be determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable
§ LDR-609 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-610
AO:402
§ LDR-611. GUARANTEES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
taking into consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, (2) economic
conditions and (3) the comprehensiveness of the development. The
developer may apply for thereafter, and the reviewing board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the reviewing board to be
reasonable taking into consideration (1) the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, (2) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, (3) economic conditions and (4) the comprehensiveness of
the development.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats, or as a condition of final site
plan approval, the approving authority may require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards adopted by this Ordinance for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements:
1. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the City in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate including:
streets, grading, pavement, gutters curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final
map and required by the "Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c. 141
(C.46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures,
erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only,
other on-site improvements and landscaping. The City Engineer
shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost
estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted
by the obligor.
2. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the
Governing Body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed of the improvements are covered by performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall
be required by the municipality for such utilities or improvements.
B. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Governing Body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of the performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
§ LDR-610 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-611
AO:403
cost of the installation. The City Engineer shall determine the cost of
the improvements according to the method of calculation set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligator and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the City for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected and the City may either prior
to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor may request of the Governing Body in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer prepare, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
subsection A.1 above, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory
completed improvements. The request shall indicate which
improvements have been completed and which improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the City
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's
request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Governing Body, and shall simultaneously send a copy therof to the
obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect
to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory,
the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete
improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the
unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the City Engineer shall identify
each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together
with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared
by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to subsection A.1 above.
E. The Governing Body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the City
Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended
to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection A.1 above. This
resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the
list and report prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the Governing Body, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to those
approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
§ LDR-611 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-611
AO:404
§ LDR-612. MINOR SUBDIVISION.
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements.
For the purposes of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee
attributable to each approved improvement shall be reduced by the
total amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection A.1 above, including
any contingency factors applied to the cost of installation. If the sum
of the approved improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount
of the performance guarantee, then the City may retain 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Governing
Body may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
G. The obligor shall reimburse the City for all inspection fees paid to the
City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements.
H. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
City on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Governing Body shall be
deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to subsection A.1 above, to accept dedication for public use of
streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according
to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority,
provided that such improvements have been inspected and have
received final approval by the City Engineer.
A. The Planning Board shall waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the Planning Board finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of "minor
subdivision" in § 102 of this Ordinance. Minor subdivision approval
shall be deemed to be final approval of the subdivision by the Board;
provided that the Board may condition such approval on terms ensuring
the provision of improvements pursuant to Article VII of this Ordinance.
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Planning Board, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval and a certificate
of the Secretary of the Planning Board as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be
§ LDR-611 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-612
AO:405
§ LDR-613. FILING OF SUBDIVISION PLATS.
§ LDR-614. SELLING BEFORE APPROVAL. [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55]
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the "Map Filing Law," N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the application for
development for a proposed minor subdivision the Planning Board may
accept a plat not in conformity with the "Map Filing Act" N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.; provided that if the developer chooses to file the
minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed such plat
shall conform with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval; provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided herein.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
B. Final approval of a major subdivision shall be evidenced by affixing to
the plat the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the reviewing
Board, or a copy of the certificate of the Secretary of the reviewing
Board indicating that the reviewing Board failed to reach a decision on
the subdivision application within the prescribed time. The signatures
of the Chairman and Secretary of the reviewing Board shall not be
affixed until the developer had posted the guarantees required
pursuant to § 611.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
City approval is required by this Ordinance, such person shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
§ LDR-612 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-614
AO:406
§ LDR-615. CERTIFICATES SHOWING APPROVAL.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the City may institute and maintain a civil
action:
1. For injunctive relief; and
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with § 615 of this Ordinance.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding August 1, 1976,
may apply in writing to the Administrative Officer for the issuance of a
certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been
approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered
by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The Administrative Officer shall make and issue such certificate within
15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
1. That there exists in the City of Lambertville a duly established
Planning Board and that there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of the "Municipal
Land Use Law" of 1975, c.291.
2. Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
3. Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56).
D. The City Clerk shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess of those
provided in R.S. 54:5-14 and 15. The fees so collected by the City Clerk
shall be paid by him or her to the City.
§ LDR-614 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-616
AO:407
§ LDR-616. REFERRAL OF APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT TO
THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION. [Ord. No. 2002-13
§ 3b]
The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall make available to the
Historic Preservation Commission an informational copy of every
application submitted to either Board for development in a historic zoning
district or on historic sites designated on the zoning map, official map or
in the historic preservation element of the master plan. Failure to make the
informational copy available shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
The Historic Preservation Commission may provide its advice, which shall
be conveyed through its delegation of one of its members or staff to testify
orally at the hearing on any application within the Lambertville Historic
District and to explain any written report, which may have been submitted.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Lambertville, no construction permit shall be issued by the Construction
Code Official prior to Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval of an
application for development of the following activities:
A. Demolition or relocation of an historic site or of any structure in a
historic district.
B. Change in the appearance of an existing historic site or change visible
from the street of any structure within the Lambertville Historic
District, whether by addition, alteration or replacement.
C. Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure in the
historic district or on the same lot as a historic site.
D. Any sign erected, altered, located, relocated, constructed,
reconstructed, maintained, or changed in any manner within the
Lambertville Historic District.
E. Referral of an application for development to the Historic Preservation
Commission shall not apply to any repair in kind, or the exact
replacement of any existing structure.
§ LDR-616 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-616
AO:408
ARTICLE VII
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ LDR-700. DESIGN STANDARDS.
Standards of performance and design for subdivision and site plans,
including planned developments, shall be those set forth in the City of
Lambertville Zoning Ordinance and The Land Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of Lambertville readopted by Article XI of this Ordinance.
§ LDR-700 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-700
AO:409

ARTICLE VIII
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ LDR-800. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ LDR-801. ESTABLISHMENT, MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
[Ord. No. 88-28]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of section 56 of the "Municipal Land Use Law
of 1975", P.L. 1975, c.291, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, also known
as the Board of Adjustment, heretofore established, is hereby
continued, and shall consist of seven members.
B. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the
Governing Body. The terms of the members first appointed under this
Ordinance shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the
first four years after their appointment. Thereafter, the term of each
member shall be four years. No member may hold any elective office or
position under the City. No member shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. A member may, after public hearing if he requests it,
be removed by the Governing Body for cause. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term only.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from
its members and select a secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
D. The Mayor may appoint to the Board of Adjustment two alternate
members who shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
unexpired term only.
No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member, may after public hearing, if he requests one, be
removed by the Governing Body for cause.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of the
regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event
§ LDR-800 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-801
AO:411
§ LDR-802. POWERS. [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance;
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the zoning map or
ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
such board is authorized to pass by any zoning or official map
ordinance, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.;
C. (1) Where: (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or (b) by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific
piece of property, or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional
situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the
structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-62 et seq. would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such
strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship; (2) where in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property the purposes of this act or the purposes of the
"Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act," P.L.2000, c. 72
(N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et al.), would be advanced by a deviation from the
Zoning Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to article 8 of the Municipal Land
Use Law; provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use is an
inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a decision on a
variance under this section and provided that no variance from those
departures enumerated in paragraph D of this section shall be granted
under this paragraph C; and provided further that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, in conjunction with which the
Planning Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant
to subsection a of N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-60; and
D. In particular cases for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to article 8 of the Municipal Land
Use Law to permit: (1) a use or principal structure in a district
restricted against such use or principal structure, (2) an expansion of a
nonconforming use, (3) deviation from a specification or standard
pursuant to section 54 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67)
§ LDR-801 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-802
AO:412
§ LDR-803. EMPLOYEES.
The Board of Adjustment may employ, or contract for, and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, a licensed
planning consultant, a licensed engineer and other staff and services as
it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its use.
§ LDR-804. APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
pertaining solely to a conditional use, (4) an increase in the permitted
floor area ratio as defined in section 3.1. of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4), (5) an increase in the permitted density as defined in section
3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling
unit buildings, which lot or lots either an isolated undersized lot or lots
are resulting from a minor subdivision or (6) a height of a principal
structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height
permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance under this
paragraph D shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five
members, in the case of a municipal board, or two-thirds of the full
authorized membership, in the case of a regional board, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-77 et seq.
If an application development requests one or more variances but not
a variance for a purpose enumerated in paragraph D of this section,
the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered
under paragraph C of this section.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
§ 802, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will
not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan
and zoning ordinance. In respect to any airport safety zones delineated
under the "Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983," P.L.1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A.
6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted under
the terms of this section, permitting the creation or establishment
of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under standards
promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by
the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this section
may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report;
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within
which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer of the City based on or
made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or official map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the
Zoning Officer specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from
§ LDR-802 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-804
AO:413
§ LDR-805. TIME FOR DECISION.
whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to the Zoning Officer.
C. If an application for development is filed with the Board of Adjustment,
whether or not an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer is also
taken, the applicant shall submit 10 copies of his completed application
to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The time for the Board's
review shall not begin to run until the submission of a complete
application with the required fee. Unless the applicant is informed in
writing by the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment within 45 days of
the actual submission of the application that it is incomplete, said
application shall be deemed complete as of the date it was submitted.
D. A complete application for development under this Article shall consist
of the following:
1. A properly completed Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment application form and checklist(s).
2. The required fee.
3. If subdivision, and-or site plan and-or conditional use approval is
also sought as part of an application for a variance pursuant to
§ 802D of this Ordinance, the applicant shall also include the
information and documents required pursuant to the provisions of
§ 602 B. of this Ordinance.
E. The Secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall distribute the
application for review and report, where required, approval as follows:
1. The Board of Adjustment.
2. The Planning Board.
3. The City Engineer.
4. The City Utilities Authority.
5. The City Planning Consultant.
6. The City Health Officer.
7. The City Police Department.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the decision of the Zoning
§ LDR-804 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-805
AO:414
§ LDR-806. MODIFICATION ON APPEAL.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ LDR-807. STAY OF PROCEEDINGS BY APPEAL.
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the Zoning Officer from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
§ LDR-808. OTHER POWERS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT. [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76]
Officer or (2) the submission of a complete application for development
to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 804B of this Ordinance.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such 120-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
A. N.J.S.A. §§ 40:55D-72 to 40:55D-75 shall apply to the power of the Board
of Adjustment to:
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-32; or
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-37 et
seq. or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 40:55D-67
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. The developer
may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of the
variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent
approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval
§ LDR-805 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-808
AO:415
shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance. The number of votes of Board members required to grant
any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. for the approval in question, and the special vote
pursuant to the aforesaid subsection d. of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-57 shall not
be required.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
paragraph B. of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a completed application to the Administrative Officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision,
or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the municipal Board
of Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning
Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time.
An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report; provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall act.
§ LDR-808 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-808
AO:416
ARTICLE IX
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-13 § 4b]
§ LDR-900. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
§ LDR-901. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION. [Ord. No. 2002-13]
A. Establishment and Classes of Members. A Historic Preservation
Commission (HPC) is hereby established consisting of five regular
members and which may include two alternate members, each of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor, of the following three classes:
1. Class A - A person who is by occupation a professional in building
design and construction or architectural history;
2. Class B - Persons who are knowledgeable or have a demonstrated
interest in local history;
3. Class C - Persons who are residents of the municipality and who
hold no other municipal office, position or employment except for
membership on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
4. There shall be one member each from Classes A and B fulfilling the
terms.
5. Those regular members who are not designated as Class A or B
shall be designated as Class C. Of the regular members a total of at
least one less from a majority shall be of Classes A and B. Alternate
members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members and
shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" at the
time of appointment.
6. All members shall be residents of the municipality excepting Class
A and Class B.
7. Terms of Membership.
a. The term of each regular member shall be four years and the
term of each alternate member shall be two years.
b. Alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated at
the time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2."
c. The term of any member in common with the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on
such Board.
B. The terms of the members first appointed under this Ordinance shall be
such that two members shall be appointed to a one-year term, two
members shall be appointed to a two-year term, and one member shall
§ LDR-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-901
AO:417
be appointed to a three-year term. Alternate No. 1 shall be appointed
to a two-year term and Alternate No. 2 shall be appointed to a oneyear
term. The first year of the terms of all initial appointments under
this Ordinance shall expire on December 31 of that year. The term
of a regular member subsequently appointed shall be three years;
and the term of an alternate member shall be two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only, within 60 days of said vacancy. Notwithstanding
any other provision herein, the term of any member common to the
Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment shall be for the term of the membership on the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member of any Class. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term, only.
E. Compensation. Members of the HPC shall serve without compensation
except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of
official duties may be made by the municipality.
F. Removal. A member of the Commission may, after public hearing if he
requests it, be removed by Governing Body for cause.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the HPC shall be
permitted to act on either any matter in which he or she has directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. No member who is so
disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not continue to sit
with the Commission on the hearing of such matter, nor shall
participate in any discussion or decision.
H. Organization. The HPC shall elect from its membership a Chairman and
Vice Chairman whose terms of office shall be for one year. The
Chairman shall preside over the Commission and shall have the right to
vote. The Vice Chairman shall, in case of absence or disability of the
Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman. A Secretary shall be
appointed by the Commission may or may not be a member of the
Commission or a municipal employee. The Commission shall be
governed by Roberts Rules of Order.
I. Funding. The Governing Body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Commission shall have the authority to contract for
the services of qualified persons to direct, advise and assist the
Commission, and may acquire equipment and supplies necessary to its
effective operation.
§ LDR-901 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-901
AO:418
J. Advice. The Commission is empowered to seek advisory opinions and
technical assistance from appropriate municipal officers and employees
on any matter within the Commission's jurisdiction.
K. Rules and Procedures. The HPC shall adopt and may amend internal
rules and procedures for the transaction of its business subject to the
following:
1. A quorum for any action by the HPC shall be three members.
2. All HPC minutes and records shall be public records.
3. All HPC meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
4. The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business, which shall provide for time and place meetings.
5. Rules shall provide for the establishment of special meetings either
by the Chairman or by at least three other members of the HPC.
Any interested party shall be entitled to appear and be heard on
any matter to come before the HPC. All decisions shall be by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and qualified
to vote, and shall be reduced to writing and adopted at the next
regular meeting of the HPC.
6. HPC meetings shall be scheduled at least once every month or as
often as required to fulfill its obligations to advise the Planning
Board, Board of Adjustment, Governing Body, or Administrative
Official, unless there is no business before the Commission.
L. Responsibilities of the Historic Preservation Commission. The HPC
shall have the following duties and responsibilities.
1. Prepare a survey of historic sites of the City pursuant to criteria
identified in the survey report;
2. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the master plan and on the
implications for preservation of historic sites of any other master
plan elements;
3. Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program;
4. Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment on applications
for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110;
5. Provide written reports on the application of the Zoning Ordinance
provisions concerning historic preservation; and
6. Carry out such advisory, educational and informational functions as
will promote historic preservation in the City.
§ LDR-901 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-902
AO:419
§ LDR-902. APPLICATION PROCEDURES OF THE HISTORIC
PRESERVATION COMMISSION. [Ord. No. 2002-13]
An application for a zoning permit shall be required precedent to the
issuance of a building permit to construct, alter, repair, move or demolish
any building, structure or sign in the Lambertville Historic District. The
zoning permit application shall be made to the Zoning Officer, pursuant to
Article IX of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lambertville. No zoning
permit shall be issued until a Certificate of Appropriateness has been
approved by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or Historic
Preservation Commission, as the case may be. An application for approval
of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be completed and filed with the
Administrative Officer not less than 10 days before a Historic Preservation
Commission meeting.
A. Minor and Major Applications. The Administrative Officer shall review
the application form and classify the application in accordance with the
following guidelines:
1. If a Certificate of Appropriateness is requested for an action which
will substantially affect the characteristics of the district or historic
site, the Administrative Officer shall classify the application as a
major application and notify the applicant to submit a full
application which shall include architectural drawings and plans
prepared by a New Jersey licensed architect; photographs, sign
designs, and other information described in the Historic
Preservation Commission's regulations. The Administrative Officer
shall be entitled to request and receive assistance in the
classification from HPC members and staff.
2. If a Certificate of Appropriateness is requested for an action which
will not substantially affect the historic site or district, then the
Administrative Officer shall classify the application as a minor
application.
3. Completed minor applications will be heard and acted upon at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
4. Major applications shall be acted on within 30 days after the
application is declared complete by the Administrative Officer. If
the HPC does not act on a major application within 45 days, the
application shall be deemed to have been approved as submitted,
and the Administrative Officer shall so certify. By mutual written
agreement of the applicant and the HPC, there may be an extension
of time. The HPC may advise the applicant and make
recommendations in regard to the appropriateness of the proposed
action, and may grant approval upon such conditions as it deems
appropriate within the intent and purposes of this Ordinance. The
HPC shall decide on each application and shall reduce their
§ LDR-902 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-902
AO:420
findings and conclusions in the form of a resolution to be adopted
by the Commission.
5. Sign Application. Any person seeking a construction permit to
construct, alter, repair, move, install or demolish a sign in the
historic district or historic site outside of a district shall be required
to receive a Certificate of Appropriateness from the HPC. All
applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness for a sign shall be
classified as minor applications.
B. Decisions by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. If an application is approved, the HPC shall issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness and provide the applicant with a certified copy of
the resolution. If disapproved, the Commission shall notify the
applicant in writing of the resolution and provide to the applicant a
certified copy.
2. In the event that an applicant alleges that compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance would be an unreasonable hardship
and that the nature of his application is such that the change
sought does not justify the time and expense of a plenary
proceeding, will not impact negatively on the public good, nor
specifically on the historic qualities sought to be preserved, the
Commission, by a majority vote of its full authorized membership,
may grant such relief from the requirements of this Ordinance as it
deems consistent with the public good and the purposes of this
Ordinance.
3. An applicant may request that a Certificate of Appropriateness be
granted without fulfilling all the application requirements set forth
because the change contemplated shall not be visible from any
place to which the public normally has access and, therefore,
cannot adversely affect the public interest. In that event, the
Historic Preservation Commission, by a majority vote of its full
authorized membership, may determine that the criterion for such
an exemption has been met and may grant a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
C. Effect of a Certificate of Appropriateness Approval; Denial; Appeal.
1. Issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to be
final approval pursuant to this Ordinance. Such approval shall
neither cause nor prevent the filing of any collateral application or
other proceeding required by any other City ordinance to be made
prior to undertaking the action requested concerning the historic
site or structure in the historic district. A Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be valid for two years within such time the
applicant shall have procured a construction permit, or in the event
that subdivision or site plan approval is required pursuant to § 601,
filed a complete application with the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, or within such time as the HPC
§ LDR-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-902
AO:421
may deem it in the public interest to grant, but in no circumstance
shall such extension be for a period greater than two years from
the date of the expiration of the original approval.
2. Denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to
preclude the applicant from undertaking the activity applied for
concerning a historic site or structure in a historic district.
3. Appeal from a denial of the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
to the Board of Adjustment under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a where no
application for development is required and to Superior Court
where the Certificate of Appropriateness is issued by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
D. Emergency Repairs. When emergency repairs are required, the
Administrative Officer shall notify the Chairman of the Historic
Preservation Commission or his designee and a recommendation
concerning the emergency repairs shall be made within 48 hours. The
Administrative Officer may allow temporary repairs to a structure prior
to the Historic Preservation Commission's review when these repairs
are necessary for the building's occupancy or to ensure public safety
contingent upon the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
within 10 days of the onset of such emergency repairs. Such emergency
repairs shall not be intended to last more than 90 days.
§ LDR-902 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-902
AO:422
ARTICLE X
ZONING DISTRICTS AND PERMITTED USES
[Ord. No. 2002-13 § 4a]
§ LDR-1000. USES AND DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
The boundary of the various zoning districts and the uses permitted in
each, together with conditional uses, are those set forth in the City of
Lambertville Zoning Ordinance, re-adopted by Article XI of this Ordinance.
§ LDR-1000 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1000
AO:423

ARTICLE XI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
[Ord. No. 2002-13 § 4a]
§ LDR-1100. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ LDR-1101. REPEALS. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, or any
other ordinance of the City of Lambertville, which contain provisions
contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be and are (to the extent of
such inconsistency) hereby repealed. The most recently adopted ordinances
and amendments shall prevail.
§ LDR-1102. ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
Pursuant to Chapter 115, Laws of New Jersey 1976, all provisions of the
ordinance known as the "City of Lambertville Zoning Ordinance" adopted
November 15th, 1971, and the ordinance known as "The Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Lambertville" adopted March 1st, 1971, and all
subsequent amendments to said ordinances, are readopted to the extent
that said ordinances are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance, and shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read in
para materia with this Ordinance. Three copies of the text of the to be
readopted ordinances and accompanying maps are filed in the Office of the
City Clerk of the City of Lambertville and are available for public inspection
until final action upon and adoption of this Ordinance and the readoption of
said existing ordinances.
The Governing Body and Planning Board of the City of Lambertville hereby
declare that they have reviewed the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision
Ordinance and all subsequent amendments to said ordinances and hereby
further declare that said ordinance meet the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28 b. (2) and N.J.S.A. 40:55B-62 a.
§ LDR-1103. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect on February 1st, 1977.
§ LDR-1104. COPY TO BE FILED WITH COUNTY PLANNING
BOARD.
Immediately upon adoption of this Ordinance, the City Clerk shall file a copy
of this Ordinance with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Clerk shall also file with said Planning Board copies of all other ordinances
of the municipality relating to land use such as the subdivision and zoning
ordinances.
§ LDR-1100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1104
AO:425

ARTICLE XII
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ LDR-1200. AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORDINANCE. [Ord. No.
23-2018 replaced Article XII in entirety. Prior history includes Ord.
Nos. 2005-19, 2006-23, 2009-07, 2009-13, 18-2014]
§ LDR-1200.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
This Section of the "Code of the City of Lambertville" shall be known as the
"Affordable Housing Ordinance of the City of Lambertville."
§ LDR-1200.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
§ LDR-1200.3. Monitoring and Reporting Requirements. [Ord. No.
23-2018]
The City shall comply with the following monitoring and reporting
requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its Courtapproved
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. This Section of the Lambertville Code sets forth regulations regarding
the very-low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units in the City
consistent with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing", N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls ("UHAC"), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., except where modified by the requirements for very-low income
housing as established in P.L. 2008, c.46 (the "Roberts Bill", codified at
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1) as reflected in the terms of a Settlement
Agreement between the City and Fair Share Housing Center ("FSHC")
such that the statutory requirement to provide very-low income units
equal to 13% of affordable units approved and constructed after July 17,
2008, to be affordable households at 30% of the regional median
income, overrides the UHAC requirement that 10% of all low- and
moderate-income units must be affordable at 35% of the regional
median income, and the City's constitutional obligation to provide a fair
share of affordable housing for very-low-, low-, and moderate-income
households.
B. This Ordinance is intended to assure that very-low-, low- and moderateincome
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on
affordability over time and that very-low, low- and moderate-income
households shall occupy these units. This Ordinance shall apply to all
inclusionary developments and 100% affordable developments
(including those funded with low-income housing tax credit financing)
except where inconsistent with applicable law.
C. This Ordinance implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93, as may be amended and
supplemented.
§ LDR-1200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.3
AO:427
§ LDR-1200.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
The following terms when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings
given in this Section:
ACT — Means the Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Means constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Means the entity designated by the City to
administer affordable units in accordance with this Ordinance, N.J.A.C.
5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1).
A. Beginning on May 22, 2018, and on every anniversary of that date
through May 22, 2025, the City agrees to provide annual reporting of its
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs ("NJDCA"), Council on Affordable Housing
("COAH"), or Local Government Services ("NJLGS"), or other entity
designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to FSHC
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the NJDCA, COAH, or NJLGS. The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
B. Beginning on May 22, 2018, and on every anniversary of that date
through May 22, 2025, the City agrees to provide annual reporting of
the status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such posting
provided to FSHC, using forms previously developed for this purpose by
COAH or any other forms endorsed by the Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the City
will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a
status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of
whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present
a realistic opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding
whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity. Any
interested party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
D. By May 22, 2021, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the City will post on its municipal website, with a
copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very
low income requirements, including its family very low income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very low income and family very low
income housing obligations.
§ LDR-1200.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.4
AO:428
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — Means a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — Means the average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — Means, a sales price or rent level that is within the
means of a low- or moderate- income household as defined within N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4, and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as
may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a development
included in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan or otherwise intended to address the City's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Means any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — Means a housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a housing unit designed to meet the
needs of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein
the unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or 3) the
development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as
defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — Means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — Means a structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements
include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless;
Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities
as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for
the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living
arrangements.
§ LDR-1200.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.4
AO:429
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Means a facility that is licensed by
the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum,
one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — Means a household that has been certified by
an Administrative Agent as a very-low, low-income household or moderateincome
household.
COAH" OF THE "COUNCIL — Means the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, as established by the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301, et seq.) which has primary jurisdiction for the administration
of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional planning
consideration in the State.
DCA — Means the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — Means a housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Means any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Means money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.8.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Means the assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the
municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance
with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Means those strategies that minimize
the impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ LDR-1200.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.4
AO:430
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Means a development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median
household income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — Means the primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Means housing not restricted to low- and
moderate-income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — Means the median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by the City pursuant to this
ordinance, by COAH or a successor entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total
gross annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
regional median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to
a moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Means any sale or transfer of ownership other
than the transfer of ownership between spouses; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — Means a process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable housing
units such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except
for purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — Means the maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80%
of the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — Means the repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
§ LDR-1200.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.4
AO:431
RENT — Means the gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant,
including the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include
charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
an ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — Means the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — MEANS A HOUSEHOLD WITH A
TOTAL GROSS ANNUAL HOUSEHOLD INCOME EQUAL TO 30% OR LESS
OF THE REGIONAL MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY HOUSEHOLD
SIZE.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a
very low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Means building insulation (for attic, exterior walls
and crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement
doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation
program.
§ LDR-1200.5. Applicability. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
§ LDR-1200.6. City-Wide Mandatory Set-Aside. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the City of Lambertville pursuant to
the City's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
B. Moreover, this Ordinance shall apply to all developments that contain
very-low-, low-and moderate-income housing units, including any
currently unanticipated future developments that will provide very-low,
low- and moderate-income housing units.
C. Projects receiving Federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit financing
shall comply with the income and bedroom distribution requirements of
UHAC at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3 (with the exception that the UHAC
requirement for 10% of the affordable units in rental projects being
required to be at 35% of median income be modified as required by the
statutory requirement, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 to 13% of affordable units
in such projects shall be required to be at 30% of median income) and
the length of the affordability controls applicable to such projects shall
be not less than a thirty-year compliance period plus a fifteen-year
extended use period.
§ LDR-1200.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.6
AO:432
§ LDR-1200.7. Alternative Living Arrangements. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
A. A multi-family development providing a minimum of five new housing
units created through a municipal rezoning; Zoning Board use or
density variance; redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan that
provide for densities at or above six units per acre is required to include
a minimum affordable housing set-aside of 20% if the affordable units
will be for-sale and a minimum affordable housing set-aside of 15% if
the affordable units will be for rent.
B. At least 50% of the affordable units in each development shall be
affordable to low-income housing. At least 13% of all affordable units in
rental developments shall be affordable to very-low-income households.
C. All such affordable units, including bedroom distribution, shall be
governed by the controls on affordability and affirmatively marketed in
conformance with UHAC, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., or any successor
regulation, and all other applicable law.
D. No subdivision shall be permitted or approved for the purpose of
avoiding compliance with this requirement. Developers cannot, for
example, subdivide a project into two lots and then make each of them a
number of units just below the threshold.
E. This requirement does not give any developer the right to any such
rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any obligation on the
part of the City to grant such rezoning, variance or other relief.
F. This City-wide mandatory set-aside requirement does not apply to any
sites or specific zones otherwise identified in the City's Settlement
Agreement with FSHC or Fair Share Plan, for which density and setaside
requirements shall be governed by the specific standards as set
forth therein. The City shall maintain this mandatory set-aside provision
through at least July 8, 2025 at which time the City may determine to
extend the applicability of the provision.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
1. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
2. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty year controls on affordability in
§ LDR-1200.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.7
AO:433
§ LDR-1200.8. Phasing Schedule for Inclusionary Zoning. [Ord. No.
23-2018]
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ LDR-1200.9. New Construction. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable Housing
Units:
1. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very low
income units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very low income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low income
units within the development.
2. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very low or low-income
units.
3. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
a. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
b. At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two
bedroom units;
§ LDR-1200.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.9
AO:434
c. At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
d. The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
4. Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility Requirements:
1. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
2. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
a. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
b. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
c. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
d. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
e. If not all of the foregoing requirements in 2,a through 2,d can
be satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel must be
provided between stories within an individual unit, but if all of
the terms of paragraphs 2,a through 2,b above have been
satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be
required between stories within an individual unit; and
f. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the City has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
(1) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
§ LDR-1200.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.9
AO:435
(2) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the City of Lambertville's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
(3) The funds deposited under paragraph f,(2) above shall be
used by the City of Lambertville for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of an affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
(4) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
City for the conversion of adaptable to accessible
entrances.
(5) Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the
City's Director of Finance, or their designee, who shall
ensure that the funds are deposited into the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and appropriately earmarked.
g. Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
1. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
2. In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices:
1. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and the calculation procedures as approved by the Court and
detailed herein.
§ LDR-1200.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.9
AO:436
"Regional income units shall be established for the region that the
City is located within (i.e. Region 3) based on the median income by
household size, which shall be established by a regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
HUD. To compute this regional income limit, the HUD
determination of median county income for a family of four is
multiplied by the estimated households within the county
according to the most recent decennial Census. The resulting
product for each county within the housing region is summed. The
sum is divided by the estimated total households from the most
recent decennial Census in the City's housing region. This quotient
represents the regional weighted average of median income for
a household of four. The income limit for a moderate-income unit
for a household of four shall be 80% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. The income limit for a
low-income unit for a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD
determination of the regional weighted average median income for
a family of four. The income limit for a very low income unit for a
household of four shall be 30% of the regional weighted average
median income for a family of four. These income limits shall be
adjusted by household size based on multipliers used by HUD to
adjust median income by household size. In no event shall the
income limits be less than those for the previous year."
2. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
3. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very low-income households, which very low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
4. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
5. In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
§ LDR-1200.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.9
AO:437
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household;
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
d. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 4 1/2 person
household; and
e. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
6. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household; and
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
7. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
8. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
9. The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
§ LDR-1200.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.9
AO:438
§ LDR-1200.10. Utilities. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
§ LDR-1200.11. Occupancy Standards. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ LDR-1200.12. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and
Enforcement Mechanisms. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
10. The rents of very low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this Ordinance for a period of at least 30 years, until the City takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
§ LDR-1200.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.12
AO:439
§ LDR-1200.13. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units,
Homeowner Association Fees and Resale Prices. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ LDR-1200.14. Buyer Income Eligibility. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions
in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this Ordinance, an amount
equal to the difference between the unit's non-restricted fair market
value and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured
by a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this Ordinance shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure
with respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
B. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See Section 1200.16.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
§ LDR-1200.12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.14
AO:440
§ LDR-1200.15. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership
Unit; Subordination. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
§ LDR-1200.16. Capital Improvements To Ownership Units. [Ord.
No. 23-2018]
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrative Agent may, upon
approval by the Governing Body, and subject to the Court's approval,
permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income unit if and
only if the Administrative Agent can demonstrate that there is an
insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative Agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this Section, and the Administrative Agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
§ LDR-1200.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.16
AO:441
§ LDR-1200.17. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units. [Ord.
No. 23-2018]
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the Administrative Agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the Administrative
Agent. Unless otherwise approved by the Administrative Agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
Ordinance for a period of at least 30 years, until the City takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Somerset. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to
the Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this Ordinance despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
§ LDR-1200.16 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.17
AO:442
§ LDR-1200.18. Rent Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases. [Ord.
No. 23-2018]
§ LDR-1200.19. Tenant Income Eligibility. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
Ordinance.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this Ordinance.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
1. Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
2. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
3. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
§ LDR-1200.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.19
AO:443
§ LDR-1200.20. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in A,1 through B,5 above with the
Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The City shall appoint a specific municipal employee to serve as a
Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the City's
affordable housing program, including overseeing the administration of
affordability controls on the affordable units and the affirmative
marketing of available affordable units in accordance with the City's
Affirmative Marketing Plan; fulfilling monitoring and reporting
requirements; and supervising Administrative Agent(s). The City of
Lambertville shall adopt this Ordinance which creates the position of
Municipal Housing Liaison and the City of Lambertville shall adopt a
Resolution which appoints the person to fulfill the position of Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the governing body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall
be duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the City of
Lambertville, including the following responsibilities, which may not be
contracted out to the Administrative Agent:
§ LDR-1200.19 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.20
AO:444
§ LDR-1200.21. Administrative Agent. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
An Administrative Agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the Administrative
Agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the Administrative Agent are required. The Administrative Agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an Administrative Agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
1. Serving as The City of Lambertville's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents and interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of
Lambertville's Fair Share Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this Ordinance;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the City shall designate one or
more Administrative Agent(s) to administer and to affirmatively market
the affordable units constructed in the City in accordance with UHAC
and this Ordinance. An Operating Manual for each affordable housing
program shall be provided by the Administrative Agent(s) to be adopted
by resolution of the governing body and subject to approval of the
Court. The Operating Manual(s) shall be available for public inspection
in the office of the City Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing
Liaison, and in the office(s) of the Administrative Agent(s). The
Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the work of the
Administrative Agent(s).
A. Affirmative Marketing:
1. Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the City and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
2. Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low-and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household Certification:
§ LDR-1200.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.21
AO:445
1. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
2. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
3. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or non-eligibility;
4. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
5. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
6. Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the City when referring households
for certification to affordable units; and
7. Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the City: Fair Share Housing Center, the New
Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, including the New
Brunswick, Plainfield Area, Perth Amboy and Metuchen/Edison
branches, the Latino Action Network, NORWSCAP, the Supportive
Housing Association, and the Central Jersey Housing Resource
Center.
C. Affordability Controls:
1. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
2. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
3. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Hunterdon County Register of Deeds or Hunterdon County Clerk's
office after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
4. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
5. Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
§ LDR-1200.21 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.21
AO:446
D. Resales and Re-rentals:
1. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the Administrative Agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental;
and
2. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing Requests from Unit Owners:
1. Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
Ordinance;
2. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
3. Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
4. Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
1. Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
2. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
Administrative Agent;
3. Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
§ LDR-1200.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.21
AO:447
§ LDR-1200.22. Affirmative Marketing Requirements. [Ord. No.
23-2018]
4. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
5. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
6. Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the Administrative
Agent, to be approved by the Governing Body and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional Responsibilities:
a. The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
b. The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this Ordinance.
c. The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The City shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative Marketing Plan,
subject to approval of the Court, which is compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 3 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 3, comprised of
Hunterdon, Middlesex, and Somerset Counties.
§ LDR-1200.21 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.22
AO:448
§ LDR-1200.23. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
[Ord. No. 23-2018]
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and re-rentals. The Administrative Agent designated by the City
shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative Agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the Administrative
Agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in City, and copies of the application forms, to the
following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State
Conference of the NAACP, including the New Brunswick, Plainfield
Area, Perth Amboy and Metuchen/Edison branches, the Latino Action
Network, NORWSCAP, the Supportive Housing Association, and the
Central Jersey Housing Resource Center.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
§ LDR-1200.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.23
AO:449
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer or
Tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the Owner,
Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
1. The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer or
Tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the Owner,
Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
a. A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
b. In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Municipality Affordable
Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally
collected;
c. In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
2. The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
a. The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
Owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating Owner shall have his
§ LDR-1200.23 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.23
AO:450
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
b. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the Owner and shall be held
in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the Owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the Owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the Owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
c. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
Owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
d. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low-and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
§ LDR-1200.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.23
AO:451
§ LDR-1200.24. Development Fees. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
e. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the Owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the Owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
f. The Owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the Owner.
A. Purpose:
1. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to COAH's adoption of rules.
2. COAH was authorized by P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2), and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee
Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7) to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of
competent jurisdiction and have a COAH- or court-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
3. In Re: Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the "Mount
Laurel IV" decision, the Supreme Court remanded COAH's duties to
the Superior Court. As a result, affordable housing development fee
collections and expenditures from the municipal affordable housing
trust funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair Share Plans
through July 7, 2025 are under the Court's jurisdiction and are
subject to approval by the Court.
4. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and
32 through 38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used
§ LDR-1200.23 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.24
AO:452
for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income
housing. This chapter shall be interpreted within the framework of
COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
B. Basic Requirements:
1. COAH had previously approved ordinances adopting and amending
Section 1201, which established the City's affordable housing trust
fund. The City's development fee ordinance which has been further
amended remains effective pursuant to the Superior Court's
jurisdiction in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93.8.
2. At such time that the Court approves the City's Amended Third
Round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and the Amended
Third Round Spending Plan, the City may begin spending
development fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8 for the new
2018 Plan activities.
C. Residential Development Fees:
1. Imposed fees.
a. Within all Zoning Districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value
for residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
b. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application. Example: If an
approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application.
2. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
a. Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
§ LDR-1200.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.24
AO:453
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction
of affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
b. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
c. In addition to the construction of new principal and/or
accessory buildings, development fees shall be imposed and
collected for the construction of additions or expansions to
existing buildings, for the change or conversion of an existing
building to accommodate a more intense use, and/or for the
demolition and replacement of an existing building provided
that:
(1) The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in
the equalized assessed value of the improved building.
(2) No development fee shall be collected for a demolition and
replacement of a residential building resulting from a
natural disaster.
(3) No development fee shall be collected for the construction
of an "accessory structure" which is not a "building" as
these terms are defined in the City "Land Development
Ordinance."
D. Nonresidential Development Fees:
1. Imposed fees.
a. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
b. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
c. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
§ LDR-1200.24 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.24
AO:454
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
2. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
a. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
b. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
c. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" form.
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
d. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the
exemption no longer applies and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
e. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the City as a lien against the real
property of the owner.
E. Collection Procedures:
1. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
2. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
§ LDR-1200.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.24
AO:455
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall
verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as
per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
4. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
5. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
6. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should the City of Lambertville fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008,
c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
8. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
9. Appeal of development fees.
a. A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the City of Lambertville. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
§ LDR-1200.24 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.24
AO:456
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
b. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the City of Lambertville. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
F. Affordable Housing Trust Fund:
1. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Director of Finance, or their designee,
for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls.
2. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
b. Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
c. Rental income from municipally operated units;
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
e. Recapture funds;
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
g. Any other funds collected in connection with the City of
Lambertville's affordable housing program.
3. The City of Lambertville previously provided COAH with written
authorization, in the form of three-party escrow agreements
between the municipality, Bank of Princeton, and COAH, to permit
COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8. The Superior Court shall now have such jurisdiction
to direct the disbursement of the City's trust funds per N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.
§ LDR-1200.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.24
AO:457
4. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
G. Use of Funds:
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address the
City's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the City of Lambertville
for past housing activities.
3. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
a. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, infrastructure
assistance, and assistance with emergency repairs.
b. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
c. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
§ LDR-1200.24 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.24
AO:458
4. The City of Lambertville may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16.
5. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with the monitoring requirements set forth in the Court-approved
December 8, 2018 executed Settlement Agreement with Fair Share
Housing Center. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing
affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's regulations
and/or action are not eligible uses of the affordable housing trust
fund.
H. Monitoring:
1. On or about December 8 of each year through 2025, the City of
Lambertville shall provide annual reporting of trust fund activity to
the DCA, COAH, or NJLGS, or other entity designated by the State
of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for
this purpose by the DCA, COAH, or NJLGS. This reporting shall
include an accounting of all housing trust fund activity, including
the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other
funds collected in connection with the City of Lambertville's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan approved by the Court.
I. Ongoing Collection of Fees:
1. The ability for the City of Lambertville to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with its Court-issued
Judgment of Compliance and Repose unless the City of
Lambertville has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with the Court or other appropriate jurisdiction, has filed a
Declaratory Judgment Action, and has received the Court's
approval of its development fee ordinance. If the City of
Lambertville fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its Judgment of
§ LDR-1200.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.24
AO:459
§ LDR-1200.25. Appeals. [Ord. No. 23-2018]
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent appointed pursuant
to this Ordinance shall be filed in writing as an action in lieu of prerogative
writ in the Superior Court, Law Division in the County with jurisdiction over
the City's affordable housing proceedings, or in such other manner as the
Superior Court may direct.
Compliance and Repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any
or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds
so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L.
1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The City of Lambertville shall
not impose a residential development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its Judgment Compliance and Repose, nor shall the City of
Lambertville retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The City of Lambertville shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its Judgment Compliance
and Repose.
§ LDR-1200.24 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § LDR-1200.25
AO:460
Chapter Z
ZONING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE TO LIMIT AND RESTRICT TO SPECIFIED DISTRICTS OR
ZONES, AND TO REGULATE THEREIN, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
ACCORDING TO THEIR CONSTRUCTION AND THE NATURE AND
EXTENT OF THEIR USE, AND THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE USE
OF LAND IN THE CITY OF LAMBERTVILLE IN THE COUNTY OF
HUNTERDON AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROVISIONS HEREIN CONTAINED AND FIXING
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
§ LDR-1200.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § LDR-1200.25
AO:461

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-101. SHORT TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lambertville
Zoning Ordinance."
§ Z-102. GENERAL INTENT. [Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
A. The intent of this Ordinance is to establish a precise and detailed plan
for the use of land in the City of Lambertville based on the Master Plan
for the City of Lambertville and enacted in order to promote and to
protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare of the people. This Ordinance is intended to regulate
the use of land within zoning districts, promote orderly development,
preserve the character of certain districts, regulate intensity of use and
the location of buildings, establish standards of development, prohibit
incompatible uses, regulate the alteration of existing buildings, limit
congestion in the street, protect against hazards and conserve the
taxable value of land. In furtherance of the intentions of this Ordinance
the City has been divided into districts which implement the intentions
stated above.
B. Purpose.
The City of Lambertville, as a municipality in the State of New Jersey,
hereby declares that pursuant to the purposes of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, that the amendments
contained herein shall promote the conservation of historic sites and
districts, a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangement contributing to the
well being of persons, neighborhoods, the community and region as a
whole and to more particularly:
1. Safeguard the heritage of the City of Lambertville by preserving
that part of the City, designated as the historic district, which
reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic and architectural
history;
2. Maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for
the architecturally and historically significant historic sites within
the City of Lambertville;
3. Stabilize and improve property values;
4. Foster civic beauty;
5. Stabilize and improve neighborhoods;
§ Z-101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-102
AO:463
§ Z-103. INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed and
required by other provisions of the Code of the City of Lambertville, county,
state, or federal government, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Where such other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions
require greater restrictions than are imposed by this Ordinance, the
provisions of such other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions
shall control.
§ Z-104. PROHIBITED USES.
All uses not expressly permitted in this Ordinance are hereby prohibited.
§ Z-105. TIME OF COMPLIANCE.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use
and shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not the
entire structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use.
§ Z-106. PROPOSED PUBLIC DEDICATIONS.
Approval of final plans by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall constitute an acceptance of proposed
dedications for streets, parks, and other public uses or purposes.
Nonetheless, such approval shall not constitute an acceptance of physical
improvements on such dedicated land and shall not impose on the City
any obligation of jurisdiction or maintenance of such improvements. The
acceptance of such physical improvements shall only be by action of the
Governing Body in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ Z-107. PUBLIC NOTICE FOR VARIANCES.
Public notice shall be given for applications otherwise excepted from the
requirements of public notice whenever variance relief is requested.
6. Protect and enhance the City for residents and visitors and serve as
a support and stimulus to business and industry;
7. Prevent any construction, demolition, or exterior alteration that
would injure, depreciate, or conflict with the character of any
established local historic district.
8. Promote the use of any established local historic district for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Lambertville and its visitors.
§ Z-102 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-108
AO:464
§ Z-108. EXPIRATION OF VARIANCES.
In the event a variance is granted for an application exempt from the
requirements of site plan or subdivision review, the applicant shall secure
a building permit, or, in the case where no building permit is required,
a certificate of occupancy, within one year from the date of approval;
otherwise the granting of the variance shall be deemed null and void. In the
event a variance is granted for a bifurcated application for development, the
applicant shall apply for site plan or subdivision approval within one year of
the date of approval of the variance; otherwise the granting of the variance
shall be deemed null and void. The Board of Jurisdiction may extend the
grant of the variance for a period of up to one year if the applicant proves
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the applicant was barred or
prevented, either directly or indirectly, from obtaining a building permit, or,
in the case where no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy
within the one year time period from the date of approval.
§ Z-109. DATE OF APPROVAL.
The time period for the effect of approval shall begin with the date of
the adoption of the resolution memorializing such approval of the subject
application by the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ Z-110. CONFORMANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any land be designed, used or
intended to be used for any purpose other than as permitted within the
zoning districts so described by this Ordinance, nor shall any open space
or yard area be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in strict
conformity with the regulations contained herein.
§ Z-111. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED.
[Ord. No. 18-2017]
Except as otherwise exempted or waived as provided in Section 516, no
building permit shall be issued for any building or use or enlargement of any
building or use unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the City
of Lambertville Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as the law
directs. No subdivision of land shall be valid unless a plat is first submitted
and approved by the City of Lambertville Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment and filed with the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ Z-108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-111
AO:465

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-200. WORD USAGE.
Any word or term not defined herein shall be as defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A., 40:55D-1 et seq., or shall be utilized in standard
usage for the context in which the word is used. For the purposes of this
Ordinance certain terms and words are herein defined as follows: The words
"used for" include "designed for" and vice versa; words used in the present
tense include the future; words used in the singular number include the
plural number and vice versa; the word "used" shall include "arranged",
"designed", "constructed", "altered", "converted", "rented", "leased", or
"intended to be used"; the word "dwelling" includes the word "residence" or
"unit"; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; the word "shall"
is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
§ Z-201. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
Definitions identified with the initials "MLUL" are taken from the Municipal
Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). "RSIS" means the definition was
taken from the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et
seq.). The following definitions shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — See DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use of a building or structure on the same lot and serving a
purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement which changes the
exterior appearance of a building or structure which comprises an existing
improvement.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the City of
Lambertville or designee for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this
Ordinance; the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment for purposes of application to the respective Boards, who are
responsible for administering the responsibilities and authorities specified
for the Administrative Officer in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3.
AGE-RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT — A residential development including
accessory buildings and required or permitted social, cultural, medical and
recreational facilities limited to certain age groups conforming to 24 CFR
Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons, of the federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or superseded.
AIR SAFETY AND HAZARD ZONE — Any such district delineated pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 16:62-6.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as walls, posts, piers, columns, beams or girders.
§ Z-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:467
APARTMENT — See DWELLING and DWELLING, ACCESSORY
APARTMENT, DWELLING, APARTMENT.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
[MLUL]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms,
together with the required fees and all accompanying documents required
by this Ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned
development, cluster development, conditional use, zoning variance or
direction for issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36. [MLUL]
AS-BUILT PLAN — For the purpose of applications for development, a
survey by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor that indicates improvements
on, above, and below the ground after construction pursuant to a final site
plan or subdivision approval and, for the purpose of building construction,
a survey by a New Jersey registered architect which certifies the location
of building components and their dimensions precedent to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility which is licensed by the NJ
Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and congregate
dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed,
for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor. In the context
of this definition, "apartment" shall mean a dwelling unit offering at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, private bathroom, kitchenette, and a
lockable door on the unit entrance.
AUTO BODY SHOP — An establishment that repairs and repaints motor
vehicles after collision, fire damage, water damage, or other natural
disaster or for the purpose of restoration.
AUTOMOBILE SALES — The use of any building, land or other property for
the display and sale of new and used automobiles, light trucks and vans,
trailers or recreational vehicles and including vehicle preparation, repair
and auto body work as accessory uses.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — An establishment that recycles parts and
other materials from motor vehicles or otherwise disposes of same.
AWNING — A roof-like cover that is temporary or movable in nature and
that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a
doorway or window from the elements and that may be periodically
retracted against the face of the building.
BAR — Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by
the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be available for
consumption on the premises as accessory to the principal use.
BASEMENT — A story having more than 25% of its clear height below the
average finished grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST — A facility providing limited overnight
accommodations with a morning meal to transients for compensation.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:468
BILLBOARD — See SIGN, OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL.
BOARDING HOUSE — Any building, together with any related structure,
accessory building, and land appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof,
which contains two or more units of dwelling space arranged or intended
for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied by an owner
or operator, and wherein personal or financial services, including meals, are
provided to the residents.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to continuously limit view of and/or sound from the site to adjacent
sites or properties; also termed a buffer yard.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof. [MLUL]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured by a vertical
plane established by the outside edge of the roof or roofs.
BUILDING, COMMUNITY — A building for civic, social, educational,
cultural and recreational activities of a neighborhood or community not
operated primarily for monetary gain.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at a point five feet away from the front of the
building to the top of the roof surface for flat and mansard roofs, and to the
vertical midpoint between the base of the roof and its peak for gable, hip,
and gambrel roofs.
CAMPER — Any of the following:
A self-propelled, vehicular structure built as one unit on a chassis and
designed for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or other
short-term uses which may contain cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities.
A.
An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities for
travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term uses and designed to
be attached to the body of another vehicle for transporting from one
location to another.
B.
A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis, designed for camping,
the body of which is basically rectangular with a flat top not more than
four feet above the surface of the ground. The camper is designed to
have a temporary tent erected above the body for camping activities.
C.
A portable structure built on a chassis designed for towing and as
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation and other shortterm
uses and having an outside body width not exceeding eight feet
and a length not exceeding 30 feet, and which may contain cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
D.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:469
CANOPY — A roof-like structure, open to the elements on four sides, which
is used to protect outdoor equipment, such as motor fuel pumps or a
pedestrian walkway.
CAR WASH — Any building or premises or potions thereof used for washing
automobiles, light trucks and vans for compensation.
CARPORT — An attached or detached accessory building designed for the
storage of motor vehicles and constructed primarily as an open building
with only a roof and the necessary supporting columns and of an area
between the columns not to exceed 300 square feet.
CELLAR — A story having more than 25% of its clear height below the
average finished grade.
CLINIC — A place where patients are treated or studied by physicians
specializing in various ailments and practicing as a group.
CLUB, SOCIAL OR FRATERNAL — A private organization for social
purposes in which the principal use is in enclosed buildings and limited
outdoor sports are involved.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, figure, symbol, color,
illumination, fixture, projection, or other representation that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business product,
service, or other commercial activity.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Vehicles used in the conduct of business,
retail, service or industrial purposes.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment or residents and
owners of the development. [MLUL]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store which sells a limited variety of
prepackaged sundries, dry goods and food, with hours of operation
generally from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. or longer and usually not larger than
4,000 square feet.
COOPERATIVE — A building or buildings divided into individually attended
exhibit space or artisan's booths rented, leased, or in the form of shares in
a cooperative enterprise, with shared common facilities.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed [MLUL]; gross density.
DESIGN GUIDELINES — Instructions that provide a general framework for
sound planning and improvements to real property.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Regulations that set forth specific improvement
requirements. [RSIS]
DISTRICT — The zoning districts per this Ordinance pertaining to any part
of the territory of the City of Lambertville.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:470
DRIVEWAY — A defined paved or unpaved surface providing vehicular
access to a street. A driveway is not a road, street, boulevard, highway, or
parkway. [RSIS]
DWELLING — A room or series of connected rooms designed for permanent
human habitation containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities
for one housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential
dwelling unit with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters, and a
private entrance, which is created within an existing residence, or through
the conversion of an existing accessory structure on the same lot, or by an
addition to an existing residence or accessory building.
DWELLING, APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and
kitchen facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling in a
building.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building on a single lot containing two dwelling
units each of which is totally separated from the other, one of which is
wholly or partially above the other, with separate entrances at the ground
level.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A unit in an apartment house consisting of one
room with additional bath and cooking facilities separated from such room
by a permanent wall and folding or sliding doors respectively.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — A building containing three or more
dwelling units and occupied or designed for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other with their own cooking, sanitary
and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING, ROW HOUSE — See TOWNHOUSE DWELLING.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED — A single family unit attached to one other
such unit on one side by a common unpierced vertical wall from ground to
roof on its own separate lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED — A building physically
separated from other buildings or portions of buildings which is occupied
or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by one family. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the development of an accessory apartment as
otherwise permitted shall be included in this definition.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A single family dwelling in a row of three or
more such units separated from one another by an unpierced vertical wall
from ground to roof.
ECHO (ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES) HOUSING — A
small, removable modular cottage placed on a concrete slab or treated
wood foundation in a rear or side yard of a single family detached house
lot specifically designed to meet the needs of older or disabled people,
connected to the utilities of the primary dwelling, and designed to be
removed when it is no longer necessary.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:471
EXAMINATION ROOM — Any room wherein special equipment may be
installed for use in the examination or treatment of a patient as
distinguished from a waiting room, counseling room or offices of such
practitioner.
FACADE AREA — The total area of the exterior face of a building including
walls, windows, doors, and fixtures below the top of the parapet of a
building with a flat roof, the cornice line of a building with a gambrel, gable,
or hip roof, or the upper slope line of a building with a mansard roof, that
faces a public street, pedestrian walkway, or mall.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
household, who are living together as a stable and permanent living-unit,
being a traditional family or the functional equivalent thereof.
FARM MARKET — A permanent enclosed building typically operated
seasonally where products primarily grown or produced locally are sold.
FIRE LANE — Any right-of-way on private property to permit access by
emergency vehicles. Fire lanes shall be kept open and clear of all vehicles
or other objects.
FIRST FLOOR AREA — First floor area shall be measured by using the
outside dimensions of the residential portion of a building excluding the
area of an attached garage. For a split level or tri-level dwelling, the area
shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of two adjoining levels,
excluding cellars and garages.
FUTURE STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way of a street as shown
on the adopted Master Plan, or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the
occupants of the main building to which the garage is accessory, and
wherein not more than one space is either rented to persons not residents
of the lot or not more than one commercial vehicle not to exceed two tons
in net weight.
GAS STATION — See SERVICE STATION
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Gross floor area shall be measured by using
the outside dimensions of the building, excluding the area of an attached
garage, open porch or patio and further excluding the area used as a
basement. Only those floor areas which have a ceiling height of seven feet
or more shall be eligible for inclusion in the gross floor area. The gross
floor area of an apartment dwelling unit shall be measured from the center
of interior walls and the outside of exterior walls and shall include closets,
bathrooms and hallways within the dwelling unit in addition to the area of
all other rooms within the dwelling unit.
GROUP HOME — A profit or nonprofit boarding home for the sheltered care
of four or more adult persons, providing personal care or service in addition
to food and shelter.
GUEST HOUSE — See ROOMING HOUSE.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:472
HABITABLE ROOM AREA — The floor area within a residential structure to
be used for habitation excluding cellars, attics, utility (heating and cooling)
rooms and garages and open porches and, in apartment houses, excluding
common hallways.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — Industry where the type of activities customarily
produce nuisance or dangerous elements and where the type of work is
oriented to the primary manufacturing of a product.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites [MLUL]; such sites exhibit the
following characteristics:
HISTORIC LANDMARK (OR LANDMARK) — See HISTORIC SITE.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The municipal agency
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 with all of the powers and
duties enumerated therein.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object,
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic, or architectural significance. [MLUL]
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted entirely within a dwelling unit, which occupation is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the lot for residential purposes,
pursuant to the criteria in § 520.
HOSPITAL — An institution where the ill or injured may receive medical,
surgical or psychiatric treatment, nursing, food, and lodging during illness.
HOTEL — A building which: a) contains guest rooms, each having its only
access from a central interior corridor which is designed or intended to be
used, let, or hired out for compensation, b) contains a public lobby serving
the guest rooms, c) may contain one or more dining rooms or ancillary uses,
and d) has full-time on-site management.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building used for religious purposes.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the
dwelling unit.
A. Represent a significant period in the history of the City; or
Have a distinctive character resulting from their architectural style,
relationship to other buildings, spaces, scale or other design elements;
or
B.
Because of their distinctive character, can readily be viewed as an area
or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the City; and
C.
Should be preserved because of its importance to archaeological,
cultural, historical, or architectural purposes and motives.
D.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:473
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water
such that the rate of infiltration is less than one inch in two hours. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, detention and retention basins and dry wells
shall not be considered impervious surfaces; however graveled areas shall
be considered impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — The total area of impervious surfaces
divided by the total site area.
JUNK YARD — Any area of land with or without buildings, regardless of
size, devoted to the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or debris,
including by way of illustration but not of limitation; abandoned automobile
tires, automobile parts, paper, rags, metal, glass, or plastic containers, old
household appliances, wood, lumber, brush, and any stumps or any other
debris of any material whatsoever.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing or assembly of semi-finished
products, not including chemical or physical change of raw materials into
products.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, according to
criteria established in this Ordinance.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat or
otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit. [MLUL]
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot but not
including any portion of a street.
LOT COVERAGE — The total area covered by impervious surfaces on a
property, including but not limited to, buildings, surfaced or unsurfaced
parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, patios, pools and decks.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear
lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the street line.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting a road right-of-way, the
STREETLINE.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line or the point at which the two side lot lines meet, as the case may be.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
along the front setback line.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:474
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°.
LOT, FLAG — A lot located to the rear of another lot, connected to the public
street frontage common to both lots by a narrow strip of land.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
MOBILE HOME — See MANUFACTURED HOME.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings which: a) provides for transient
guest rooms with outside entrances, b) has a public lobby, and c) may
contain one or more dining rooms.
NON-CONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment. [MLUL]
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment. [MLUL]
NON-CONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment. [MLUL]
NUISANCE — Any practice which annoys, disturbs or interferes with one
in the possession and enjoyment of his property, rendering its reasonable
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off-site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site; or
A.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis; or
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on a
permanent foundation; and
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a
manufactured home pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," P.L. 93-383 (43 U.S.C.
and 5401 et seq.) and the standards promulgated for a manufactured
mobile home pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act,"
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
For purposes of this Ordinance, campers are not considered
manufactured homes.
D.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:475
use or occupation physically uncomfortable, e.g.: excessive noise, noxious
odors, electronic radiations, vibrations, smoke discharge, glare, improper
drainage, etc.
NURSING HOME — An institution or a distinct part of an institution that is
licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for
24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related
to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — A temporary loading area for a truck or
delivery van that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and that is not
located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle only and that is not
located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and offstreet
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental
to the natural openness of the land or support its use for conservation and
recreation purposes. [MLUL]
OPEN SPACE ORGANIZATION — An incorporated, non-profit organization
operating in a planned development under recorded land agreement
through which:
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land.
PARKING AREA AISLES — Unobstructed access to parking stalls.
PARKING LANE — A lane usually set on the sides of streets, designed to
provide on-street parking. [RSIS]
PARKING SPACE — A storage area provided for the parking of a motor
vehicle. [RSIS]
PATIO — A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area at grade directly adjacent
to a principal building; an unroofed porch.
PAVEMENT — A surface created to facilitate passage of people and/or
vehicles, usually constructed of brick, stone, concrete, or asphalt. [RSIS]
A. Each owner is automatically a member;
Each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against the
organization by the City; and
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has the right to use the common property.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:476
PERMITTED USE — Any use of the land or building as permitted by this
Ordinance.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel.
POOL — See SWIMMING POOL.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Offices of a recognized profession maintained
for such purpose.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure time activities, usually of a formal nature
with a set of sanctioned rules and often performed with others, requiring
equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields; including,
but not limited to, court games, swimming, track and field events, golf,
playground activities, and field sports.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Leisure time activities not involving formal rules
of play or action with lesser physical activity than active recreation;
including, but not limited to, bird watching, walking, picnicking, and
sunbathing.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises excluding however, a snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground,
play field, or park operated in conjunction with and incidental to such
recreational facility for the sole convenience of patrons of the facility.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A restaurant at which any food or refreshment
are customarily served to or consumed by any patrons seated in
automobiles or otherwise off the premise whether or not, in addition
thereto, seats or other accommodations are provided for patrons.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A public eating facility where patrons
purchase food while within the physical premises of the restaurant or from
a drive-thru window, which is obtained by self-service or from an employee
of the establishment over a counter, for consumption either within the
establishment or away from the premises.
RETAIL SALES — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise
to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAIL SERVICES — Establishments providing services or entertainment,
as opposed to products, to the general public for personal or household
use, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real
estate and insurance, personal service, motion pictures, amusement and
recreation services, health, educational, and social services, museums and
concert halls, except as otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another
special use. [RSIS]
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:477
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building, together with any related structure,
accessory building, and land appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof,
which contains two or more units of dwelling space arranged or intended
for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied by an owner
or operator, and wherein personal or financial services are provided to the
residents.
SERVICE STATION — Land and building designed and used for providing
for the sale of fuel, lubricants, and automotive accessories and for providing
maintenance and minor repairs for motor vehicles, but not including body
repairs or, under any circumstances the storage of inoperable or wrecked
vehicles.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
The term "required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
horizontal distance from the street line or lot line and beyond which a
building or part of a building is not permitted to extend in order to provide
the required yards.
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof, to be
occupied and used by more than one enterprise for the conduct of business
as an integrated and comprehensively planned area.
SIDEWALK — A concrete way provided for pedestrian use and usually
located at the side of a cartway within the right-of-way.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection. [RSIS]
SIGN — Any object, device, display, mural or structure, or a part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected
images. This definition shall specifically include any building or part of
a building, including walls and facades used for such purposes and shall
further include banners, pennants, flags and similar attention attracting
devices.
SIGN AREA — The area of the sign, exclusive of the supporting structure,
which is used in calculating the square footage of the sign.
SIGN HEIGHT — The highest spot at any one point on the sign measured
from the grade level surrounding the sign.
SIGN, AWNING — Any sign which is attached to or part of an awning.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign designed in such a fashion that the
message on the sign can be easily and periodically altered, typically with
moveable lettering, and whose message does not change more than once a
day.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:478
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign whose sole source of
artificial illumination is outside the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, FACADE — A sign fastened to or painted on the facade of a building
or structure in such manner that the facade becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign, and which does
not extend more than 12 inches from the supporting facade.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign not attached to a building, erected,
constructed or maintained on a post or pole, or other bracing or supporting
device, being used to support a sign.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign whose sole source of
artificial illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL — A sign containing a commercial
message which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
property on which the sign is located.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE NON-COMMERCIAL — A sign that does not contain a
commercial message which directs attention to an institution, government,
or non-profit corporation and their policies; or contains a message directed
to the general public for health, safety and welfare purposes.
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure; or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich board signs;
balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached
to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way,
unless such vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day operation of the
business.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign perpendicular to a wall or facade which is
attached to and extends more than 12 inches from the surface of a building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign of an owner of real property or of a licensed
real estate broker designating a property "for sale" or "for lease".
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL — A sign located in a district zoned for residential
purposes that does not contain any commercial message except for goods
or services legally offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Any construction work on, or improvement in
connection with, residential development limited to streets, roads, parking
facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures, and utilities. [RSIS]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains,
marshes and waterways; and
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
B.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:479
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a lot including all pertinent data required in § 516. Wherever the term
site plan approval is used in this Ordinance, it shall be understood to mean
a requirement that the site plan be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
[MLUL]
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan for one or more lots which:
STEEP SLOPES — Slopes over 15%.
STORY — That part of any building comprised between the level of one
finished floor and the level of the next higher finished floor, or if there is no
higher finished floor, then that part of the building comprised between the
level of the highest finished floor and the top of the roof beams. The first
story of any building shall be where more than 75% of the story is above the
finished grade along the front of the building.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way meeting any of the following:
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; and
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the plan
in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. [MLUL]
C.
Proposes new development in accordance with the criteria established
for minor site plans in this Ordinance;
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street, or extension of
any off-street improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42; and
B.
Contains any other information reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination as to whether the requirements established
by ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met. [MLUL]
C.
A. Is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;
C. Is approved by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; or
Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the
grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street line. [MLUL]
D.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:480
master plan or official map, forming the dividing line between the street and
a lot.
STREET TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special easement or rightof-
way adjoining a street constituting a large tree in size when mature.
STREETSCAPE — All of the elements that constitute the physical makeup
of a street and that, as a group, define its character, including building
frontage, street paving, street furniture, landscaping, including trees and
other plantings, awnings and marques, signs, and lighting.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members of a
building such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land. [MLUL]
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
Any of the following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this ordinance if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision. [MLUL]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any division of land meeting all of the following
criteria:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order including but not limited to,
judgements of foreclosure;
C.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
D.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or
atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision". [MLUL]
E.
Contains an aggregate of not more than three lots (two new lots and
the remaining parcel).
A.
B. Does not involve a planned development.
C. Does not involve any new street.
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:481
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — Any pool not accessory to a detached
single family or two-family dwelling.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — A temporary man-made body of water
used for wading or bathing meeting all of the following criteria: does not
require water filtration, circulation and purification; does not exceed 24
inches in depth; does not exceed a water surface of 250 square feet; and
does not require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, RESIDENTIAL — A swimming pool, other than a
portable swimming pool, that is located on a lot principally used by one
household accessory to a detached single family or two-family dwelling.
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by
the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be
served or sold only as accessory to the primary use.
TOWNHOUSE — See DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.
TRACT — A contiguous area of land composed of one or more lots to make
one parcel of land meeting the requirements of this Ordinance for the use(s)
intended.
TRAILER — See CAMPER.
TRAILER CAMP — Land used or intended to be used by tents, campers, or
movable dwellings. Two or more campers, whether parked or supported by
foundations, shall constitute a trailer camp.
TRAVEL TRAILER — See CAMPER.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
USED CAR LOT — Any place out-of-doors where two or more used motor
vehicles in operating condition are displayed or offered for sale.
VARIANCE — Permission granted to depart from the literal requirements of
a zoning ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, -70c, and -70d. [MLUL]
WAIVER — A deviation from a required submission item, performance
standard, or design standard.
WATERFRONT COMMERCIAL — A specialized commercial use within the
Central Business District on a minimum sized tract, planned as a single
entity that may incorporate any use otherwise permitted, health and fitness
facilities, conference facilities, banquet halls, night clubs, marinas or other
water dependent uses, cultural facilities and similar uses into an integrated
whole and with public access and orientation to the waterfront with
significant amenities available to the general public.
Does not require the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of
which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
D.
Meets the criteria for filing an application for a minor subdivision as
otherwise required in this Ordinance. [MLUL]
E.
§ Z-201 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-201
AO:482
YARD, FRONT — An open space, extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the street line and the building setback line. The depth of
the front yard shall be measured horizontally at right angles from the street
line, or radially on a curved street, to the building.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard
shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main building
toward the nearest point of the rear line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space, extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the main building and each side lot line. The width of the
required side yard shall be measured from the nearest point on the side lot
line toward the nearest part of the main building.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual responsible for enforcement and
interpretation of the zoning ordinance provisions of the City of Lambertville
as designated by the Governing Body.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer: a), which is
required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a
use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building, and b), which acknowledges that such
use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the municipal
zoning ordinance or variance therefrom duly authorized by a municipal
agency. [MLUL]
§ Z-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-201
AO:483

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-300. ZONING DISTRICTS. [Ord. No. 2001-15; Ord. No. 2002-12;
Ord. No. 2014-28]
§ Z-301. ZONING MAP. [Ord. No. 2001-15; Ord. No. 12-2015; Ord.
No. 22-2018; amended 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. 05-2019]
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Lambertville is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts: [Amended 4-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 05-2019]
Symbol Zone
R-C Residential - Conservation
R-L Residential Low Density
R-1 Residential 1
R-2 Residential 2
R-3 Townhouse Residential
CBD Central Business District
C-2 Service Commercial
C-3 General Commercial
Residential Overlay Option 1
IO-1 Inclusionary Overlay Zone 1
IO-2 Inclusionary Overlay Zone 2
LHSRA Lambertville High School Redevelopment Area
B. The Lambertville Historic District shall be coterminous with the
boundaries and area of the Central Business District, the C-2 Service
Commercial, and the C-3 General Commercial as depicted on the
Zoning Map in accordance with the provisions of § 301.
A. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Lambertville," dated
September 19, 2019, and as it may be amended pursuant to law22.
[Amended 9-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
B. Zoning Map Amendments.
1. Properties Fronting Bridge and Ferry Streets That Are Split Zoned
Lots.
22.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map may be found at the end of this Zoning Ordinance.
§ Z-300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-301
AO:485
An Ordinance to Amend Zone Line Change and the Zoning Map of
the City of Lambertville for Properties fronting Bridge and Ferry
Streets that are Split Zoned Lots
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members and board professionals
reviewed the application submitted by the Bridge Street
Foundation for 57 Bridge Street, block 1042, lot 28 at their
December 4, 2014 regularly scheduled session, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members and board professionals
determined the rezoning of the rear portion of the property
currently located in the Residential 2 Zone to the Central Business
District to be consistent with the property's frontage on Bridge
Street, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members have recommended the
Governing Body approve the revision of the zoning map to rezone
the rear portion of the property currently located in the Residential
2 Zone to the Central Business District, and
WHEREAS, Planning Board members would also like the Governing
Body to approve revisions to the zoning map to be consistent with
the zoning of properties that are split zoned fronting either Bridge
Street or Ferry Street, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members have recommended the
properties fronting Bridge Street be rezoned to the Central
Business District and the properties fronting Ferry Street be
rezoned to the Residential 2 Zone, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members and board professionals
determined the rezoning of block 1042, lots 24 and 26, which front
both Bridge Street and Ferry Street, by the location of the Principal
Building/Use on the property, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Board members and board professionals
recommended the properties in question be rezoned as follows:23
CBD DESIGNATION:
Block 1042, Lot 2 Block 1042, Lot 23 Block 1042, Lot 28
Block 1042, Lot 18 Block 1042, Lot 24 Block 1042, Lot 29
Block 1042, Lot 21 Block 1042, Lot 27
RESIDENTIAL 2 DESIGNATION:
Block 1042, Lot
3.01
Block 1042, Lot 6 Block 1042, Lot 8
Block 1042, Lot 5 Block 1042, Lot 7 Block 1042, Lot 16
23.Editor's Note: See § Z-1600 for the Connaught Hill Redevelopment Plan. See the Appendix
for the Zoning Map.
§ Z-301 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-301
AO:486
§ Z-302. INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES.
District boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines, water
courses and lot or property lines as they exist at the time of enactment
of this Ordinance unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning
Map. The exact location of any disputed district boundary line shall be
determined by the Board of Adjustment.
§ Z-303. VACATION OF STREETS OR OTHER PUBLIC WAYS.
Where a vacated street is bounded on either side by different districts, the
former center line of the vacated right-of-way shall be considered the new
district line.
RESIDENTIAL 2 DESIGNATION:
Block 1042, Lot 26
2. Overlay Zones: An Ordinance to Amend the Zoning Map of the City
of Lambertville to repeal the Residential Option 2 Overlay District
and create two Inclusionary Overlay Zones that create realistic
opportunities for housing that is affordable to very-low-, low-, and
moderate-income households.
IO-1 Inclusionary Overlay Zone
1
Block 1072, Lots 3 and 3.01
Block 1058, Lot 15
IO-2 Inclusionary Overlay Zone
2
Block 1022, Lot 8
3. Lambertville High School Redevelopment Area: An Ordinance to
Amend the Zoning Map of the City of Lambertville to create the
Lambertville High School Redevelopment Area that creates a
realistic opportunity for housing that is affordable to very-low, low-,
and moderate-income households.24
LHSRA Lambertville High
School Redevelopment Area
Block 1073, Lots 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 32, 33, and 33.01
Block 1090, Lots 4 and 5
Block 1091, Lots 1 and 1.01
4. Strumfels Rezoning: An Ordinance to Rezone Block 1005, Lots 25
and 26 from the C-3 District to the R-2 District. [Added 9-19-2019
by Ord. No. 19-2019]
24.Editor's Note: See § Z-1600 for the Connaught Hill Redevelopment Plan. See the Appendix
for the Zoning Map.
§ Z-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-303
AO:487

ARTICLE IV
Zoning
[§§ 401 — 405 added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-400. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ Z-400.1. Principal Building; Yard and Lot Regulations.
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, not more than one principal
dwelling or building shall be permitted on one lot. Where a lot is formed
from part of a lot already occupied by a building any subdivision shall be
executed in such a manner so as to not create or exacerbate any violation
of the requirements of this Ordinance with respect to the existing building
and all yard, setback, buffers and open space in connection therewith All
resulting lots shall have dimensions consistent with the requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located.
§ Z-400.2. Unlawful Encroachment.
In the event of any unlawful encroachment or reduction of open space or
yard area, the building or structure, as the case may be, shall be deemed
in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance and the Certificate of
Occupancy for such building or structure shall be null and void.
§ Z-400.3. Exception for Certain Utilities and Other Infrastructure.
The provisions for review by a board of competent jurisdiction shall not
apply to utility distribution or collection lines for water, sewerage, storm
water, natural gas and electric, nor telephone, and cable television or other
telecommunications lines supplied by a public or local utility, or cable
television company which are located in a public street providing service
to private property. The location of substations, offices, service yards, or
other similar uses shall require the review and approval of the Board of
Jurisdiction.
§ Z-400.4. Frontage on Public Street.
Every principal use shall be located on a lot with frontage upon a public
street which has been improved in accordance with the applicable City
standards or for which such improvement has been insured by the posting
of a performance guaranty in accordance with this Ordinance.
§ Z-400.5. Dedication of Right-of-Way.
No subdivision or site plan involving any street(s) requiring additional rightof-
way width as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map and the street
requirements of the City shall be approved unless such additional right-ofway,
either along one or both sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be
deeded to the municipality or other appropriate governmental agency.
§ Z-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-400.6
AO:489
§ Z-400.6. Yards.
No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of
complying with the front, side, or rear yard requirements of this Ordinance
shall be considered as providing for the required yard areas of another
principal building.
§ Z-400.7. Special Minimum Setback Requirements.
§ Z-400.8. Height Exception.
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment, or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building; roof towers, spires, steeples,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, monuments, silos, or similar structures
may be erected above the height limits prescribed by this Ordinance but
in no case more than 25% higher than the maximum height permitted
in the applicable district. Water towers, electricity transmission and
telecommunications towers shall have no height restrictions except as may
be required by the Airport Safety and Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et
seq.) as it may be amended or superseded.
§ Z-400.9. Exception to Area Requirements.
A. Residential Lots. In order to maintain positive lot drainage, no detached
dwelling, accessory building or structure (excluding fences and walls),
or driveway otherwise permitted in this Ordinance shall be located
within five feet of a side or rear lot line unless a lot grading plan is first
submitted and approved by the City Engineer.
B. Transmission Lines. No residential building shall be placed within 100
feet of the vertical plane established by the closest portion of a high
voltage transmission line (excluding its support), or 150 feet from any
underground petroleum or natural gas transmission pipeline.
C. Limited Access Highways. No residential building shall be placed
within 150 feet of the right-of-way line of a limited access highway.
D. Delaware and Raritan Canal Buffer. Any required yard or required
setback shall be measured from the closest edge of any buffer required
by the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
A. Lot Consolidation. Whenever title to two or more contiguous
unimproved lots is held by the same owner, regardless whether or not
each lots may have been approved as portions of a major subdivision, or
acquired by separate conveyance or by other operation of law, and one
or more lot(s) should, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, typographical conditions, substandard area or yard space,
not conform with the minimum lot area and dimension requirements for
the zone in which it is located, the contiguous unimproved lots shall be
§ Z-400.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-400.9
AO:490
§ Z-400.10. Temporary Uses.
Application may be made to the Governing Body for a permit for a
temporary use inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance for special
events lasting for a period not to exceed two weeks in any one year. Such
events may include, but not be limited to, festivals, circuses, bazaars, fairs,
fund-raising events, and athletic contests. In the granting or denial of such
temporary use permit the Governing Body may consider the following:
§ Z-401. RESIDENTIAL — CONSERVATION (R-C) DISTRICT. [Ord.
No. 99-13]
considered as a single lot and the provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply to the entire lot.
B. Right-of-Way Dedication. Whenever land has been dedicated or
conveyed to the City by a lot owner to meet the minimum street width
requirement of the Land Subdivision Ordinance or to implement the
Official Map or Master Plan of the City, the Administrative Officer shall
issue the appropriate permits for the lot whose areas are rendered
substandard in area only because of such dedication and where the
owner has no other unimproved adjacent lands to provide the minimum
requirements.
C. Side Yard Exception. Undersized lots where § 400.9A is not applicable
may be permitted a reduction in the side yard requirements in the same
proportion as the width of the existing lot is to the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance. However, in no case shall any side yard
be less than five feet.
A. The adequacy of provisions for public safety, including, but not limited
to, fire prevention, crowd control, and emergency medical services.
B. The adequacy of provisions for vehicular and pedestrian traffic control,
including ingress and egress, parking, attendants and temporary traffic
signage.
C. The adequacy of provisions for food handling, solid waste, and sanitary
sewerage.
D. The sufficiency of insurance for the event.
E. Any other measures necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
F. The Governing Body may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance
of any temporary use permit including, but not limited to, the posting of
adequate surety and the reimbursement of expenses incurred by the
municipality for the event.
§ Z-400.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-401.1
AO:491
§ Z-401.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Residential - Conservation (R-C) District is to allow very
low density single family detached housing in areas with severe flooding
potential, poor access, and a lack of public water and sewer. The large
lots required in this district are to reduce the potential for destruction of
property or endangerment of the public and to allow dwellings to be located
on the land least constrained by environmental factors.
§ Z-401.2. Permitted Uses.
In the Residential - Conservation zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
§ Z-401.3. Accessory Uses.
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
§ Z-401.4. Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to each lot:
A. Single family detached dwelling.
B. Parks and recreation.
C. Conservation.
D. Municipal use.
A. Private garage.
B. Boat house and boat ramp.
C. Residential tool shed.
D. Residential swimming pool.
E. Deck.
F. Home occupations, pursuant to § 520.
G. Fences and walls, pursuant to § 507.
H. Signs, pursuant to § 515.
I. Public recreation facility.
J. Community center.
A. Minimum lot size: three acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 15 feet or adequate legal means of access to the
satisfaction of the approving authority.
§ Z-401.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-401.4
AO:492
§ Z-401.5. Additional Requirements.
Any building excepting boat houses shall be so sited on the lot to minimize
its observance from the Delaware River.
§ Z-402. RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY (R-L) DISTRICT. [Ord. No.
99-13]
§ Z-402.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Residential Low Density (R-L) District is to provide
for single family detached dwellings at densities between 1.3 units per
acre and three acres per unit. The R-L District is characterized by areas
of steep slopes; freshwater wetlands; streams; shallow, stony soils; and
shallow depth to bedrock that present difficult sites to develop. Because of
these characteristics, clustering of residential units on the least constrained
land is preferred over conventional development.
§ Z-402.2. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 2001-15]
In the Residential Low Density Zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
2. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
3. Minimum setbacks:
a. From any lot line: 50 feet.
b. From the mean high water level of the Delaware River: 100
feet.
4. Maximum height: 35 feet.
5. Maximum lot coverage: 10% of total lot area.
A. Single family detached dwellings.
B. Public, parochial and non-profit private schools for academic
instruction.
C. Parks and recreation.
D. Conservation.
E. Municipal use.
F. Cemetery.
G. Residential Option 1 Overlay District. Within those lands marked as
Residential Option 1 Overlay District on the Zoning Map, an application
for development may be submitted under the regulations of this
§ Z-401.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:493
subsection. The intent of this optional district is to create an
architecturally diverse urban neighborhood in an open space setting.
Such development shall be subject only to the specific provisions set
forth herein and shall not be subject to other provisions of this
Ordinance except as specifically referenced herein:
1. Additional permitted uses. In addition to the uses otherwise
permitted in the R-L District, the following additional uses shall be
permitted:
a. Semi-detached dwellings.
b. Townhouse dwellings.
2. Restriction on conditional uses. No development utilizing the
provisions of the Residential Option 1 Overlay District shall include
any conditional use permitted in § 402.4.
3. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply
to any Residential Option 1 Overlay District development:
a. Minimum tract size: 45 acres.
b. Maximum density: 2.32 units per gross pre-development acre.
c. Minimum tract frontage: 500 feet.
d. Minimum open space: 45% of total tract area.
e. Minimum tract perimeter setbacks for buildings, above-ground
structures and parking areas from tract boundary line:
(1) Building and above ground structures: 50 feet side and
rear property lines; 200 feet from existing streets.
(2) Entrance structures: 10 feet.
(3) Parking lot setback: 25 feet.
f. Buildings shall be separated the following minimum distances
measured from their closest points:
(1) Front of building to another building: 50 feet.
(2) Side of building to another building: 30 feet.
(3) Rear of building to another building: 40 feet.
(4) Accessory buildings shall not be located within 25 feet of
another building, excepting private garages.
g. Units in structure. No more than six dwelling units shall be
permitted in any one structure.
h. All development shall be served by public water and public
sanitary sewer.
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:494
4. Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements. The following
regulations shall apply to each lot in the Residential Option 1
Overlay District:
Use
Single Family
Semi-Detached
Dwelling
Townhouse
Dwelling
Minimum lot size 2,250 square feet 2,250 square feet
Minimum lot
frontage
30 feet 30 feet
Minimum lot width
at the building line
30 feet 30 feet
Maximum building
coverage
55% 60%
Maximum lot
coverage
75% 80%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard 20 feet 20 feet
Side Yard 0 feet, common wall;
10 feet otherwise
0 feet, common wall;
10 feet otherwise
Rear Yard 15 feet 15 feet
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2 1/2
stories, whichever is
less
35 feet or 2 1/2
stories, whichever is
less
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height
Limitations(1)
Front Yard N.P. N.P.
Side Yard 3 feet 3 feet
Rear Yard 3 feet 3 feet
Maximum Height 12 feet 12 feet
(1) - Applies to accessory buildings associated with individual
dwellings on fee simple lots
N.P. = Not a permitted location
5. Additional Requirements. The following additional requirements
shall apply to Residential Option 1 Overlay District developments:
a. Each dwelling shall have a private rear yard of 200 square feet
minimum.
b. A minimum of 200 square feet of storage shall be provided in
the basement, attic or other attached area for each dwelling
exclusive of bedroom closet space.
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:495
c. Decks shall conform to the requirements of § 405.6E, except
that no privacy screen shall be required. No second floor or
higher deck shall be permitted unless the rear yard abuts the
tract perimeter or common open space.
d. Landscaping design intent. Landscaping for Residential Option
1 Overlay District developments is intended to create a
transition between an urban streetscape and a natural, wooded
landscape. To accomplish this, the following should be adhered
to:
(1) An urban streetscape shall include street tree plantings
and a delineation between the public rights-of-way and
private yards. Delineation may include landscaping, walls
or fences consistent with this design intent. Additionally,
foundation planting plans, ornamental trees for each
individual unit, naturalized plantings of storm water
management areas, and enhanced landscaping around any
amenity features, such as entries or community-wide
accessory structures, shall be included in the design of the
overall landscape plan.
(2) The landscaping plan shall also be sensitive to the
woodland setting in which the new development occurs.
The standards offered below shall therefore be followed to
the extent reasonably possible:
(a) Landscaping shall be provided to soften the visual
impact of the buildings. Landscape buffers, including
evergreen trees, shall be planted to minimize views of
rear yards from Route 29.
(b) All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions.
The use of indigenous species is strongly encouraged.
Exotic, non-native invasive plant species are strongly
discouraged.
e. Additional landscaping requirements. No other Ordinance
provisions relating to landscaping shall apply under
Residential Option 1 Overlay District except for the
recommended plants and plant material specifications of
§ 510.3 through § 510.7.
6. Lighting shall conform to the requirements of § 511.1 and § 511.2.
7. Permitted increases in slope disturbance.
a. Given the increase in open space required for the Residential
Option 1 Overlay District, and in consideration thereof, the
maximum permitted disturbance of steep slopes shall be as
follows:
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:496
Extent of Slope
Maximum Extent of
Disturbance of Sloped Area
0 to 15% No limit
15.1 to 20% 35%(1)
20.1 to 30% 25%
30.1%+ 5%
(1) - May be increased to 40% as of right to permit
conformance with the storm water management standards of
the Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-7
Slope disturbance calculations submitted by the applicant
may exclude disturbance necessitated by the construction or
reconstruction of minor collector streets.
b. Notwithstanding the steep slope limitations set forth in
§ 402G.7.a above, to the extent that an application for
development exceeds the standards of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.6 for storm
water management (N.J.A.C. 5:21-7), the steep slope standards
in § 402G.7.a above shall be relaxed to the minimum extent
necessary to allow such exceedance from the storm water
management standards of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
8. Open space use. No recreation facilities or structures shall be
required to be provided under the Residential Option 1 Overlay
District, however nothing shall be construed as to prevent an
application to the Board of Jurisdiction for use of common open
space for conservation or passive recreation uses.
9. Limit of disturbance and tree protection. A limit of disturbance line
shall be delineated on the steep slope analysis submitted in
accordance with § 519.6. Trees outside of the limit of disturbance
shall be preserved. Trees to be retained within the limit of
disturbance line shall be protected from injury in accordance with
§ 510.12B.
H. IO-1 Inclusionary Overlay Zone District. [Amended 4-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 05-2019]
1. Purpose and Area of Application: to address its affordable housing
unmet need obligation, the City through the implementation of an
Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing that is affordable to very-low-, low-, and
moderate-income households on Block 1072, Lots 3 and 3.01, and
Block 1058, Lot 15. This subsection establishes the Inclusionary
Overlay Zone 1 — the IO-1 District — and permits the creation of
multifamily development on the properties identified above
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:497
provided that such housing complies with a required inclusionary
set-aside requirement for affordable housing and with the
requirements of this subsection. This subsection shall not take
effect until such time that the sites have access to public water and
sewer.
2. Special Rules.
a. In any inclusionary development permitted by this subsection,
in the case of affordable rental units, at least 15% of the
residential units must be affordable to very-low-, low-, and
moderate-income households and, in the case of owneroccupied
affordable units, at least 20% of the residential units
must be affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderate-income
households.
b. Where this subsection contradicts § LDR-1200.6 of the City's
Affordable Housing Ordinance, the effects and requirements of
this subsection shall supersede the requirements of
§ LDR-1200.6.
3. Additional Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses otherwise
permitted in the R-L District, the following additional uses shall be
permitted:
a. Townhouse dwellings.
b. Apartment dwellings.
4. Restriction on Conditional Uses. No development utilizing the
provisions of the IO-1 Inclusionary Overlay District shall include
any conditional use permitted in § Z-402.4.
5. Accessory Uses Permitted:
a. Common recreational facilities, as specifically approved by the
Planning Board within the specified open space in order to
satisfy the needs of the residential population within the
development, including but not limited to tennis courts, tot
lots, picnic tables and recreational paths.
b. Complementary landscape structures and elements including
benches, trellises, gazebos and other such features
customarily associated with the permitted principal uses.
c. Underground sprinkler systems within the designated open
space and within individual lots, provided that the water spray
does not extend beyond the tract boundary line.
d. Fences and walls in accordance with the design provisions
specified in § Z-507.
e. Patios and balconies.
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:498
f. Off-street parking and private garages in accordance with
§§ Z-402.2H9 and Z-509.
g. Signs in accordance with §§ Z-402.2H11 and Z-515.
h. Office space within an apartment building to be used for the
operation and management of the affordable rental
apartments.
i. Lighting in accordance with § Z-511.
j. Stormwater management and other utilities.
k. Conservation areas, recreation, open space, and public
purpose uses.
l. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area, either attached to the trailer or
freestanding, which advertises the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and similar
data for the period of construction beginning with the issuance
of a construction permit and ending with the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever time period is
less. The temporary construction trailer(s) and temporary sign
shall be located on the site where the construction is taking
place and shall be set back at least 30 feet from all lot lines and
from the right-of-way lines of all existing and proposed streets.
There shall be at least one operating telephone within the
trailer.
m. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
6. Maximum Building Height.
a. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and three
stories as measured from the proposed finished grade except
as further allowed in § Z-400.8, entitled "Height Exceptions."
b. No accessory building shall exceed 25 feet in height and 1 1/2
stories.
7. Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
a. The following regulations, area, bulk, setback and intensity
requirements for the principal dwelling and permitted
accessory structures applies for the IO-1 District:
IO-1 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements
§ Z-402.2H7
Requirements
Tract
Minimum tract size 2.2 acres
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:499
IO-1 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements
§ Z-402.2H7
Requirements
Maximum density 6 dwelling units per acre
Minimum open space 20%
Minimum buffer to existing
single-family detached
dwellings
20 feet
Lots Townhouse
Dwelling
Multifamily
Apartments
Minimum lot size 2,000 square
feet
30,000 square
feet
Minimum lot frontage 20 feet 150 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet 200 feet
Maximum building coverage 70% 35%
Maximum lot coverage 80% 60%
Principal Building
Minimum front yard 10 feet 20 feet
Minimum side yard 0 feet
common wall;
10 feet
otherwise
30 feet
Minimum rear yard 15 feet 50 feet
Maximum garage height 1 story N/A
Distance between buildings
Side-to-side 20 feet 30 feet
Rear-to-rear 50 feet 50 feet
Side-to-rear 50 feet 50 feet
Accessory Buildings or Structures
Minimum front yard N.P. N.P
Minimum side yard N/A 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 3 feet 10 feet
Distance to another building N/A 20 feet
Notes:
1. Patios and decks on end units may not project more than 3
feet beyond the principal building wall.
2. Balconies may encroach into a required minimum setback
up to 3 feet.
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:500
IO-1 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements
§ Z-402.2H7
Requirements
3. Unless modified by § Z-400.7A.
N.P. = Not a permitted location
b. No parking area, loading area, driveway or other structure
(except for approved accessways, signs and fencing) shall be
permitted within 20 feet of any tract boundary line, and such
areas shall be planted and maintained in lawn area or ground
cover and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubbery as
approved by the Board.
8. Requirements for Buildings.
a. General Architectural Requirements.
(1) Multiple detached principal buildings shall be permitted
on the tract.
(2) The exteriors of all building in the development, including
accessory buildings, shall be architecturally compatible
and shall be constructed of complementary materials.
(3) All building elevations shall exhibit classical proportions.
The characteristics of classicism include symmetry,
repetition of elements, expressions of hierarchy to reflect
the building uses, and tripartite compositions (base,
middle, top).
(4) Subelements within the facades and individual
architectural components (i.e., railings, awnings, columns)
shall also conform to the overall classical proportions of
the facade.
(5) All entrances to a building shall be articulated utilizing
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments,
pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches or overhangs.
(6) Balconies and patios shall be designed as integral
subcomponents of the building facade. Cantilevered
balconies are not permitted.
(7) The building shall be provided with both heat and smoke
alarms as well as fire suppression sprinkler system where
required by code.
b. Facade Treatments.
(1) Any facade exceeding 30 feet or more in length shall
include at least one change in wall plane (projection or
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:501
recess) having a depth of at least 3% of the entire length
of the facade and extending for a minimum of 20% of the
entire length of the facade.
(2) The architectural treatment of the front facade(s) shall be
continued in its major features around all sides of each
building.
c. Roof Treatments.
(1) Principal roof eaves shall project at least two feet beyond
the building facade or a supporting column. Secondary
roof eaves (i.e., balconies, porches and patios) shall
project at least one foot.
(2) Primary roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6/12.
Secondary roofs may have a pitch below 6/12.
(3) The transition between a facade and a roof shall have a
cornice or frieze that is designed to fit the overall
composition of the facade.
d. Windows and Fenestration.
(1) Windows and other openings in the facade shall exhibit a
vertical emphasis, in harmony with the overall facade
composition. Windows shall be single hung with simulated
divided lights.
(2) Within each building elevation, the maximum ratio of
windows to wall shall be 50% window to 50% wall. The
minimum ratio of window to wall shall be 25% window to
75% wall.
9. Off-Street Parking and Driveways.
a. Parking shall not be permitted between buildings and
Brunswick Avenue (Route 518).
b. Townhouse Dwellings.
(1) Individual townhouse driveways shall not have direct
access to a public street, but may have direct access to an
internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Townhouse dwellings shall provide at least one off-street
parking space within an enclosed garage located in the
rear yard with access from a lane/alley.
(3) Garages, driveways and parking areas shall have a
minimum setback of three feet from any side property line
or side of dwelling unit. An exception to the three-foot
setback from the side property lines shall exist for
townhouse lots to permit garages, driveways and parking
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:502
areas that share a common wall on the common property
line.
c. Multifamily dwellings.
(1) Parking shall not be located in the front yard between
buildings and public streets. Individual building driveways
shall not have direct access to a public street, but may
have direct access to an internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located between buildings and
internal streets, roadways, etc.
(3) Parking areas shall be set back at least seven feet from
building walls.
d. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum number of
parking spaces according to the provisions of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), N.J.A.C. 5:21, or based
upon historical data provided subject to City review.
e. See § Z-509 for additional standards.
10. Trash and Recycling Requirements.
a. The trash and recyclable material collection and pickup
locations shall be provided either within the building being
served or in nearby locations outside the building.
b. If located outside the building, the trash and recyclable
materials area shall be totally enclosed, finished with materials
used to construct the building(s) being served, up to a
maximum of eight feet in height, and located in a manner to be
obscured from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent
residential uses or zoning districts by a fence or wall.
Landscaping, at least six feet in height, shall be provided
around any outdoor trash and recycling area.
c. The area provided for the collection and pickup of trash and
recyclable materials shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by trash and recycling personnel and
vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the trash
and recycling area without interference from parked cars or
other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the trash and recycling area and the bins or containers placed
therein against theft of trash and recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
d. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of
trash and recyclable material, and which are located in an
outdoor trash and recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid.
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.2
AO:503
e. Individual bins or containers for the collection and pickup of
recyclable materials shall be equipped with signs indicating
the materials to be placed therein.
f. See § Z-512 for additional standards.
11. Permitted Signage.
a. Community Sign. One ground-mounted freestanding sign
identifying the name of the development no larger than 25
square feet shall be permitted at the entrance to the
development from an existing public street.
(1) The sign shall not exceed six feet in height and shall be set
back at least 10 feet from all street lines and 50 feet from
all other property lines.
(2) Any sign illumination shall be external to the sign and shall
be designed and oriented to prevent any sight of the lamp
from any street or neighboring properties.
b. Residential Building Identification. Each residential building
may have up to two attached identification signs. The
maximum sign area of each shall not exceed six square feet.
Such signs shall be appropriately integrated within the
architecture of the buildings.
c. See § Z-515 of this chapter for permitted temporary signs,
additional standards and the design requirements for signs.
12. Community Design.
a. The front facade of buildings shall face Brunswick Avenue
(Route 518).
b. A minimum of 750 square feet of area shall be provided as
community open space for the residential development.
c. Plantings. All portions of a lot not covered by buildings or
structures (e.g., parking lots, parking spaces, loading areas,
access aisles, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, curbs, trash
enclosures, children play areas, dog walks, etc.) shall be
suitably planted with grass, shrubs, and trees and shall be
maintained in good condition. In any case, no less than 20% of
the area of the lot shall be so planted, and the planted area may
include approved detention and/or retention basins.
d. Other Design Features.
(1) Wherever reasonably feasible, sustainable construction
techniques shall be utilized to minimize the impact upon
the environment, including energy efficient building
designs, recycled materials, water conservation devices,
§ Z-402.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.2
AO:504
permeable pavement, native plantings, low chemical
usage to maintain the landscaping, and similar measures
which are sensitive to the environment.
(2) The stormwater management plan shall include
stormwater management facilities that are designed to
enhance the aesthetic attributes of the proposed
development.
13. Affordable Housing Standards.
a. A developer's agreement is required to establish low/moderate
apportionment, very-low-income requirement per N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, bedroom distribution, unit size, etc.
b. At least 13% of the units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households, 37% of the units shall be affordable to low-income
households, and 50% may be affordable to moderate-income
households.
c. The affordable units shall be developed in accordance with
COAH's regulations at N.J.A.C. 5:9325 and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., which
govern the administration and affordability controls of
affordable units in New Jersey, with one exception. The
exception is for 13% very-low-income housing at 30% of the
regional median income instead of the UHAC requirement of
10% very-low-income housing at 35% of the regional median
income.
d. Affordable Housing Standards. In addition to addressing the
requirements of COAH and noted above, the affordable units
shall be developed in accordance with the following:
(1) The affordable units cannot be age-restricted units;
(2) The bedroom distribution requirements pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.326 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b).
(3) The unit distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3.
(4) The length of controls requirement and deed restrictions
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11.
(5) The accessibility and adaptability requirements pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.27
25.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B — 5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
26.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B — 5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ Z-402.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.3
AO:505
§ Z-402.3. Accessory Uses.
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
§ Z-402.4. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2006-16]
The following conditional uses may be permitted when authorized by the
Planning Board:
A. Residential Use:
1. Private garage.
2. Residential tool shed.
3. Residential swimming pool.
4. Deck.
5. Home occupations, pursuant to § 520.
6. Family day care conforming to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Nursing Home or Assisted Living Facility:
1. Medical and social services to residents.
2. Congregate dining.
3. Superintendent or caretaker's dwelling and office.
4. Maintenance building.
C. Cemetery:
1. Sales office.
2. Mausoleum.
3. Maintenance building and garage.
D. Fences and walls, pursuant to § 507.
E. Signs, pursuant to § 515.
A. Residential uses on reduced area lots as otherwise permitted in areas
characterized as steep slopes in accordance with § 519.
B. Nursing home or assisted living facility, provided the following criteria
are met:
1. Any such use shall be served by public sewer and water.
27.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:97 expired 6-2-2015.
§ Z-402.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.4
AO:506
2. The minimum lot size shall be two acres and the maximum lot size
shall not exceed five acres.
C. (Reserved)
D. House of worship, subject to the following criteria:
1. Houses of worship shall be connected to public sewer and water.
2. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall meet the following
requirements:
a. No parking lot shall be permitted in a front yard; however this
shall not exclude drop off and pick up lanes.
b. Parking lots shall be setback from any side property line eight
feet and any rear property line 10 feet.
3. Accessory residential buildings shall comply with the yard
requirements for dwellings in the respective zone.
E. Farm market, subject to the following criteria:
1. No farm market shall exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
2. Access to a farm market shall be from a collector or arterial road.
3. No farm market shall exceed one story in height.
4. A farm market shall be set back from the right-of-way line a
minimum of 30 feet.
5. At least 50% of the number of products sold on an annual basis
shall be fresh food or perishables.
F. Bed and breakfast accommodation, subject to the following criteria:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet for lots served by
public water and sewer, otherwise, the minimum lot size shall be
two acres.
2. No more than six guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
3. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite shall be
required.
4. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard. Parking lots shall
be adequately screened from adjacent properties to obscure the
view of parked vehicles.
5. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served food
and drink on the premises.
6. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or suites.
§ Z-402.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.4
AO:507
§ Z-402.5. Density Limitations.
The following maximum density limits shall be met for all uses within the
R-L District:
§ Z-402.6. R-L Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to each lot:
Use
Single Family
with water &
sewer; B&B
Single Family
w/o water &
sewer
Nursing
Home,
Assisted
Living
Facility,
House of
Worship Municipal Use Other use
Minimum lot
size
10,000 square
feet(1)
2 acres(3) 2 acres(2) 7,500 square
feet
3 acres
Minimum lot
frontage
75 feet 100 feet(3) 200 feet 75 feet 200 feet
Minimum lot
width at the
building line
75 feet 150 feet 300 feet 75 feet 300 feet
7. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30
days.
G. ECHO unit, provided the following criteria are met:
1. The ECHO housing unit shall be in conjunction with a primary
single-family residence existing on the lot.
2. The occupants shall be restricted to one or two persons who are
family members of the owner/occupant of the primary dwelling on
the lot and at least one shall be either a senior citizen or a disabled
person.
3. The ECHO housing unit shall comply with the required setbacks for
an accessory structure and the additional standards in § 402.7.
A. Single family detached dwellings with public sewer and water: 1.3 units
per acre.
The permitted number of units shall be determined by multiplying the
gross acreage of the tract by 1.3 and rounding to the next highest whole
number.
B. Other single family detached dwellings: 1 unit per three acres
C. Nursing home and assisted living facility: 25 beds per acre
§ Z-402.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-402.6
AO:508
Use
Single Family
with water &
sewer; B&B
Single Family
w/o water &
sewer
Nursing
Home,
Assisted
Living
Facility,
House of
Worship Municipal Use Other use
Maximum
Building
Coverage
40% 10% 50% 70% 5%
Maximum Lot
Coverage
60% 30% 75% N/A 15%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard 25 feet 50 feet 50 feet 25 feet 75 feet
Side Yard 10 feet 25 feet 50 feet 10 feet 30 feet
Rear Yard 30 feet 50 feet 50 feet 30 feet 50 feet
Maximum
Height 35 feet
35 feet 40 feet, or 2
stories(4)
40 feet 35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P.
Side Yard 5 feet(5) 10 feet 20 feet 10 feet 20 feet
Rear Yard 5 feet(5) 10 feet 25 feet 10 feet 25 feet
Max. Height 15 feet 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet 20 feet
N.P. — Not a permitted location
(1) - See also, density limits of § 402.5. Bed and Breakfast accommodation is only permitted on lots
15,000 square feet or larger
(2) - See also § 402.4.B
(3)- Excepting flag lots, see § 402.7 for additional regulations
(4) - Houses of worship may extend to 45 feet in height
(5) - ECHO units shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the side or rear property line
§ Z-402.7. Additional Standards. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
The following additional standards shall apply:
A. ECHO Housing.
1. The ECHO housing unit shall be positioned in such a way as to
minimize its visibility from adjacent lots or public rights-of-way. To
minimize this visibility, the Zoning Officer may require landscape
buffering.
§ Z-402.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-402.7
AO:509
§ Z-403. RESIDENTIAL 1 (R-1) SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT. [Ord.
No. 99-13]
§ Z-403.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Residential 1 (R-1) Single Family District is to provide for
single family detached dwellings, limited institutional uses, and municipal
purposes in the three hills area of the municipality. These areas are largely
developed and mostly served with public water and sewer.
§ Z-403.2. Permitted Uses.
In the Residential 1 Zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
2. Each ECHO housing unit shall comply with the minimum unit size
requirements for Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing
Program (N.J.A.C. 5:43 et seq.).
3. No ECHO housing unit shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
4. The exterior of ECHO housing units shall be covered with a
material and color that compliments the facade of the primary
residence on the property.
5. The unit shall be removed from the premises within six months of
the end of the term of occupancy of the approved applicant and the
lot restored to its status prior to the installation of the unit. The
Zoning Officer may extend the time period for removal up to an
additional three months upon adequate documentation of
marketing efforts to sell the unit during the initial six-month period.
6. The ECHO unit shall be separated from the principal dwelling a
minimum of five feet.
B. Flag Lots. Flag lots for single family detached dwellings shall be
permitted in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Flag lots shall only be permitted where either public water or
sewer or both is not available.
2. The minimum lot size shall be met without including the area of the
access "pole" and shall be a minimum of three acres in area. All
other yard, area and coverage requirements shall be as for
conventional single family detached residences without water and
sewer.
3. The minimum width of the access strip shall be 25 feet.
4. Flag lots shall not be permitted in major subdivisions. No more
than two flag lots shall be permitted to be created from the original
tract.
§ Z-402.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-403.2
AO:510
§ Z-403.3. Accessory Uses.
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
A. Single family detached dwelling.
B. Emergency services facilities.
C. Public, parochial and private schools for academic instruction.
D. Parks and recreation.
E. Conservation.
F. Municipal use.
G. Cemetery.
A. Residential Use:
1. Private garage.
2. Residential tool shed.
3. Residential swimming pool.
4. Deck.
5. Home occupations, pursuant to § 520.
6. Family day care conforming to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Boarding Home for the Elderly:
1. Medical and social services to residents.
2. Congregate dining.
3. Superintendent or caretaker's apartment and office.
4. Maintenance building.
C. Cemetery:
1. Sales office.
2. Mausoleum.
3. Maintenance building and garage.
D. Schools:
1. Athletic fields and facilities.
2. Maintenance buildings and garages.
3. Accessory uses customarily incidental to such uses.
§ Z-403.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-403.3
AO:511
§ Z-403.4. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2006-16]
The following conditional uses may be permitted when authorized by the
Planning Board:
E. Fences and walls, pursuant to § 507.
F. Signs, pursuant to § 515.
G. ECHO unit, provided the following criteria are met:
1. The ECHO housing unit shall be in conjunction with a primary
single family residence existing on the lot.
2. The occupants shall be restricted to one or two persons who are
family members of the owner/occupant of the primary dwelling on
the lot and at least one shall be either a senior citizen or a disabled
person.
3. The ECHO housing unit shall comply with the required setbacks for
an accessory structure and the additional standards in Section
403.6.
A. Residential uses on reduced area lots as otherwise permitted in areas
characterized as steep slopes in accordance with § 519.
B. Boarding home for the elderly, provided the following criteria are met:
1. Any such use shall be served by public sewer and water.
2. The minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet and the maximum
lot size shall not exceed two acres.
3. No such use shall exceed 15 residents.
C. (Reserved)
D. Clinics and houses of worship, subject to the following criteria:
1. Such uses shall be connected to public sewer and water.
2. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall meet the following
requirements:
a. No parking lot shall be permitted in a front yard; however this
shall not exclude drop off and pick up lanes.
b. Parking lots shall be setback from any side property line eight
feet and any rear property line 10 feet.
3. Accessory residential buildings for Houses of Worship shall comply
with the yard requirements for dwellings in the respective zone.
E. Bed and breakfast accommodation, subject to the following criteria:
§ Z-403.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-403.4
AO:512
§ Z-403.5. R-1 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to each lot:
Use Single Family
Elderly
Boarding
Home
Clinic &
House of
Worship Municipal Use Other use
Minimum lot
size
7,500 square
feet
30,000 square
feet
1 acre 7,500 square
feet
3 acres
Minimum lot
frontage
75 feet 150 feet 150 feet 75 feet 200 feet
Minimum lot
width at the
building line
75 feet 150 feet 150 feet 75 feet 300 feet
Maximum
Building
Coverage
40% 25% 25% 70% 20%
Maximum Lot
Coverage
60% 60% 75% N/A 50%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard 25 feet(1) 25 feet 30 feet 25 feet 30 feet
Side Yard 10 feet 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet 30 feet
Rear Yard 30 feet 40 feet 40 feet 30 feet 50 feet
Maximum
Height
35 feet 35 feet, or 2 1/2
stories
35 feet, or 2
stories(2)
40 feet 35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
1. The minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet and shall be
served by public water and sewer.
2. No more than six guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
3. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite shall be
required.
4. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard. Parking lots shall
be adequately screened from adjacent properties to obscure the
view of parked vehicles.
5. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served food
and drink on the premises.
6. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or suites.
7. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30
days.
§ Z-403.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-403.5
AO:513
Use Single Family
Elderly
Boarding
Home
Clinic &
House of
Worship Municipal Use Other use
Front Yard N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P.
Side Yard 5 feet(3) 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet 20 feet
Rear Yard 5 feet(3) 25 feet 25 feet 10 feet 25 feet
Max. Height 15 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 20 feet
N.-P. = Not a permitted location
(1)- In blocks where more than 50% of the properties abutting a common street line are developed, the
front yard of the principal building may be the average of all the existing setbacks on the same side of
the street of the block
(2) - Houses of worship may extend to 45 feet in height
(3) - ECHO units shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the side or rear property line
§ Z-403.6. Additional Standards.
The following additional standards shall apply:
A. ECHO Housing.
1. The ECHO housing unit shall be positioned in such a way as to
minimize its visibility from adjacent lots or public rights-of-way. To
minimize this visibility, the Zoning Officer may require landscape
buffering.
2. Each ECHO housing unit shall comply with the minimum unit size
requirements for Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing
Program (N.J.A.C. 5.43 et seq.) as follows:
a. Efficiency - 500 square feet.
b. One bedroom - 600 square feet.
c. 2 bedroom - 750 square feet.
3. No ECHO housing unit shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
4. The exterior of ECHO housing units shall be covered with a
material and color that compliments the facade of the primary
residence on the property.
5. The unit shall be removed from the premises within six months of
the end of the term of occupancy of the approved applicant and the
lot restored to its status prior to the installation of the unit. The
Zoning Officer may extend the time period for removal up to an
additional three months upon adequate documentation of
marketing efforts to sell the unit during the initial six-month period.
§ Z-403.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-403.6
AO:514
§ Z-404. RESIDENTIAL 2 (R-2), DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.
§ Z-404.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Residential 2 (R-2), Downtown Residential District is to
allow for several types of residences, limited institutional, lodging or social
uses, and municipal purposes in the lowland area of the municipality. These
areas are fully developed and served with public water and sewer.
§ Z-404.2. Permitted Uses.
In the Residential 2 Zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
§ Z-404.3. Accessory Uses.
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
6. The ECHO unit shall be separated from the principal dwelling a
minimum of five feet.
B. Bed and Breakfast Accommodation. Bed and breakfast accommodation
shall conform to the area, yard and lot coverage requirements of
§ 402.6 that have not been modified herein.
A. Single family detached dwelling.
B. Semi-detached dwelling.
C. Townhouse.
D. Emergency services facilities.
E. Public, parochial and private schools for academic instruction.
F. Parks and recreation.
G. Conservation.
H. Municipal use.
I. Funeral homes.
J. Clubs, lodges or other social and fraternal organizations.
A. Residential Use:
1. Private garage.
2. Residential tool shed.
3. Residential swimming pool.
§ Z-403.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-404.3
AO:515
§ Z-404.4. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
The following conditional uses may be permitted when authorized by the
Planning Board:
4. Deck.
5. Home occupations, pursuant to § 520.
6. Family day care conforming to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Funeral Home Use:
1. Chapel.
2. Commercial garage for the housing of vehicles used in the
business.
C. Schools:
1. Athletic fields and facilities.
2. Maintenance buildings and garages.
3. Accessory uses customarily incidental to such uses.
D. Fences and walls, pursuant to § 507.
E. Signs, pursuant to § 515.
A. Bed and breakfast accommodation, subject to the following criteria:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet and the use shall
be served by public water and sewer.
2. No more than six guest rooms or suites shall be permitted.
3. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite shall be
required. Off-street parking may be accommodated off-site
provided that the location is within 600 feet of the subject site and
an adequate guaranty that establishes a right to the use of the offtract
parking is secured.
4. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard. Parking lots shall
be adequately screened from adjacent properties to obscure the
view of parked vehicles.
5. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served food
and drink on the premises.
6. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or suites.
7. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30
days.
B. Accessory apartment, subject to the following criteria:
§ Z-404.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-404.4
AO:516
§ Z-404.5. R-2 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to each lot:
1. The apartment shall be occupied only by a low and moderate
income household as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3.
2. The apartment shall conform to the requirements for maximum
rent level in N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9(a)3.
3. The apartment shall be affirmatively marketed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.
4. Controls on the affordability of the accessory apartment shall
remain in effect for a minimum of 10 years in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9(e), as it may be amended or superseded.
5. Accessory apartments shall only be permitted within single family
detached dwellings or their accessory structures. Only one such
apartment per lot shall be permitted.
6. Each accessory unit shall comply with the minimum unit size
requirements for Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing
Program (N.J.A.C. 5.43 et seq.)
a. (Reserved)
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. No accessory apartment shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
7. Each accessory apartment shall have direct access to the side or
rear exterior of the building.
C. Age-Restricted Development. Senior citizen apartments shall be
permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. Maximum density shall not exceed 50 units per acre.
2. Apartment types shall be limited to efficiencies or one-bedroom
apartments and shall meet the size minimums as noted in
paragraph C.6 above.
3. The maximum lot size shall be three acres.
§ Z-404.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-404.5
AO:517
Use
Single Family
& Municipal
Semi-detached
Residence Townhouse
Funeral Home,
Club & Office
Senior
Apartments,
Other use
Minimum lot
size
2,800 square
feet
1,875 square
feet
1,350 square
feet
10,000 square
feet
30,000 square
feet
Minimum lot
frontage
40 feet 25 feet 18 feet 75 feet 150 feet
Minimum lot
width at the
building line
40 feet 25 feet 18 feet 75 feet 150 feet
Maximum
Building
Coverage
60% 65% 70% 30% 30%
Maximum Lot
Coverage
80% 80% 80% 60% 60%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard 0 feet 0 feet 0 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Side Yard 5 feet 0 feet 1 side 5
feet other side
0 feet(1) 10 feet 15 feet
Rear Yard 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Maximum
Height
40 feet or 3
stories
40 feet or 3
stories
40 feet or 3
stories
35 feet or 2 1/2
stories
40 feet(2)
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P.
Side Yard 0 feet(3) 0 feet(3) N/A 10 feet 10 feet
Rear Yard 3 feet(3) 3 feet(3) 3 feet(3) 5 feet 10 feet
Max. Height 15 feet 12 feet 12 feet 15 feet 15 feet
N.-P. = Not a permitted location
(1) - The end wall of a building not attached to another unit shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any other
building.
(2) - Houses of worship may extend to 60 feet in height
(3) - Unless modified by § 400.7.A.
§ Z-404.6. Additional Standards for Bed and Breakfast
Accommodation.
Bed and breakfast accommodation shall conform to the area, yard and lot
coverage requirements of § 402.6 that have not been modified herein.
§ Z-405. RESIDENTIAL 3 (R-3) TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.
§ Z-404.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-405.1
AO:518
§ Z-405.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Residential 3 (R-3) Townhouse District is to provide
for low density, modern, townhouse development which incorporates
significant common open space.
§ Z-405.2. Permitted Uses.
In the Residential 3 Zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
§ Z-405.3. Accessory Uses.
Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
§ Z-405.4. R-3 General District Regulations.
The following general regulations shall apply to any R-3 District
development.
A. Townhouse dwelling.
B. Parks and recreation.
C. Conservation.
D. Municipal use.
A. Private garage.
B. Deck.
C. Swimming pool for the common use of residents.
D. Tennis courts and other usual recreational facilities.
E. Home occupations, pursuant to § 520.
F. Family day care conforming to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
G. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
H. Maintenance building.
I. Signs, pursuant to § 515.
A. Minimum tract size: 10 acres.
B. Maximum density: 3 units per acre.
C. Minimum tract frontage: 200 feet.
D. Minimum open space: 40% of total tract area.
E. Maximum building coverage: 20% of total tract area.
§ Z-405.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-405.4
AO:519
§ Z-405.5. R-3 Area, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to each lot:
Use Townhouse Municipal Use Other use
Minimum lot size 1,350 square
feet
10,000 square
feet
30,000 square
feet
Minimum lot
frontage
18 feet 75 feet 150 feet
Minimum lot width
at the building line
18 feet 75 feet 150 feet
Maximum Building
Coverage N/A(1)
30% 30%
Maximum Lot
Coverage N/A(1)
60% 60%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard 0 feet(1) 25 feet 50 feet
Side Yard 0 feet(1) 10 feet 15 feet
Rear Yard 15 feet(1) 20 feet 20 feet
Maximum Height 40 feet or 3
stories
35 feet or 2 1/2
stories
35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard N.P. N.P. N.P.
Side Yard N/A(2) 10 feet 10 feet
F. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60% of total tract area.
G. Minimum tract perimeter setbacks for buildings, above-ground
structures and parking areas from tract boundary line:
1. Building and above ground structures: 50 feet.
2. Entrance structures: 10 feet.
3. Parking area setback: 25 feet.
H. Building separation requirements shall be as follows:
1. Front of building to another building: 50 feet.
2. Side of building to another building: 30 feet.
3. Rear of building to another building: 40 feet.
4. Accessory buildings shall not be located within 25 feet of another
building, excepting private garages.
§ Z-405.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-405.5
AO:520
Use Townhouse Municipal Use Other use
Rear Yard N/A(2) 5 feet 20 feet
Maximum Height 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet
N.-P. = Not a permitted location
(1) - Applies to fee simple townhouse lots only
(2) - Accessory buildings shall adhere to the building separation and tract
boundary setback requirements.
§ Z-405.6. R-3 Additional Requirements.
The following additional requirements shall apply to townhouse
developments:
§ Z-406. CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD).
§ Z-406.1. Permitted Uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the CBD Zone:
A. Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed six
units in a row.
B. Each townhouse shall have a private rear yard of 200 square feet
minimum.
C. A minimum of 200 square feet of storage shall be provided in the
basement, attic or other attached area for each unit exclusive of
bedroom closet space.
D. Recreational facilities shall be set back from the perimeter of the tract a
minimum of 75 feet and shall not be located closer than 25 feet to a
dwelling. Such facilities shall be screened from adjacent residences and
public rights-of-way with a minimum buffer of 15 feet consisting of
landscaping materials, and/or fencing and walls.
E. Decks shall be attached to the rear elevation of a townhouse, only.
Decks may extend across the full width of the dwelling, however, any
deck within five feet of the common wall of another dwelling unit shall
be constructed with a privacy screen attached to the edge of the deck
perpendicular to the vertical plane of the rear elevation. Such privacy
screen shall be six feet in height and shall be a minimum of 75%
opaque. The privacy screen shall extend the depth of the deck or a
distance of at least 10 feet from the vertical plane of the rear elevation,
whichever is greater. No deck may be greater than 14 feet in depth
measured perpendicularly from the rear elevation.
A. Single family semi-detached residential.
B. Townhouse.
§ Z-405.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.1
AO:521
C. Retail sales including retail services incidental to such sales.
D. Personal services.
E. Restaurants and luncheonettes.
F. Hotels.
G. Galleries and antique stores.
H. Public utilities except maintenance yards, power generation, or similar
industrial functions.
I. General and professional offices.
J. Commercial recreational uses, including but not limited to theatres,
bowling alleys, bike and boat rental, sporting goods, skating rinks, and
similar uses.
K. Municipal and school district uses.
L. Parks, playgrounds, and conservation.
M. Waterfront commercial use shall be permitted as an optional
development overlay provided the tract is located between the
Delaware River and Delaware and Raritan Canal, and between the
extensions of Delaware Street and Swan Street, excluding any part of
Holcombe Island.
N. Religious use, including house of worship, parish house, rectory,
parochial school, convent, or similar such use.
O. Senior citizen residential apartments.
P. IO-2 Inclusionary Overlay Zone District. [Added 4-18-2019 by Ord.
No. 05-2019]
1. Purpose and Area of Application: to address its affordable housing
unmet need obligation, the City through the implementation of an
Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing that is affordable to very-low-, low-, and
moderate-income households on Block 1022, Lot 8. This subsection
establishes the Inclusionary Overlay Zone 2 — the IO-2 District -
and permits the adaptive reuse of the existing nonresidential
building into non-age-restricted (family) apartments on the
property identified above provided that such housing complies with
a required inclusionary set-aside requirement for affordable
housing and with the requirements of this subsection.
2. Special Rules.
a. In any inclusionary development permitted by this subsection,
in the case of affordable rental units, at least 15% of the
residential units must be affordable to very-low-, low-, and
§ Z-406.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.1
AO:522
moderate-income households and, in the case of owneroccupied
affordable units, at least 20% of the residential units
must be affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderate-income
households.
b. Where this subsection contradicts § LDR-1200.6 of the City's
Affordable Housing Ordinance, the effects and requirements of
this subsection shall supersede the requirements of
§ LDR-1200.6.
3. Permitted Uses:
a. Apartment Dwellings.
4. Restriction on Conditional Uses. No development utilizing the
provisions of the IO-2 Inclusionary Overlay District shall include
any conditional use permitted in § Z-406.3.
5. Accessory Uses Permitted:
a. Common recreational facilities, as specifically approved by the
Planning Board within the specified open space in order to
satisfy the needs of the residential population within the
development, including but not limited to tennis courts, tot
lots, picnic tables and recreational paths.
b. Landscaping features including benches, trellises, gazebos and
other such features customarily associated with the permitted
principal uses.
c. Fences and walls in accordance with the design provisions
specified in § Z-507.
d. Patios and balconies.
e. Off-street parking in accordance with §§ Z-406.1P7 and Z-509.
f. Signs in accordance with § Z-515.
g. Office space within an apartment building to be used for the
operation and management of the affordable rental
apartments.
h. Lighting in accordance with § Z-511.
i. Stormwater management and other utilities.
j. Conservation areas, recreation, open space, and public
purpose uses.
k. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area, either attached to the trailer or
freestanding, which advertises the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and similar
§ Z-406.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.1
AO:523
data for the period of construction beginning with the issuance
of a construction permit and ending with the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever time period is
less. The temporary construction trailer(s) and temporary sign
shall be located on the site where the construction is taking
place and shall be set back at least 30 feet from all lot lines
and from the right-of-way lines of all existing and proposed
streets. There shall be at least one operating telephone within
the trailer.
l. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
6. Maximum Density. The maximum density of housing units shall be
10 units per acre.
7. Off-Street Parking.
a. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum number of
parking spaces according to the provisions of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), N.J.A.C. 5:21.
b. See § Z-509 for additional standards.
8. Affordable Housing Standards.
a. A developer's agreement is required to establish low/moderate
apportionment, very-low-income requirement per N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, bedroom distribution, unit size, etc.
b. At least 13% of the units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households, 37% of the units shall be affordable to low-income
households, and 50% may be affordable to moderate-income
households.
c. The affordable units shall be developed in accordance with
COAH's regulations at N.J.A.C. 5:9328 and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., which
govern the administration and affordability controls of
affordable units in New Jersey, with one exception. The
exception is for 13% very-low-income housing at 30% of the
regional median income instead of the UHAC requirement of
10% very-low-income housing at 35% of the regional median
income.
d. Affordable Housing Standards. In addition to addressing the
requirements of COAH and noted above, the affordable units
shall be developed in accordance with the following:
(1) The affordable units cannot be age-restricted units;
28.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B — 5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ Z-406.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.1
AO:524
§ Z-406.2. Accessory Uses.
The following accessory uses shall be permitted in conjunction with a
principal use:
§ Z-406.3. Conditional Uses.
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the Central Business
District:
(2) The bedroom distribution requirements pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.329 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b).
(3) The unit distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3.
(4) The length of controls requirement and deed restrictions
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11.
(5) The accessibility and adaptability requirements pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.30
A. Fences and walls in accordance with § 507.
B. Signs in accordance with § 406.11 and § 515.
C. Surface parking lots.
D. Outdoor seating, provided that the following conditions are met:
1. Seating must comply with the handicapped accessibility
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
2. Services shall not be extended to patrons utilizing such seating,
unless the following conditions are met:
a. Such seating shall be screened from adjacent properties by
fencing and/or landscaping.
b. No glare from exterior lighting of the outdoor seating shall be
created.
c. The number of seats outdoors shall not exceed the number of
seats indoors.
3. No such seating shall be permitted within the right-of-way.
E. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
29.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B — 5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
30.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:97 expired 6-2-2015.
§ Z-406.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.3
AO:525
§ Z-406.4. Area, Yard, and Building Coverage Requirements. [Ord.
No. 18-2016]
A. Conversion of existing buildings for apartment use conforming to the
criteria of § 406.8 and § 517.
B. Structured parking conforming to the criteria of § 406.9 and § 517.
C. Taverns and bars conforming to the criteria of § 406.10 and § 517.
D. Conversion of second floor and higher floors to non-residential use
provided that the gross floor area of the building shall not be less than
1,800 square feet and the criteria of § 517 are met.
A. Residential and Non-Residential Uses, excepting Waterfront
Commercial Uses.
1. Minimum lot size: 1,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot frontage: 14 feet.
3. Front Build to Line: The front wall of a building shall be located on
the front property line, unless modified by § 602.
4. Minimum rear yard: 10 feet, excepting corner lots.
5. Minimum side yard: zero feet.
6. The minimum separation distance between buildings shall be
governed by the fire separation distance requirements in the
currently adopted Building Code as amended by the Uniform
Construction Code in N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.
7. Maximum building height: 40 feet.
8. Maximum building coverage: 80% of total lot area.
B. Waterfront Commercial Use.
1. Minimum tract size: three acres.
2. Minimum lot size: one acre.
3. Minimum lot frontage: 40 feet.
4. Front build to line: The front wall of a waterfront commercial
building may be located on the front property line, unless modified
by § 602.
5. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
6. Minimum side yard: zero feet.
7. The minimum separation distance between buildings shall be
governed by the fire separation distance requirements in the
§ Z-406.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.4
AO:526
§ Z-406.5. Additional Waterfront Commercial Development
Requirements.
§ Z-406.6. Design Standards for the Central Business District.
Lambertville occupies a unique place in New Jersey by virtue of its
placement on the National and State Registers of Historic Places, proximity
currently adopted Building Code as amended by the Uniform
Construction Code in N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.
8. Maximum building height: 40 feet above the deck elevation of the
Lambertville-New Hope Bridge.
9. Minimum building distance from Delaware and Raritan Canal: 50
feet.
10. Minimum building distance from Lambertville-New Hope Bridge
superstructure: 40 feet.
11. Maximum building coverage: 50% of total lot area.
A. Conformance to Community Development Goals. Any waterfront
commercial development shall conform to the goals and objectives as
set forth in the Master Plan and associated documents of the City of
Lambertville for the Delaware River in order to create a consistent
architectural scheme among its buildings and a streetscape well
connected to the central business district, providing for the
preservation of natural features including environmentally sensitive
lands, with integrated recreation and public amenities.
B. Public Access. Any waterfront commercial development shall provide a
visible public access to the Delaware River or Island Creek, as the case
may be. The continuity of public access along the waterfront shall be
encouraged. Pedestrian connections to existing public open space,
including the Delaware and Raritan Canal, shall be encouraged.
C. Views. Existing or important views of the Delaware River and Island
Creek are a valuable public resource and shall be maintained to the
greatest feasible extent within the context of the overall planning of any
waterfront commercial development. The approving authority may
require such additional information on existing viewsheds as it deems
reasonably necessary in order to determine compliance with this
requirement.
D. Traffic Impact. A traffic impact study shall be submitted indicating no
unreasonably adverse impact on public streets in the same or adjacent
zone, including signalized intersections. In the event that a traffic
impact study indicates a lowering of the level of service at a signalized
intersection due to such proposed facility, the applicant proposing such
development shall be responsible for improvements to retain the
existing level of service.
§ Z-406.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.6
AO:527
to the Delaware River, association with the Delaware and Raritan Canal,
and its long history of settlement that has resulted in the rich and diverse
architectural character of a riverfront town. Design standards are necessary
to preserve this rich history by providing guidance to property owners in
the renovation of existing structures and the development of new buildings.
The following guidelines and standards shall be used to prepare and review
the physical, visual, and spatial character and overall appearance of site
plan and subdivision applications for development in relation to the specific
streetscape, adjacent buildings, and the central business district in general.
In this section, guidelines are overall principles to be used in the design of
sites. Standards are to be followed in the placement and design of buildings
unless specifically waived by the approving authority.
A. Design Guidelines.
1. Consideration of context. The design of a building or structure shall
be undertaken with clear and reasonable regard for adjacent and
nearby buildings, setbacks, streetscape, open spaces and site
improvements.
2. Continuation of design elements. Existing architectural and urban
design elements shall be used as guidelines in the overall design of
a building or structure. The physical, visual, and spatial
characteristics of immediate and nearby buildings or structures
shall be reinforced through the use of architectural and urban
design elements to achieve a coherent, organized, development
pattern within a block's area.
3. Retention of historical context. The distinguishing original qualities
or character of the streetscape should not be altered by the
removal or alteration of historic buildings or their architectural
features. Buildings and structures should be recognized as
products of a particular time or era and not altered to appear like
another period.
B. Design Standards.
1. Building mass. The massing and height of the building should be
similar to the ones that make up the rest of the streetscape.
Example: A one story ranch house would be incompatible with 2 1/
2 story houses.
2. Building proportion. The relationship of the building's height to
width in the front facade should be proportioned to be the same as
nearby buildings.
Example: A low and wide Prairie style house would be incompatible
with narrow and tall Federal or Greek Revival proportions
characteristic of Lambertville.
§ Z-406.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.6
AO:528
3. Architectural elements. The elements in the facade, such as
windows, doors, sidelights, and projections from it, such as
porches, balconies, or porte-cocheres should be proportional in
height and width both within themselves and in relationship to the
supporting wall as other structures in the streetscape.
Example: Wide picture windows are incompatible with Queen Anne
style windows which feature tall and narrow profiles.
4. Element spacing. The spacing and size of exterior wall to the
elements in the facade should be compatible with adjacent and
nearby buildings.
Examples: Modern windows which wrap corners are incompatible
with pre-WWII buildings which lack this technological advantage. A
pent roof should not be larger than the roof of an addition or main
roof.
5. Streetscape rhythm. The relationship of the new building to side
yards and the setback from the street should be similar to the
existing pattern of development.
Examples: Buildings should be set in line with the front edge of
existing buildings. Side yards should be narrower than the width of
the lot on which the building sits.
6. Building materials. The use of building materials, their texture, and
color should be visually compatible with existing buildings in the
district.
Example: Vinyl siding with an embossed wood grain is incompatible
with wooden clapboard siding, which is planed smooth.
7. Roof Lines. The shape, roof line, and slope of roofs, including
dormers, chimneys, and other projections should be compatible
with nearby structures. Roof lines are a particularly important
design feature because they strongly convey the mass of the
building.
Example: A low pitched gable roof is incompatible with the
mansard roof of the Second Empire style.
8. Landscape Elements. Landscape elements such as individual trees
and tree masses, walls, fencing, and other materials should be
compatible with the existing views from the street.
Example: A wooden stockade fence would not be compatible with
wrought iron. Chain link fencing should not be used at all.
9. Ornamental Features. The exterior features of a building, including
ornamentation, should be visually compatible with the
architectural era of nearby buildings.
§ Z-406.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.6
AO:529
§ Z-406.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
Examples: Shutters should be fitted to the window size and be
designed to work rather than attached flat to a building's facade.
Ornamental cornices should not be boxed with aluminum or vinyl.
A. Required Parking. The following parking schedule shall be used to
calculate the required number of parking spaces per use. Unless
otherwise noted, the calculation shall be based upon the gross square
footage of the floor area of the use. Where the calculation results in a
fraction of a space, the required number of parking spaces shall be
rounded to the next highest whole number. Where more than one
permitted use is allowed within the district, the requirement for
parking spaces shall be the sum of the individual uses computed
separately.
1. Apartment Uses, per unit:
a. Efficiency: one parking space.
b. One Bedroom: 1 1/2 parking spaces.
c. Two Bedroom: 1 3/4 parking spaces.
d. Three Bedrooms or More: two parking spaces.
e. Senior Citizen: 1/2 parking space.
2. Residential, excepting apartment use: two spaces per unit.
3. Retail and personal sales and services: one space per 300 square
feet.
4. General and professional offices, excepting medical and dental
offices: one space per 300 square feet.
5. Medical and dental offices: one space per 250 square feet.
6. Restaurants and luncheonettes: one space per three seats.
7. Taverns and bars: one space per two seats. Where individual seats
are not provided, each 24 inches of counter shall constitute one
seat.
8. Hotels: one space per room.
9. Galleries and antique stores, excepting cooperatives: one space per
600 square feet.
10. Cooperatives: three spaces per exhibit area.
11. Religious use, excepting residential: one space for each five seats.
Where individual seats are not provided, each 21 inches of bench or
pew shall be considered one seat.
§ Z-406.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.7
AO:530
§ Z-406.8. Conditions for Conversion to Apartment Use.
12. Public Assembly: one space for each five seats.
13. Theatre: one space for each three seats.
14. Recreation, indoor: one space for each 400 square feet, excepting
bowling alleys which shall provide four spaces per lane.
15. Recreation, outdoor. Sufficient space shall be provided to prevent
parking in fire lanes or parking aisles as reasonably determined by
the approving authority.
16. Other uses not specifically identified: one space per 300 square
feet.
B. Required Loading. Each business or service establishment shall have
access to a loading and unloading space within 300 feet of the
premises. An adequate guarantee shall be provided that establishes a
right to the loading and unloading use, unless such space is provided by
a public entity.
Business or service establishments occupying a lot of 15,000 square
feet or larger shall provide off-street loading and unloading space on
the premises. Each off-street loading area shall be a minimum of 12 feet
by 35 feet. The loading area shall be so arranged to avoid impairment
to the circulation system of parking spaces, parking aisles, points of
ingress and egress, and streets.
C. The design standards of § 509 shall apply to all off-street parking and
loading areas.
D. Location of Parking. Required off-street parking may be supplied offtract
provided the following criteria are met:
1. The off-tract parking shall not provide required parking for any
other use.
2. An adequate guaranty that establishes a right to the use of the offtract
parking shall be provided.
3. The off-tract parking is located within the following distances from
the premises in question:
a. Senior citizen residential use: 150 feet.
b. Other residential use: 300 feet.
c. Non-residential use: 600 feet.
A. No apartment shall be permitted within a basement or a cellar as
defined in Article II, § 201. An apartment(s) shall be permitted on the
first floor of a building however, the habitable room area, as defined in
§ 201, for said unit(s) shall not occupy more than 50% of the first floor
§ Z-406.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-406.8
AO:531
§ Z-406.9. Conditions for Structured Parking.
§ Z-406.10. Conditions for Taverns and Bars.
area as measured from the rear wall of the building, exclusive of
common hallways providing access to said unit(s). No portion of the
habitable room area shall be permitted within the front areas of the first
floor as measured from the front wall of the building, that being the
wall facing a public street within the CBD Zone. The minimum square
footage standards contained in § 406.8 paragraph E. shall continue to
apply to any apartment within the CBD Zone.
B. Public notice shall be given in the same manner as required for
applications for development.
C. Access to each apartment shall be by means of an entrance to the
exterior of the building or by common hallway.
D. Each apartment shall have a minimum of two means of ingress and
egress.
E. No apartment shall be less than the square footage minimum required
as follows:
1. Efficiency: 450 square feet.
2. One Bedroom: 600 square feet.
3. Two Bedroom: 800 square feet.
4. Three Bedrooms or More: 900 square feet plus 100 square feet
additional for each bedroom in excess of three.
A. No structured parking facility shall exceed a capacity for 250 passenger
vehicles.
B. Parking structures shall be limited to three levels of parking, including
the roof deck as one level.
C. The exterior surface of the structure shall be faced in brick or other
approved durable material.
D. A traffic impact study shall be submitted indicating no unreasonably
adverse impact on public streets in the same or adjacent zone,
including signalized intersections. In the event that a traffic impact
study indicates a lowering of the level of service at a signalized
intersection due to such proposed facility, the applicant proposing such
structured parking shall be responsible for improvements to retain the
existing level of service.
A. No tavern or bar shall be located within 500 feet of a public or private
school.
B. No tavern or bar shall be located within 300 feet of another such use.
§ Z-406.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-406.10
AO:532
§ Z-406.11. Signs. [Repealed by Ord. No. 2001-07 § 14]
(See § 515 for other sign regulations.)
§ Z-406.12. Design Standards for CBD Central Business District
Signs. [Repealed by Ord. 2001-07, § 14]
See § 515.5 for sign design standards.
§ Z-407. C-2 SERVICE COMMERCIAL. [Ord. No. 2014-28]
§ Z-407.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 99-13]
In the C-2 Service Commercial Zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
C. No outdoor seating shall be located within 15 feet of a side or rear
property line.
D. Outdoor seating shall be screened with a combination of landscaping
and fencing a minimum width of 10 feet along any side or rear property
line.
A. through G. (Reserved)
B. Waterfront Development. On planned waterfront commercial
development there may be permitted one additional freestanding sign
not exceeding 32 square feet identifying the entire complex.
A. Automobile sales, both new and used, and auto repairs except auto
wrecking yards and junk yards.
B. Automobile parts and accessories, including tire and battery sales, but
not to include tire recapping or recycling.
C. General business and professional offices.
D. Grocery, convenience, drug, liquor, and dry goods stores, card and
flower shops.
E. Clothing and clothing accessory stores, dry cleaning and tailoring
services, excepting stores primarily devoted to the sale of T-shirts.
F. Galleries and antique stores.
G. Hardware, paint, plumbing, and electrical supply stores, but not to
include lumberyards or masonry supply stores.
H. Lighting, carpet, furniture and musical instrument stores.
I. Restaurants and coffee shops, excepting fast-food restaurants and
drive-thru facilities.
§ Z-406.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-407.1
AO:533
§ Z-407.2. Accessory Uses and Buildings Permitted.
§ Z-407.3. Conditional Use. [Ord. No. 99-13]
The following conditional use may be permitted when authorized by the
Planning Board:
J. Appliance, electronics sales and service shops, video sales and rentals,
recorded music and computer software sales.
K. Funeral homes.
L. Parks and playgrounds.
M. Buildings used exclusively by federal, state, county and local
governments.
N. Motels and hotels.
A. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
B. Fences and walls in accordance with § 507.
C. Reserved. (Signs added by Ord. No. 99-13, repealed by Ord. No.
2001-07)
A. Service Stations.
Service stations in accordance with the following criteria:
1. No service station shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within
200 feet along the same side of a street as any school, public
playground, church, hospital, public building or institution, except
where such property is in another block or on another street which
the lot in question does not abut.
2. No service stations shall be permitted where any oil draining pit or
visible appliance for any purpose (other than filling pumps and air
pumps) is located within 20 feet of any street line or within 50 feet
of any residential district, unless such appliance or pit is within a
building. Gasoline pumps and air pumps within the required front
yard space shall be no closer than 15 feet to the street line.
3. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, scrap metal, or motor
vehicles incapable of normal operation upon the highways shall be
permitted on the premises of any service station. It shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of violation of this Ordinance if more than
three motor vehicles incapable of operation are located at any time
upon any premises not within a closed and roofed building and if
any scrap metal or other junk is stored upon and premises not
within a closed and roofed building excepting, however, that a
number not exceeding six motor vehicles may be located upon any
service station premises outside of a closed or roofed building for a
§ Z-407.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-407.3
AO:534
§ Z-407.4. Area and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-407.5. Minimum Residential Floor Area.
Motel units shall have a minimum gross floor area of 400 square feet per
unit.
§ Z-407.6. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.
period of time not to exceed 48 hours and providing that said motor
vehicles are awaiting repair by the owners thereof.
4. Any service station shall be located within the C-2 Service
Commercial District.
A. An attached or abutting group of commercial buildings may be
considered as one building in applying the yard space requirements,
which are the same as those in the CBD District.
B. All buildings in the C-2 District shall be set back from the street line a
minimum of 10 feet.
C. Motels shall meet the following minimum requirements: lot width 100
feet; lot depth 100 feet; building set back from any side or rear property
line 20 feet. Motels shall be permitted up to 50% building coverage.
D. No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height except as
permitted by § 400.8.
A. See § 509.
B. Funeral homes shall provide at least six spaces for each viewing room.
C. Professional building shall provide two spaces for each room in the
building but in no case less than five spaces.
D. Television and radio appliance stores, tire sales, automobile and
hardware stores shall provide one space for each 800 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
E. Automobile agencies and lumber yards shall provide one space for each
800 square feet of office and retail gross floor area plus one space for
each 2,000 square feet devoted to warehouse and storage facilities.
F. Motels shall provide 3/4 space for each room, plus one space for each
three seats in an associated restaurant, plus five spaces for employees.
G. Restaurants and diners shall provide one space for each three seats.
H. Other offices and government buildings shall provide one space for
each vehicle owned and/or operated by the use plus one space for each
3,000 square feet or gross floor area used for warehousing, shipping or
§ Z-407.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-407.6
AO:535
§ Z-407.7. Signs. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-407.8. Minimum Off-Street Loading.
Each business, office, or retail outlet shall provide off-street loading and
unloading space with adequate ingress and egress. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street in any C-3 Zone. Each off-street loading
and unloading space shall measure 15 feet by 45 feet and be so located
that any vehicles being loaded or maneuvering into a loading space do not
interfere with any other parking or loading areas, driveway, fire lane, or
street right-of-way.
§ Z-408. C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL.
§ Z-408.1. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
§ Z-408.2. Accessory Uses and Buildings Permitted.
Those uses customarily incidental to the principal uses.
§ Z-408.3. Height Limits.
No structure shall exceed 40 feet in height except as provided in Article VI,
Standards for Review of Applications.
§ Z-408.4. Area and Yard Requirements.
receiving plus one space for every 700 square feet of gross floor area
used for other purposes.
A. through C. (Reserved)
B. See § 515.
A. Offices.
B. Parks and playgrounds.
C. Buildings used exclusively by federal, state, county and local
governments.
D. The wholesaling and retailing of goods or services including the
warehousing or storage of goods provided such activities and
inventories are conducted entirely within an enclosed structure or are
conducted in open yard areas which are adequately screened from view
from adjacent lots or roads.
E. See Non-Conforming Uses, Buildings or Lots.
F. Light industry as defined under Article II, Definitions.
A. The minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet. The minimum lot
width shall be 150 feet and a minimum lot depth of 200 feet.
§ Z-407.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-408.4
AO:536
§ Z-408.5. Minimum Residential Floor Area.
Not applicable in this district.
§ Z-408.6. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements.
§ Z-408.7. Signs.
§ Z-408.8. Minimum Off-Street Loading.
B. No building or structure shall be located closer than 25 feet to any
street right-of-way.
C. The minimum side yard shall be 20 feet, but in no event shall either side
yard be less than the height of the building or structure. The minimum
rear yard shall be 20 feet which may include parking spaces.
D. Total building or structure coverage shall not exceed 50% of the lot
coverage provided all parking and other yard requirements are met.
E. A transition or buffer strip not less than 10 feet wide consisting of
conifers shall be provided along all lot lines which form a common
boundary with any residential district. The conifers shall be a minimum
of five feet in height when newly planted and shall be planted at
intervals of 10 feet or less.
A. See § 509.
B. Off-street parking space shall be located within 200 feet of the use it is
intended to serve.
C. One space shall be provided for each 700 square feet of general
commercial or office use and one space for each 3,000 square feet of
wholesale use.
A. Same as C-2 District.
A. Same as C-2 District.
§ Z-408.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-408.8
AO:537

ARTICLE V
Additional Requirements and Performance Standards
[Renamed by Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-500. DEVIATIONS FROM ARTICLE V STANDARDS AND
GUIDELINES. [Ord. 2001-07; Ord. No. 16-2011]
Deviations from the performance and design standards of Article V shall
be considered as exceptions within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51;
provided however, that any deviation from Section 519 and the subsections
thereto related to steep slopes shall be considered as variances pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60(a) and/or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
§ Z-501. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-501.1. Location of Parking.
An accessory building or a private parking area shall not be located in any
required front yard space, except that nothing shall prohibit an owner of a
home from counting his driveway as one parking space per dwelling unit
and except further that any driveway in excess of 10% slope shall not be
considered as off-street parking. If erected on a corner lot, it shall be set
back from the side street to comply with the setback line applying to the
principal building for that side street.
§ Z-501.2. Distance from Adjacent Building and Property Line.
The minimum distance of any accessory building from a property line or
adjacent building on the same lot shall be five feet.
§ Z-501.3. Accessory Buildings as Part of Principal Buildings.
Accessory buildings may be erected as part of a principal building provided
that all yard requirements of this Ordinance for the principal building
including the attached accessory building are complied with.
§ Z-501.4. Accessory Buildings Not to be Constructed Prior to
Principal Buildings.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no building permit
shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the construction of the main building
to which the accessory building is accessory. If construction of the main
building does not precede or take place at the same time with the
construction of the accessory building the Construction Official shall have
cause to revoke the building permit for the principal and accessory
buildings.
§ Z-501.5. (Reserved)
§ Z-500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-501.6
AO:539
§ Z-501.6. Campers and Boats. [Ord. No. 99-13, renumbered by Ord.
No. 2001-07]
Campers and boats may be stored in rear or side yards provided their
locations meet the yard setback requirements for accessory buildings in
their respective zoning districts. Campers and boats may not be occupied
when stored and may be used only for temporary shelter for recreational or
leisure purposes.
§ Z-502. APPEARANCE OF BUILDINGS.
Within any residential district, no building shall be constructed or altered
in a manner so that its exterior design and appearance is not compatible
and harmonious with a normal exterior residential appearance. Typical
commercial and store front designs are prohibited.
§ Z-503. BUILDING IDENTIFICATION.
All principal building in all districts shall be clearly identified as to building
number, house number, street number, or name, by means of a small
unobstructed sign clearly visible and legible from the main abutting street
attached to either the outer most door, porch column, or lamppost. The
house number, street number, or name shall be as assigned by the building
inspector upon approval of the building plans.
§ Z-504. CONFORMITY TO AREA REGULATIONS.
Except as previously or hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
relocate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, structurally alter, or use any
buildings, structure, or land except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which such building or structure is located in accordance with
§§ 600, 601 and 602 of this Ordinance. See also § 508.
§ Z-505. CONTINUING EXISTING USES.
Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building or structure, existing at
the time of the enactment of this Ordinance may be continued, even though
such use, building or structure may not conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance for the district in which it is located. See § 508.
§ Z-506. CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS.
The conversion of any building into a dwelling or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units
or families, shall be permitted only within a district in which the new
building or similar occupancy would be permitted under this Ordinance
providing all requirements for that zoning district are also met and only
when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing
new construction in such district.
§ Z-507. FENCES AND WALLS. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-501.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-507.1
AO:540
§ Z-507.1. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
The following regulations shall apply to any fences and walls:
§ Z-507.2. Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
The following additional regulations shall apply to fences and walls in
residential districts:
A. Clear Sight Distance. In any district on any corner lot, no fence, wall, or
other structure or continuous planting shall be erected or maintained at
a height exceeding three feet above road grade at the gutter line for a
distance of 30 from the intersection of curblines or edge of pavement in
the absence of such curbs.
B. Finished Side. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a
manner that the finished or non-structural side shall face abutting
properties.
C. Prohibited Materials. No fence or wall shall be erected of barbed wire,
topped with metal spikes, broken bottles and glass, nor constructed of
any material or in any manner which may be dangerous to persons or
animals.
D. Location of Fencing. Fences and walls may be placed with the outer
face located on the property line.
E. Stormwater Flow. Fences and walls shall be erected to avoid damming
or diverting the natural flow of water and shall be integrated into a
grading plan, where appropriate, that provides for the adequate flow of
storm water.
A. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or altered so
that said wall or fence shall be over three feet in height in front yard
areas and six feet in height in side and rear yard areas except:
1. A dog run may have fencing a maximum of seven feet in height
provided such area is located in rear yard areas only and is set back
from any lot line at least five feet.
2. A deer protection fence consisting of wooden poles with horizontal
stretched wire a maximum height of eight feet in R-C and R-L
Districts shall be permitted.
3. A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be
surrounded by a fence a maximum of 12 feet in height; said fence to
be set back from any lot line the distances required for accessory
buildings in the zoning district as stipulated in Article IV, Zoning.
B. A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a
fence at least four feet, but no more than six feet, in height, with no
opening that permits the passage of a four inch sphere. Any passage
§ Z-507.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-507.2
AO:541
§ Z-507.3. Non-Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
The following additional regulations shall apply to fences and walls in nonresidential
districts:
§ Z-508. NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS OR LOTS.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the lawful use of land existing
at the date of the adoption of this Ordinance may be continued although
such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for
the zone in which such land, building or structures are located, provided,
however, that no existing land, buildings or structures are devoted to a
use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which such lands,
buildings or structures are located, shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, substituted, relocated, erected, converted to
another use, or structurally altered except in conformity with the
regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which such land, building
or structures are located except as allowed in §§ 601 and 602. Also, land on
which a non-conforming building is located shall not be reduced in size, nor
shall any lot already non-conforming be made more non-conforming in any
manner.
§ Z-508.1. Abandonment.
A non-conforming use as defined in the preceding section shall be
considered abandoned if such non-conforming use is terminated by the
owner or tenant of if the owner or tenant shall fail to use the property for
the non-conforming use for a period of 12 consecutive months this shall be
presumptive evidence of such abandonment and thereafter such building,
structure and/or land shall not be used in a non-conforming manner.
§ Z-508.2. Conversion to Permitted Use.
Any non-conforming building or use which has been changed to a
conforming use shall not be changed back again to a non-conforming
building or use.
through the fence shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching
gate.
A. Height. Fences shall be limited to six feet in height except that they may
be increased to eight feet when adjacent to another non-residential use.
Walls shall be limited to six feet in height.
B. Landscape Plan. Fencing and walls for all uses requiring site plan
approval shall be considered within the overall context of a landscape
plan that considers the function and aesthetic quality of the fencing or
wall.
§ Z-507.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-508.3
AO:542
§ Z-508.3. Restoration.
Any non-conforming building or use which has been destroyed by fire,
explosion, flood, windstorm, or other act of God shall be examined by the
following three people to determine whether the building is more than 90%
destroyed: 1) Construction Official; 2) the owner or an architect or engineer
selected by the owner; and 3) a third person agreed to by the Construction
Official and the owner. If in the opinion of a majority of these three people
the damage is greater than 90%, the building or use shall be considered
completely destroyed, and shall not be rebuilt, restored, or repaired unless
in conformity to the building and use requirements of this Ordinance.
§ Z-508.4. Repairs and Alterations.
Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep a building in sound
condition may be made to a non-conforming building or structure, provided
no structural alterations shall be made except such as are required by law.
§ Z-508.5. Sale of Non-Conforming Use.
Any non-conforming use may change ownership and continue to function as
the same non-conforming use provided the other provisions of this section
are met.
§ Z-508.6. Lots Existing Prior to November 15, 1971.
Any lot existing prior to November 15, 1971 which does not meet the
minimum lot size, or a building which does not meet all the yard
requirements, may be utilized or may have additions to the principal
building and/or construct an accessory use without an appeal to the Board
of Adjustment provided: 1) the total permitted building coverage for the
existing or new structure(s) and the accessory building and/or addition is
not exceeded; and 2) the new or accessory building and/or addition do not
violate any other requirements of this Ordinance.
§ Z-509. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. [Renumbered by
Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-509.1. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
All sites within the municipality shall be provided with adequate parking
facilities for residents, visitors, employees and customers, including but
not limited to access ways, driveways, drive aisles, internal parking lot
collectors, loading areas, parking bays, parking garages and pedestrian
walkways sufficient to ensure the safe and efficient movement of people,
vehicles, and goods. All parking facilities shall be adequately drained,
screened from the public right-of-way and adequately landscaped as
required in this section. All minimum requirements for off-street parking
shall be met at the time of erection or enlargement of any building or
structure.
§ Z-508.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-509.2
AO:543
§ Z-509.2. Prohibited Principal Use. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
No parking lot or structure shall be permitted as the principal use of a lot
unless owned by a governmental entity or agency.
§ Z-509.3. (Reserved)
§ Z-509.4. (Reserved)
§ Z-509.5. (Reserved)
§ Z-509.6. (Reserved)
§ Z-509.7. Parking Lot Interconnection. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
Parking areas for individual non-residential uses shall be designed to be
interconnected with adjacent properties and shall utilize common
entrance(s) and exit(s) where feasible, to minimize access points to the
street. Such interconnection shall be established through an appropriate
cross-access easement either unilaterally established by one party or by
mutual agreement. The cross-access easement shall be approved by the
attorney for the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ Z-509.8. Parking Lot Design. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
Parking lots shall be designed to control access to public streets in
appropriate locations, minimize conflict points between vehicles and
vehicles and pedestrians, minimize direct access to parking spaces from
access driveways, provide adequate landscaping for the screening of parked
vehicles from public view and shade over the lot, and control storm water
runoff.
A. Vehicle Overhang. Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked
vehicles shall not overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an
additional two feet in width is provided in order to accommodate such
overhang. Parking areas or driveways shall be designed with sufficient
depth such that no vehicle overhang shall occur over the streetline by
passenger vehicles.
B. Parking areas shall not be an extension of any street right-of-way.
C. Parking areas shall not exceed a 10% slope.
D. Tree Retention. Parking facilities shall be designed to minimize the
removal of any tree eight inches in caliper or larger.
E. Markings and Signage. All off-street parking lots shall have adequate
pavement markings and signage to indicate traffic flow and parking
spaces subject to the Board of Jurisdiction.
F. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required pursuant to § 510.
§ Z-509.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-509.9
AO:544
§ Z-509.9. Required Loading. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
Each business or service establishment shall have access to a loading and
unloading space within 300 feet of the premises. An adequate guarantee
shall be provided that establishes a right to the loading and unloading use,
unless such space is provided by a public entity.
§ Z-509.10. (Reserved)
§ Z-509.11. Driveway Standards. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
Driveways providing access to parking spaces and the interior of lots shall
meet the requirements as indicated in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2 Driveway Standards
Driveway
Requirement
Single and Two-
Family
Residential Use
Multi-family, Mixed or Non-
Residential Use
One-Way Two-Way
Minimum Width 9 feet 12 feet 18 feet
Maximum Width 12 feet 18 feet 25 feet
Maximum Slope 15% 12% 12%
Minimum
Distance from
Street
Intersection(1)
25 feet 20 feet ingress,
25 feet egress
25 feet
Minimum
Distance from
Side Lot Line(2)
3 feet 5 feet 5 feet
(1) - Measured from the edge of paving to right-of-way line
(2) - Measured from long side of driveway to lot line. Does not apply to
shared driveways
§ Z-509.12. Surfacing and Curbing. [Ord. No. 2001-07]
A. Business or service establishments occupying a lot of 15,000 square
feet or larger shall provide off-street loading and unloading space on
the premises.
B. Each off-street loading area shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 35 feet.
C. The loading area shall be so arranged to avoid impairment to the
circulation system of parking spaces, parking aisles, points of ingress
and egress, and streets.
A. All-Weather Surface. All driveways and off-street parking spaces shall
be surfaced with a bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete so
§ Z-509.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-509.12
AO:545
§ Z-510. LANDSCAPING.31 [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-510.1. General Provisions.
The following general provisions shall apply to the installation and design
of landscapes:
as to provide an all-weather surface, drained, and dust free in
accordance with the street specifications of the Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of Lambertville. For parking lots of 10 spaces or less serving
non-retail sales uses, the approving authority may approve parking
utilizing alternative porous materials.
B. Curbing. All off-street parking lots, traffic islands, and other traffic
channelization devices shall be curbed with portland cement concrete
or Belgian Block with a minimum reveal of six inches or as directed by
the City Engineer. A full length depressed curb shall be installed along
the gutterline of all non-residential driveways at their intersection with
a public cartway. Such depressed curb shall have a minimum reveal of
1 1/2 inches or as directed by the City Engineer.
A. All land areas not covered with buildings, parking, or other impervious
surfaces shall be landscaped with suitable materials. Landscaping shall
consist of trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, and annuals singly or
in common as well as inanimate materials such as rocks, water,
sculpture, art, walls, fences, and paving materials.
B. A landscape design shall be provided as part of site plan and
subdivision submissions. Every applicant for subdivision or site plan
approval shall comply with the minimum standards as set forth in this
section.
C. The Board of Jurisdiction may require additional landscaping to create
an appropriate landscaping scheme for the site given the nature of the
site and the proposed development.
D. Where subdivisions only are applied for, the minimum standards shall
apply only to street trees and to common open space and areas
proposed to be dedicated to the public.
E. All landscape plants shall be typical in size and weight for their species
and shall conform to the standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen for quality and installation.
F. Plants with pervasive root systems shall not be located where they may
cause damage to drainage pipes or other underground utilities and
storm water management facilities and should generally be no closer
than 10 feet measured horizontally.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 510, Pending Applications for Building Permits, repealed by Ord.
No. 2001-07.
§ Z-509.12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.1
AO:546
§ Z-510.2. Landscape Design Guidelines.
§ Z-510.3. Street Trees.
G. All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions. The use of
indigenous species is strongly encouraged. Exotic, non-native invasive
plant species are strongly discouraged.
A. Landscaping shall be conceived holistically and be designed to achieve
a thorough integration of the various elements of site design, including
building and parking placement, the natural features of the site and the
preservation of pleasing or aesthetic views. Landscaping shall be used
to accent and complement the form and type of building proposed.
B. In the landscape design of sites, areas shall be designated for retaining
existing trees and the replacement of trees cleared from the site.
C. Landscaping shall be located to provide effective climatic control. The
east and west walls of a building should be the most heavily vegetated
to shade for summer sun and the north to northwest area for winter
prevailing winds. The southerly facing side of a building should be
shaded from summer sun but open for solar gain during the winter.
D. Plant's susceptibility to disease, their colors, textures, shapes,
blossoms, and foliage characteristics shall be considered in the overall
design of a landscape plan.
E. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in the
choice of landscaping.
F. In the design process, the eventual maturity of the plant shall be
considered for its effect on circulation patterns, solar access, site
lighting, drainage, emergency access and relationship to buildings and
the streetscape.
A. Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. Trees shall be spaced
evenly along the street between the curb and sidewalk. Where the
distance between the curb and sidewalk is less than five feet, sidewalks
should be placed in a public access easement outside of the right-of-way
to create a planting strip at least five feet wide to facilitate street tree
growth. In areas with wider sidewalks that extend to the curb, trees
shall be placed in tree wells with root guard systems. Such tree wells
shall have sufficient soil volume to support tree growth as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity
(height in feet)
Soil Volume
(in cubic feet)
Large trees (45'+) 200
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 150
Small trees (to 30') 100
§ Z-510.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.3
AO:547
Areas under sidewalks may be used to meet the soil volume
requirement provided no more than 50% of the volume is located
under such hard paving.
B. Spacing. When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along
streets, spacing shall depend on tree size.
Tree Size at Maturity
(height in feet)
Planting Interval
(in feet)
Large trees (45'+) 40
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 30
Small trees (to 30') 20
Trees may be planted closer together in order to avoid interference
with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, and street lights.
C. Street Tree Type. Tree type may vary depending on overall effect
desired but as a general rule, all street trees shall be large deciduous
trees except as needed to achieve special effects. Tree selection shall be
approved by the Board in accordance with Tables 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5.
Native species are marked with an asterisk. Alternate selections may be
approved at the discretion of the Board with input from the Shade Tree
Commission.
Table 5.3 Recommended Small Street Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Acer campestre Hedge Maple 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Acer ginnala Amur Maple 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Amelanchier x
hydrida 'Cumulus'
Shadblow 'Cumulus' 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Acer buergeranum Trident Maple 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Crataegus
phaenopyrum x.
fastigiata*
Washington
Hawthorne
2 1/2"-3" cal.
Crataegus viridis* Green Hawthorne 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Magnolia x lobneri
'Merrill'*
Merrill Magnolia 10'-12'
Malus baccata Siberian Crabapple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Malus x zumi
'Calocarpa'
Zumi Crabapple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac 10'-12'
*Native species
§ Z-510.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.3
AO:548
Table 5.4 Recommended Medium Street Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Acer rubrum
'Northwood'*
Northwood Red
Maple
2 1/2"-3" cal.
Acer rubrum
'Scanlon'*
Scanlon Red Maple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Acer saccharum
'Goldspire'*
Goldspire Sugar
Maple
3"-3 1/2" cal.
Celtis bungeana* Bunge Hackberry 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Cladratis lutea* Yellowwood 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Carpinus caroliniana* American Hornbeam 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Malus baccata
'Manchurian'
Manchurian
Crabapple
3"-3 1/2" cal.
Phellodendron
amurense
Amur Corktree 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Tilia cordata x.
'Whitehouse'*
Whitehouse Linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
* Native species
Table 5.5 Recommended Large Street Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Acer rubrum 'October
Glory'*
October Glory red
maple
3"-3 1/2" cal.
Acer rubrum 'Red
Sunset'*
Red Sunset red maple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Celtis occidentalis
'Magnifica'*
Hackberry 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Fraxinus americana
'Autumn Purple'*
Autumn purple ash 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Ginkgo biloba (male
only)
Ginkgo 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Platanus acerifolia London Planetree 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Platanus occidentalis* Sycamore 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Quercus coccinea* Scarlet Oak 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Quercus marcocarpa* Bur Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Quercus phellos* Willow Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Quercus rubra* Red Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
§ Z-510.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.3
AO:549
§ Z-510.4. Additional Recommended Trees.
Any of the trees noted in Tables 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 may be used in the design
of landscapes as well as their use as street trees. The trees in Table 5.6 are
recommended for site development purposes:
Table 5.6 Additional Recommended Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Acer palmatum Japanese Maple 6'-7'
Acer saccharum * Sugar Maple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Betula pendula Weeping Birch 12'-14'
Cedrus atlantica glauca Blue Atlas Cedar 6'-8'
Cercidiphyllum
japonicum
Katsura-tree 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Cercis canadensis* Eastern Redbud 6'-8'
Cornus kousa Chinese Dogwood 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Crataegus crusgalli
inermis*
Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorn
2"-2 1/2" cal.
Table 5.5 Recommended Large Street Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Sophora japonica
'Regent'
Scholartree 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tilia americana
'Redmond'*
Redmond Linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tilia x euchlora Crimean linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tilia tomentosa
'Green Mountain'
Silver linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Zelkova serrata
'Village Green'
Japanese zelkova 3"-3 1/2" cal.
* Native species
D. Planting Specifications. All trees shall have a minimum caliper as noted
in the appropriate table in this section unless otherwise exempted.
Street trees shall be substantially uniform in size and shape, and have
straight trunks. Trees shall be properly planted and staked in
accordance with standards promulgated by the American Nurserymen's
Association. Provision shall be made by the developer for regular
watering and maintenance until trees are established. Dead or dying
trees shall be replaced by the developer during the next suitable
planting season.
§ Z-510.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.4
AO:550
Table 5.6 Additional Recommended Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Cryptomeria japonica Cryptomeria 5'-6'
Diospyros virginiana Common Persimmon 1 1/2" - 2" cal.
Fagus grandifolia* American Beech 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Fagus atropinicea Copper Beech 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Gleditsia triacanthos
inermis*
Thornless Honeylocust 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Ilex opaca* American Holly 6'-7'
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Rain Tree 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Liquidambar
styraciflua*
Sweetgum 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Liriodendron tulipifera* Tulip Poplar 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Metasequoia
glyptostroboides
Dawn Redwood 8'-10'
Ostrya virginiana* Hop hornbeam 1 1/2"-2" cal.
Oxydendrum
arboreum*
Sourwood 6'-8'
Picea abies (excelsa) Norway Spruce 5'-6'
Picea omorika Serbian Spruce 5'-6'
Pinus strobus* White Pine 5'-6'
Pinus thunbergiana Japanese Black Pine 5'-6'
Pinus virginiana* Virginia Pine 5'-6'
Populus balsamifera Balsam Poplar 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Prunus cerasifera Flowering Plum 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Prunus serrulata White Cherry 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Pseudolarix kaempferi Golden Larch 8'-10'
Pseudotsuga menziesii* Douglas Fir 5'-6'
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Quercus alba* White Oak 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Quercus palustris* Pin Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tilia cordata
'Greenspire'
Greenspire Linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tilia tomentosa 'Green
Mountain'
Silver Linden 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Tsuga canadensis* Canadian Hemlock 5'-6'
§ Z-510.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.4
AO:551
Table 5.6 Additional Recommended Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum Planting
Size
Ulmus americana
'Delaware'*
American Elm,
'Delaware'
3"-3 1/2" cal.
* Native species
§ Z-510.5. Fall Planting Hazard.
Certain trees have been identified as having a high degree of
transplantation failure if installed during the Fall season. These should be
noted on landscape plans as "Spring planting season only". The Fall planting
hazard trees include the following genus and/or species:
Betula
Carpinus
Crataegus
Ilex opaca
Liquidambar styraciflua
Liriodendron tulipifera
Pyrus
Quercus, excluding Q. palustris
Salix babylonica
Tilia tomentosa
Zelkova
§ Z-510.6. Recommended Shrubs.
The following shrubs are recommended for site development use:
Table 5.7 Recommended Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Abelia grandiflora Glossy Abelia 18"-24"
Aronia arbtutifolia
brilliantissima*
Red Chokeberry 2'-3'
Azalea delaware valley* Delaware Valley Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea exbury Exbury Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea hino-crimson Hino-Crimson Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea stewartsonia Stewartson Azalea 18"-24"
Berberis julianae Wintergreen Barberry 18"-24"
§ Z-510.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.6
AO:552
Table 5.7 Recommended Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry 18"-24"
Clethra alnifloia* Summersweet 15"-18"
Cornus alba sibirica Siberian Dogwood 3'-4'
Cornus stolonifera lutea Yellowtwig 3'-4'
Cotoneaster apiculata Cranberry Cotoneaster 12"-18"
Cotoneaster salicifolia repens Park Carpet
Cotoneaster
12"-18"
Deutzia gracilis Slender Deutzia 18"-24"
Euonymous alata Dwarf Winged
Euonymous
4'-5'
Euonymous alatus compactus Winged Euonymous 3'-4'
Euonymous fortunei vegetus Bigleaf Wintercreeper 18"-24"
Fothergilla gardenii Dwarf Fothergilla 12"-18"
Fothergilla major* Large Fothergilla 12"-18"
Hamamelis virginiana* Witch Hazel 4'-5'
Hibiscus syriacus Rose of Sharon 18"-24"
Hydrangea paniculata
grandiflora*
PeeGee Hydrangea 18"-24"
Ilex crenata hellerei Dwarf Japanese Holly 18"-24"
Ilex glabra* Inkberry 18"-24"
Ilex glabra compacta* Compact Inkberry 18"-24"
Juniperus chinensis glauca
hetzi
Hetz Juniper 2 1/2'-3'
Juniperus chinensis
pfitzeriana compacta
Compact Pfitzer Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus chinensis torulosa Torulosa Juniper 4'-5'
Juniperus horizontalis bar
harbor
Bar Harbor Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus horizontalis
plumosa
Andorra Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus horizontalis wiltoni Blue Rug Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus sargenti Sargent Juniper 15"-18"
Kalmia latiflora* Mountain Laurel 15"-18"
Leucothoe axillaris* Coast Leucothoe 18"-24"
§ Z-510.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.6
AO:553
Table 5.7 Recommended Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Ligustrum ibolium Ibolium Privet 2'-3'
Lonicera fragantissima Winter Honeysuckle 2'-3'
Magnolia soulangiana Saucer Magnolia 8'-10'
Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia 6'-8'
Magnolia virginiana* Sweetbay Magnolia 6'-8'
Myrica pensylvanica* Northern Bayberry 4'-5'
Philadelphus virginalis Virginal Mockorange 2'-3'
Picea excelsa nidiformis Birdnest spruce #1 can
Pieris japonica Japanese Andromeda 15"-18"
Pinus montana mughus Mugho Pine 18"-24"
Potentilla fruticosa* Bush Cinquefoil 12"-18"
Pyracantha fiery cascade Fiery Cascade
Firethorn
18"-24"
Rhododendron catawbienese* Catawba
Rhododendron
2'-3'
Rhododendron maximum
roseum*
Rosebay Rhododendron 2'-3'
Spirea vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea 3'-4'
Spirea bumalda 'anthony
waterer'
Anthony Waterer
Spirea
18"-24"
Spirea nipponica
'Snowmound'
Snowmound Spirea 18"-24"
Syringa vulgaris* Common Purple Lilac 5'-6'
Taxus baccata repandens English Yew 18"-24"
Taxus cuspidata densiformis Dense Yew 3 1/2'-4'
Taxus media hicksi Hicks Yew 18"-24"
Thuja occidentalis nigra* Dark American
Arborvitae
5'-6'
Viburnum burkwoodi Burkwood Viburnum 18"-24"
Viburnum carlesi Fragrant Viburnum 3'-3 1/2'
Viburnum dentatum* Arrowwood 2'-3'
Viburnum rhytidophyllum Leatherleaf Viburnum 5'-6'
Viburnum tomentosum Doublefile Viburnum 5'-6'
* Native species
§ Z-510.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.7
AO:554
§ Z-510.7. Recommended Plants for Wet Conditions.
The following plants in Table 5.8 are recommended for wetlands, flood
plains, and stormwater management facilities:
Table 5.8 Trees and Shrubs Recommended for Wet Conditions.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer negundo* Boxelder 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Acer rubrum* Red Maple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Acer saccharinum* Silver Maple 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Alnus serrulata* Smooth Alder 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Amelanchier alleghiensis* Allegheny Serviceberry 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Amelanchier canadensis* Shadblow (Downy
Serviceberry)
2 1/2"-3" cal.
Aronia arbutifolia* Red Chokeberry 2'-3'
Aronia melanocarpa* Black Chokeberry 2'-3'
Betula nigra* River Birch 10'-12'
Betula populifolia* Gray Birch 10'-12'
Celphalanthus
occidentalis*
Buttonbush 2'-3'
Clethra alnifolia* Summersweet 18"-24"
Cornus amomum* Silky Dogwood 3'-4'
Cornus sericea* Red Osier Dogwood 3'-4'
Fraxinus pennsyanicum* Green Ash 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Ilex glabra* Inkberry Holly 18"-24"
Ilex verticillata* Winterberry Holly 18"-24"
Itea virginica* Virginia Sweetspire 12"-15"
Lindera benzoin* Spicebush 18"-24"
Liquidambar styraciflora* Sweetgum 3-3 1/2" cal.
Magnolia virgineana* Sweetbay magnolia 6'-8'
Nyssa sylvatica* Black Gum 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Platanus occidentalis* Sycamore 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Quercus bicolor* Swamp White Oak 2 1/2"-3" cal.
Quercus palustris* Pin Oak 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Rhododendron viscosum* Swamp Azalea 18"-24"
Rosa palustris* Swamp Rose 18"-24"
Salix discolor* Pussy Willow 3'-4'
§ Z-510.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.7
AO:555
Table 5.8 Trees and Shrubs Recommended for Wet Conditions.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Salix babylonica* Weeping Willow 3"-3 1/2" cal.
Salix nigra* Black Willow 2"-2 1/2" cal.
Sambucus canadensis* Elderberry 2'-3'
Vaccinium corymbosium* Highbush Blueberry 2'-3'
Viburnum dentatum* Arrowwood Viburnum 2'-3'
* Native species
§ Z-510.8. Buffers.
Landscaping buffers are areas required to minimize and visually screen any
adverse impacts or nuisances on a site or from any adjacent area.
A. General requirements.
1. Landscape buffers shall consist of a combination of deciduous
trees, conifers, shrubs, and if appropriate, fences or walls in
sufficient quantities and sizes to perform their necessary screening
function.
2. Buffers may be installed in required yard areas except for reverse
frontage buffers where they shall be in addition to the required
yard area.
3. Buffers shall be continuous except for access drives as approved by
the Board of Jurisdiction. Storm water management facilities,
parking, dumpster enclosures, accessory building or above ground
structures, and similar encroachments shall not be permitted in the
required buffer area.
B. The minimum width of a landscape buffer shall be dependent on the
proposed use of a property and the land uses adjacent to it in
accordance with Table 5.9.
Table 5.9 Required Minimum Buffer Widths.
Adjacent Land Use
Proposed
Land Use
Residential
Type A(1)
Residential
Type B(2)
CBD Retail/
Office
Other
Retail/Office
Institutional/
Quasi-public Industrial
Residential
Type A(1)
None None 10 feet 15 feet None 25 feet
Residential
Type B(2)
None None 5 feet 10 feet None. 25 feet
§ Z-510.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.8
AO:556
§ Z-510.9. Parking and Loading Area Landscaping.
The objectives of the landscape architectural treatment of all parking areas
shall be to provide for safe and convenient movement of vehicles, to limit
pedestrian/vehicular conflicts, to limit paved areas, to provide for screening
from the public right-of-way and adjacent buildings, to reduce the overall
visual impact of parking lots, and to provide shade and reduce heat island
effects. All non-residential parking lots and residential parking lots in
excess of five spaces shall conform to the following requirements:
Adjacent Land Use
Proposed
Land Use
Residential
Type A(1)
Residential
Type B(2)
CBD Retail/
Office
Other
Retail/Office
Institutional/
Quasi-public Industrial
CBD Retail/
Office
10 feet 5 feet None None None 15 feet
Other Retail/
Office
15 feet 10 feet None None None 15 feet
Institutional/
Quasi-public
15 feet 10 feet None None None 25 feet
Industrial 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 15 feet 25 feet None
(1) - Residential Type A equals single family detached, duplex and semi-detached dwellings.
(2) - Residential Type B equals all other dwellings except those in institutional settings, i.e. residential
health care facilities, skilled nursing facilities and assisted living facilities. The Institutional category
shall apply to these exceptions.
C. Required buffer widths may be reduced by five feet in width if an
opaque fence or wall is used in conjunction with plantings and is
sufficiently high to visually obstruct the view of persons at ground level.
See § 507 for fence and wall regulations.
A. The minimum width of landscape islands shall be eight feet on the side
of parking spaces and 10 feet between parking bays. If sidewalks are
incorporated through the long axis of the landscape islands, their width
shall be added to these requirements. Where the parking lot design will
result in pedestrians cutting perpendicularly through landscape
islands, sidewalks shall be installed at regular intervals through its
short axis.
B. Landscape islands within parking lots shall be planted with a
combination of deciduous trees, evergreen and deciduous shrubs, and
ground cover at the rate of six large or medium trees, four small or
ornamental trees and 60 shrubs per 100 lineal feet along the long axis
of the island.
C. Parking and loading areas shall be screened by a combination of
hedges, fences and/or walls. The minimum screening height at planting
§ Z-510.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.9
AO:557
§ Z-510.10. Historic District Landscaping.
Landscape design within the Lambertville Historic District and historic
sites outside of the district shall encourage the preservation of historic
resources and natural amenities and areas of unique character within the
landscape. This may include, but is not limited to, bodies of water, streams,
windbreaks, groves of trees, hedge rows, orchards, unique vistas, historic
structures and landmarks. Redevelopment in the Lambertville Historic
District shall be designed to preserve and utilize cultural resources of the
historic landscape.
§ Z-510.11. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements.
shall be 2 1/2 feet and shall have a height of at least four feet within
three years of installation. Loading dock areas shall be screened with
a minimum height of six feet at planting and shall achieve a height of
at least 10 feet five years after installation. Land use mitigation buffers
pursuant to Table 5.11 may be used to meet these requirements.
D. Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape islands, however,
without hindering necessary lighting coverage. See also § 511 for
lighting requirements.
E. No more than 20 parking spaces shall be placed in one row of parking
without an intervening landscape island.
A. Topsoil Preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to provide at least
four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of the development and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
B. Removal of Debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds,
excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed
from the site and disposed of in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection regulations. No tree stumps,
portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the
development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be
removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they
may, subject to approval of the City Engineer, be used as mulch in
landscaped areas, provided they have been properly composted.
C. Slope Plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes
steeper than 3:1 shall be planted with ground covers appropriate for
the purpose and soil conditions, water availability, and environment.
D. Additional Landscaping. In residential developments, besides the
screening and street trees required, additional plantings or landscaping
elements shall be required throughout the subdivision where necessary
for climate control, privacy, or for aesthetic reasons in accordance with
a typical planting plan approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ Z-510.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.11
AO:558
§ Z-510.12. Tree Protection Standards.
E. Planting Details. Planting details shall be consistent with the American
Nurserymen's Association recommendations as they may be amended
or superseded.
A. Standards for Tree Retention. The following standards shall apply to all
trees regardless of location:
1. Existing trees on a site contemplated for development shall be
retained to the greatest feasible extent.
2. In off-street parking areas and storm water management facilities,
islands of trees shall be retained. These requirements shall not
pertain to individual single family detached and two-family
dwellings.
3. No paving of any impervious nature shall be placed within the
dripline of any tree, and the grade shall be such that drainage of
rainwater will water the root area without pooling or exceeding the
requirements of the species. Excess water shall be admitted to
storm sewers in the parking lot or drained by other means
acceptable to the City Engineer.
4. Any live tree which is substantially damaged as a result of grading
or general construction shall be replaced with another tree. A tree
shall be substantially damaged when 1/2 or more of the tree bark is
destroyed below four feet or the trunk is girdled.
5. Any tree used in a required planting, or to replace a damaged tree,
shall have a trunk or main stem which is at least 2.5 inches in
caliper in accordance with the specifications herein, unless the tree
is used for storm water management facility plantings, and shall
meet the specifications of the American Nurserymen's Association
standards.
6. Existing trees are encouraged to be used for the required buffer
zone of trees and shrubs to be established in accordance with
§ 510.8.
7. Trees in the area between the street line and the setback line of the
building shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
8. Specimen trees in excess of 24 inches in diameter, measured 4 1/2
feet above grade, shall not be removed unless diseased or
constitute a hazard to the general public.
9. No trees on public rights-of-way, parks, or public areas are to be
removed by private individuals except as approved by the
Administrative Officer or other officer designated by the Governing
Body. The removal of trees shall not be permitted from a Master
Plan right-of-way unless trees are dead, diseased, or endanger life
§ Z-510.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.12
AO:559
or property, or a letter of approval is obtained from the Governing
Body or Administrative Officer. Conversely, no trees are to be
planted on public rights-of-way without express approval granted
as part of a site plan or subdivision application or by the
Administrative Officer.
B. Methods of Tree Protection. All persons shall exercise due care to
protect trees which are to be retained from damage during
construction. Critical root zones shall be protected by the use of fencing
located at the dripline in accordance with the City of Lambertville
engineering standards. The procedures in this subsection shall be
observed in order to protect retained trees, as follows:
1. Protection from mechanical injury.
a. Prior to any grubbing or clearing, all trees in the tree
protection zone from its edge to a depth of 25 feet into the zone
shall be protected from equipment damage by enclosing the
area at the dripline. Individual trees to be retained shall be
completely encircled as required herein. All exposed roots,
trunks, and low lying branches shall be equally protected.
Groups of trees in an area to be retained after construction
may be protected by fencing the entire area where they are
located. Compaction of the ground by mechanical, vehicular,
storage of materials, or other means within the dripline shall
not be permitted.
b. Feeder roots shall not be cut within the dripline; however, if
feeder root cutting is waived in order to further other
objectives of this section, such cuts shall be made by hand with
pruning shears to produce sharp, clean cuts. Removal of feeder
roots by mechanized equipment shall not be permitted.
c. Tree trunks and exposed roots shall not be damaged. However,
accidental damage shall be addressed and action taken to
avoid further injury to the tree. Damaged branches shall be
sawed off at the branch collar. No shellac or pruning paint shall
be used. When the portion of the tree that is damaged is
diseased, pruning equipment shall be dipped in alcohol to
prevent further spread of disease.
d. Deciduous trees shall be given a liquid, slow-release, lownitrogen,
all-purpose fertilizer to aid in their recovery from
potential damage from construction activities. Such
application shall be made at a distance of one foot from the
trunk extending out in concentric circles to the dripline. The
fertilizer shall be injected into the ground at the time of the
cease of construction and one year thereafter.
e. Trees shall not be used for roping, cabling, signs, or fencing.
Nails and other fastening devices shall not be driven or
attached to the tree.
§ Z-510.12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-510.12
AO:560
f. The area in the critical root zone under the dripline shall be left
open to provide access for water and nutrients. No impervious
cover, storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill shall be
allowed within this area except as specifically approved by the
Board of Jurisdiction.
g. Trees being removed under the allowances in this section shall
not be felled, pushed, or pulled into a tree protection or tree
save area.
2. Protection from grade change.
a. Increase in grade. If an increase in the grade of the land is
proposed, the applicant shall install either:
(1) A system of gravel and drains at the old soil level which
opens into a dry well built around the trunk and
individually designed for the contour of the land to provide
aeration and drainage.
(2) A retaining wall between the existing grade and higher
grade to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
b. Lowering the grade. If a lowering of the grade is proposed one
of the following methods to protect the tree shall be followed:
(1) Terracing the grade at the dripline and out from the tree.
(2) A retaining wall between the existing grade and lower
grade to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
3. Protection from excavation. Trenches for utility lines or other
similar uses shall adhere to the following, listed in descending
order of preference:
a. Trenches shall bypass the critical root area unless the
approving authority determines that no other practical
alternative exists; in which case.
b. Trenches should be tunneled under the feeder roots a
minimum of two feet from existing grade, unless the approving
authority determines that no other practical alternative exists;
in which case
c. Trenches may be dug within the dripline of the tree, provided
that the following provisions shall be observed:
(1) Trenches shall be no closer to the trunk than half the
distance to the dripline.
(2) Roots shall be cut with sharp hand tools to reduce feeder
root damage.
§ Z-510.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-510.12
AO:561
§ Z-511. LIGHTING.32 [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-511.1. General Requirements.
§ Z-511.2. Street Lighting.
All public and private streets shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure
traffic and pedestrian safety under all weather conditions.
(3) The trench shall be backfilled within the shortest amount
of time possible and the soil shall not be compacted.
d. Protection during cleanup.
(1) All construction debris shall be hauled to an approved
landfill or recycling facility and shall not be buried or
burned.
(2) Snow fences, barriers or other tree protection devices
shall be the final item to be removed from the site prior to
occupancy.
A. Sufficient lighting shall be provided on each site or along roadways to
ensure the security of property and to protect the safety of persons
during the hours of sunset and sunrise when the establishment or
facility is in use.
B. Lighting shall be so designed to avoid the creation of hazards to
motorists and pedestrians or nuisance to adjoining property owners or
residents. Lighting directed towards the sky shall be designed to
prevent interference with commercial aviation routes.
C. Lighting levels, lamp color, and fixture type shall be consistent
throughout the parcel in question and shall complement building
architecture and landscaping.
D. Lighting shall be designed to minimize energy and maintenance
requirements and shall comply with the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 1992
as it may be amended or superseded.
E. Exterior lighting not building mounted shall be supplied by electricity
from underground cabling.
F. Lighting proposed for public streets shall be designed to be integrated
into the City's existing street lighting system.
A. Design Criteria. The design of street lighting shall take into
consideration:
1. The brightness of the abutting uses in comparison to pavement
brightness as seen by both motorists and pedestrians;
32.Editor's Note: Former § 511, Principal Use, repealed by Ord. No. 2001-07.
§ Z-510.12 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-511.2
AO:562
§ Z-511.3. Illumination for Surface Parking.
Parking lots shall be adequately lighted for both motorists and pedestrians
in accordance with Table 5.10.
Table 5.10 Minimum Illumination for Surface Parking
Activity Type
Vehicular Traffic
Footcandles
Pedestrian Walkway
Footcandles
Low activity 0.5 0.2
Medium activity 1.0 0.6
High activity and
intersections
2.0 0.9
2. The ability to discern objects on the street or its edge in
comparison to abutting uses; its brightness contrast;
3. The time available to the motorist and pedestrian to view such
objects;
4. The amount of direct glare from the luminaire or lamp and
reflected glare from the pavement.
B. Lighting Standard Placement. Lighting standards shall be located at the
following places:
1. At every street intersection.
2. At the end of each cul-de-sac.
3. At curves with an inside radius of less than 300 feet, unless the
standard is within 300 feet of another.
4. A maximum of every 600 feet on straight road segments.
C. Staggering. Light standards shall be staggered on both sides of the
roadway.
D. Fixture Type. In general, any street lamp type installed by the electric
service provider shall be permitted, subject to the approval of the
Department of Public Works, Parks and Public Property, taking into
account the existing lighting standards and cost of maintenance and
operation, provided that the illumination provided is greater than or
equal to the following:
1. A 100 watt lamp at each intersection and cul-de-sac; or, as directed
by the City Engineer for special circumstances; and
2. A 50 watt lamp at all other locations.
A. Lighting shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height not more
than 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured
from the ground level to the centerline of the light source.
§ Z-511.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-511.3
AO:563
§ Z-512. SOLID WASTE.33 [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-512.1. General Provisions.
All developments shall provide for adequate solid waste disposal, including
provisions for recycled materials.
§ Z-512.2. Requirements.
There shall be at least one trash and recycling pick-up location provided for
each multi-family or non-residential building which shall be separated from
parking spaces either inside or outside the building. All trash and recycling
locations shall be enclosed and located in a manner which is obscured
from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential; and nonresidential
uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination
of the three.
§ Z-512.3. Materials.
All exterior solid waste enclosures shall be constructed of materials
compatible with the architectural materials of the building.
§ Z-512.4. Location.
If located within the building, one door may serve both the loading and
trash/garbage functions and if located outside the building, it may be
located adjacent to or within the general loading area(s) provided the
container in no way interferes with or restricts loading and unloading
functions. Moreover, if located outside the building, the container shall be
situated on the same horizontal plane as the driveway providing access to
the container.
§ Z-513. SUBDIVISION LAYOUT.34 [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07]
B. Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow a determination of the effects upon adjacent properties,
traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objectives of these
specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine into building windows, nor onto streets and driveways so as
to interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve these
requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and
similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval. Wall
mounted fixtures are only permitted if directed into a site and not
positioned towards neighboring properties or public streets.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 512, Required Yards Cannot Be Used by Another Building,
repealed by Ord. No. 2001-07.
34.Editor's Note: Former § 513, Service Stations, repealed by Ord. No. 2001-07.
§ Z-511.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-513.1
AO:564
§ Z-513.1. General Requirements.
Subdivision layout shall be designed to encourage the development of the
land which, through the standards adopted in this Ordinance, provide for
flexibility in planning and development and that respect the natural
character of the land, its drainage system, soil capabilities, groundwater
and aquifer recharge quality, and existing uses on adjacent lands.
Compliance with this section shall be determined on the basis of inventories
of the natural features of the site, plans indicating the physical relationship
among types of uses and any natural or man made barriers, existing or
planned, between different uses both within and adjacent to the proposed
development. Subdivision plans shall be designed to meet these objectives
and the following design standards:
A. Lot Configuration. Lots shall be configured to meet the following
requirements:
1. Side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street lines.
2. Lots shall be regular in shape, with rectangular-shaped lots
preferred. The Board of Jurisdiction shall have the right to reject
irregularly shaped lots with unusual geometric configurations.
3. Pie slice-shaped lots are to be avoided except on a radius of less
than 100 feet.
4. Where extra width has been dedicated, or proposed for dedication
or reservation, for the widening of existing streets, lots shall begin
at such new street line and all setbacks shall be measured from
such line, unless modified by § 400.9.
5. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors, including but not limited to, steep
slopes, poor drainage, flood prone lands and wetlands, the Board of
Jurisdiction may withhold approval of such lots. If approval is
withheld, the Board shall give reasons for such withholding on the
record.
B. Blocks. Blocks shall be configured to meet the following requirements.
1. Blocks shall be wide enough for two tiers of lots and shall not be
less than 200 feet in width. This requirement shall not preclude the
appropriate design of alleys through blocks.
2. Blocks shall be designed to include no more than 24 residential
lots.
3. Blocks shall generally be not less than 300 feet long nor more than
600 feet long. Where for unusual reasons blocks in excess of 600
feet are approved by the Board of jurisdiction, the block shall
incorporate a mid-block pedestrian right-of-way at least 10 feet
wide connecting through the block to the right-of-ways. Pedestrian
§ Z-513.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-513.1
AO:565
§ Z-514. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
§ Z-514.1. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-514.2. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-514.3. Glare.
No use shall produce a strong dazzling light or a reflection of a strong
dazzling light beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be buffered so
that glare will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties or adjoining
districts.
§ Z-514.4. Heat.
No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines. Further, no
process shall be permitted which would cause the temperature to rise or fall
in any part of ponds, streams, or other water courses.
§ Z-514.5. Noise.
The sound level of any operation (other than the operation of motor vehicles
or other transportation facilities, operations involved in the construction or
demolition of structures, emergency alarm signals or time signals) shall not
exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands as stated below.
The sound-pressure level shall be measured with a Sound Level Meter and
an Octave Band Analyzer that conform to specifications published by the
American Standards Association, New York, New York.
The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for smooth and continuous
noise shall be as follows (all of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in
each case) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.:
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
rights-of-way shall be improved with sidewalk in accordance with
the RSIS (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
§ Z-513.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-514.5
AO:566
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
Above 4,800 28
If the noise is not smooth and continuous (if the variation of the noise level
involves maxima at intervals of one second or less, it is to be considered
as continuous noise) or it is not radiated at nighttime, one or more of the
corrections below shall be added or subtracted from each of the decibel
levels given above.
Type of Operations or Character of Noise
Correction in
Decibels
Daytime Operation Only (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) +5
Noise occurs less than 5% in any one-hour period. +5
Noise is of peculiar character (hum, scream, etc.)
or is of impulsive character (hammering, etc.), (in
the case of impulsive noise, the correction shall
apply only to the average pressure during an
impulse, and impulse peaks shall not exceed the
basic standards given above.)
-5
§ Z-514.6. Storage and Waste Disposal.
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be
stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly
connecting with energy devices, heating or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by
an approved safety fence.
C. No materials or waste shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
water course or otherwise render such stream or water course
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will
destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or water course.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in
containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
§ Z-514.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-514.7
AO:567
§ Z-514.7. Vibrations.
No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions in excess of the
standards outlines below, with the exception of that vibration produced as
a result of construction activity. The standards below are as set forth in
the Table of Frequency Amplitude Relations. Vibrations shall be expressed
as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a standard threecomponent
measuring system, which is a device for recording the intensity
of any vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions.
Frequency of Ground Motion in
Cycles Per Second
Maximum Amplitude of Ground
Motion in Inches
(Not More Than)
Up to 10 0.0305
20 0.0153
30 0.0102
40 0.0076
50 0.0061
60 0.0051
§ Z-514.8. Dust and Smoke.
All regulations of the State of New Jersey shall be complied with regarding
dust and smoke.
§ Z-515. SIGNS. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-515.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to encourage the effective use of signs
as a means of communication, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic
environment and the City's ability to attract economic development and
growth, to improve pedestrian and vehicular safety and the circulation
thereof, to minimize the adverse effects of uncontrolled signs on public and
private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign
regulations.
§ Z-515.2. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
A. Accessory Uses. Signs shall be permitted as accessory uses in all zoning
districts provided that any sign hereafter erected in the City of
Lambertville conforms with the provisions of this section and any other
ordinance or regulation of the municipality, or the State or Federal
government relating to the erection, alteration, or maintenance of
signs. In the event of conflicting regulations, the most restrictive shall
apply.
§ Z-514.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.2
AO:568
B. Sign Permit. A permit shall be required for the installation of all signs,
unless exempted from such requirements under § 515.2.M. The
structural safety requirements governing construction and erection of
all signs and the issuance of permits shall be controlled by the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) of the City of Lambertville, but this section
shall supersede the UCC with respect to areas wherein signs are
erected, their location, size, design, illumination, and all such
characteristics which relate to zoning regulation.
C. Maintenance. All signs shall be kept in a proper state of repair, in
accordance with pertinent regulations. Signs which fall into such a
state of disrepair as to become unsightly or to pose a threat to public
safety may be removed by the City 30 days following notice by certified
mail to the owner of record and the City shall have the right to recover
from said owner the full costs of the removal and disposal of such signs.
D. Rights-of-Way. No sign other than traffic control or official
governmental signs shall be erected within or project over the right-ofway
of any public street or sidewalk, except as hereinafter provided.
E. Imitation of Official Signs. No sign shall be erected that is of such
character, form, shape or color that it imitates or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal or device, or that has any characteristics which are
likely to confuse or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of
a motor vehicle on a public street.
F. Sight Triangles. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any
streets improved for vehicular traffic within the triangular area formed
by the right-of-way lines, and a line connecting them at points 30 feet
from their intersection, unless the topmost portion of said sign is less
than 2.5 feet high or attached to a building. In no case shall any sign be
so erected that it dangerously impedes the vision of motorists or
pedestrians, or otherwise endangers their safety.
G. Prohibited Placement. No sign shall be placed on any tree, telephone
pole, electric light, public utility pole, wall, fence, or vacant building
(excepting for sale or rent signs), or upon rocks or other natural
features.
H. Permitted Uses. No sign shall be erected containing a message that
states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not
permitted in the zoning district in which said sign is located under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
I. Public Property. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except
in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited
to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies
that may be imposed under this Ordinance, the City shall have the right
to recover from the owner or person placing such sign the full costs,
including legal costs, of removal and disposal of such sign.
§ Z-515.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.2
AO:569
J. Illumination. Signs exempt from permits in accordance with § 515.2.M
shall not be illuminated, unless otherwise excepted. Any other sign may
be illuminated, unless otherwise prohibited.
K. Computation of Sign Area. For the purposes of this section, "sign area"
shall mean the area expressed in square feet, within a rectangle
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, symbols, logos, letters, figures,
emblems, or other representations plus all material or color forming an
integral part of the sign or used to differentiate the sign from the
background against which it is placed, provided that:
1. In the event a sign is designed with more than one face, the area
shall be computed by including only the maximum message display
area visible from any one point, provided that the message is the
same on each face;
2. The supports, uprights, or other structure on which any sign is
attached shall not be included in the calculation of sign area unless
such structure is designed in such a manner as to form an integral
part of the sign's message or otherwise conveys meaning;
3. The area of lamps, neon tubing, or other artificial illumination
visible on a sign shall be counted as part of the total allowable sign
area.
L. Prohibited Signs. Any sign that is not permitted by the provisions of this
section is hereby prohibited, with the following signs specifically
prohibited:
1. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, moving, or projected signs
of any type, with the exception of time and temperature displays as
otherwise permitted.
2. Banners, pennants, streamers, or similar devices constructed of
cloth, fabric, cardboard or other like material; vehicle signs;
portable signs; balloon signs, or other inflated signs; and
searchlights, displayed for the purpose of attracting the attention
of pedestrians and motorists; unless otherwise excepted.
3. Any sign so erected, constructed, or maintained as to obstruct any
fire escape, window, door, or other opening used as a means of
ingress and egress.
4. Any message or advertisement which uses a series of three or more
signs placed in a line parallel to a street each of which contains part
of such message or advertisement.
5. Any signs that emit smoke, vapor, vibration, or noise. Any sign that
emits electromagnetic radiation outside the wavelengths of visible
light discernible beyond the property boundary.
§ Z-515.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.2
AO:570
6. Any sign which, when applying contemporary community
standards, has a dominant theme or purpose which appeals to
prurient interests.
7. Any sign attached to the roof of a building, or a facade sign that
projects above the lowest level of a roof or beyond the corner of a
wall.
8. Off-premise signs, except as specifically permitted.
M. Signs Exempt From Permits. The following signs are exempt from the
need to secure permits:
1. Official governmental signs. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Historical markers. Building markers that may contain the building
name, date of construction, restoration award, historical data, or
other pertinent information provided that such marker does not
exceed two square feet and is made of cast, cut or etched masonry,
metal, or similar durable material.
3. Trespassing and hunting. Signs that relate to the control of
trespassing and hunting on property, provided they do not exceed
two square feet in area nor are spaced closer than 50 feet to each
other.
4. Emergency. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, public utility, pipeline company, or contractor doing such
work authorized or permitted by such agency, utility, or company.
Such signs may be illuminated.
5. Public notice. Any public notice required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
6. Interior signs. Any sign within a building, not attached to a window
or door, that is not legible from the lot line on which is located said
building.
7. Incidental. Incidental signs shall be permitted provided they do not
exceed one square foot in area.
8. Residential. Residential facade signs shall be permitted provided
that the size of the sign does not exceed four square feet in area.
9. Project development. Project development signs shall be permitted
where final approval of a site plan or subdivision has been granted
by the Board of Jurisdiction and which may indicate the name of the
development, developer, financier, architect, or contractors. Such
signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area or eight feet in
height. No more than one sign per street frontage shall be
permitted up to two such signs per project. All such signs shall be
removed within 14 days of the issuance of a conditional Certificate
of Occupancy that permits the occupation of a building, in the case
§ Z-515.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.2
AO:571
of a non-residential development, or when 75% of the dwelling
units in a residential development have been issued Certificates of
Occupancy.
10. Change in the copy of a changeable copy sign, once a permit for
that sign has been issued.
11. Traffic control. Traffic control devices on private property, such as
"stop", "yield" and other such signs, provided that the face of the
sign meets the standards of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation for such signs, do not contain a commercial
message of any type, and provided that their location has been
approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be.
12. Flags. Flags of the United States, the States, county, or
municipality, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the
United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an
elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided that
such flag shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and shall not be
flown from a pole that exceeds 40 feet in height. Other flags shall
be considered freestanding signs and shall be governed by such
regulations that may apply in the applicable zoning district in
which such flag is located. Flags may be illuminated.
13. Name and address. Name and address signs attached to the facade
of a building or on a mailbox, provided that the size of the sign does
not exceed one square foot. Address lettering shall be a minimum
of three inches in height in order to be legible to emergency
personnel.
14. Temporary signs. The following temporary signs only shall be
permitted:
a. Banners. Banners, provided they are erected by a
governmental authority or have been approved by such
authority for non-profit or charitable organizations. No banner
with the same message may be displayed for more than 30
consecutive days. Banners may project over a right-of-way.
b. Election signs. Such signs may not exceed 32 square feet in
area; may not be erected more than 45 days prior to the day of
the election, referendum, or other plebiscite; and shall be
removed within seven days after such election, referendum, or
other plebiscite. No more than one sign shall be permitted on
any one property, however, different messages may be
combined on one sign provided the area limitation is not
exceeded.
c. Grand opening and business relocation signs. Grand opening
and business relocation signs shall be permitted for a period of
time not to exceed 30 days from the initial opening of a
§ Z-515.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.2
AO:572
business or a change in the ownership of the premises on
which the sign is located. Grand opening signs may be facade
signs, freestanding signs, or banners. Business relocation signs
may be facade or window signs. Grand opening and business
relocation signs shall not exceed the total sign area permitted
on the premises for permanent facade signs. Grand opening
signs shall be permitted in addition to any permanent signage
allowed.
d. Real estate and contracting. Temporary real estate signs and
signs of contractors, mechanics, painters, paperhangers and/or
artisans, on the lot on which the real estate for rent or sale is
located, or the lot on which the contracting work is being
performed shall be permitted. Said signs shall not be larger
than six square feet in area nor more than four feet high for
residential uses and 24 square feet in area nor more than six
feet high for institutional, commercial or industrial uses. They
shall be removed within seven days of the completion of the
sale or rental of the premise; or, completion of the work to
which the sign relates.
e. Window signs. The total area of all window signs shall not
exceed 25% of the glass area of the window in which placed.
No window sign with the same message shall be displayed for
more than 30 days. Signs of a permanent nature in windows,
such as gilded name or neon signs, shall be considered facade
signs within the meaning of this section and shall require a
sign permit. Incidental signs in windows shall not be included
in the area calculation.
f. Yard or garage sales. Such signs shall not exceed four square
feet; shall not be erected more than seven days prior to such
sale; and shall be removed within 48 hours after the sale. No
premise shall be permitted to erect such signs more than four
times in any calendar year.
N. Non-conforming Signs.
1. All signs erected prior to the enactment of this section or
subsequent amendments, which are not in conformity with the
provisions thereof, shall be deemed non-conforming signs. Nonconforming
signs may continue provided that such signs comply
with the maintenance standards of § 515.2C.
2. Any change in a non-conforming sign or a conforming sign installed
prior to the enactment of this section shall be made in strict
compliance with its provisions.
O. Abandoned Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained
on any premises owned or controlled by him or her, a sign which has
been abandoned. An abandoned sign for the purpose of this section is a
sign located on, and/or related to the use of a property which becomes
§ Z-515.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.2
AO:573
§ Z-515.3. Regulations Pertaining to Specific Sign Types.
vacant and unoccupied; any sign which was erected for an occupant
or business unrelated to the present occupant in business; or any sign
which related to a time, event, or purpose which is past. Any such
sign shall be abated by the owner or person controlling the property
within 30 days of the date of abandonment as herein defined. Any
sign identifying an abandoned use, as provided for by this Ordinance,
shall itself be considered to be abandoned. Notwithstanding these
provisions, in the event that the Historic Preservation Commission
determines that a sign within the Lambertville Historic District is an
integral part of the architectural design of an historic building or
a historic structure in itself, such sign shall not be subject to the
requirement for removal.
P. Sign Permit Procedures. The following procedures shall apply to the
issuance of sign permits:
1. Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer on
the forms provided by the City.
2. The application shall be accompanied by an accurate plot plan of
the lot, scaled not greater than one inch equals 10 feet nor less
than one inch equals 50 feet, that indicates the location of
buildings, parking lots, driveways, landscaped areas, and other
pertinent data if a freestanding sign is proposed. On the plot plan
shall be drawn the location of each existing or proposed sign. A
color photograph, not less than three inches by five inches nor
larger than eight inches by 10 inches shall be submitted for each
sign presently existing on the site and/or the facade of any sign
proposed to be attached thereof. A drawing to scale of each
proposed sign, including the dimensions, colors, materials, and
method of attachment shall be submitted.
3. Applications for signs in the CBD Central Business District zone
shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and shall be considered
minor site plans for the purposes of this section; however, the
submission requirements shall be limited to the information in
paragraph P.2 above. Applications for signs in other districts shall
be reviewed by the Zoning Officer. If the sign applied for complies
with the requirements of this section, the Zoning Officer shall issue
such permit within 14 days of application.
A. Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs, except for directional signs,
shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only in the front yard.
2. No freestanding sign shall be erected closer to the curb line or
edge of paving than 10 feet, or five feet from a public sidewalk,
whichever is more, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ Z-515.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.3
AO:574
3. A freestanding sign shall not be used in conjunction with a canopy
sign.
4. No freestanding sign shall exceed six feet in height in a residential
district.
B. Facade signs. Facade signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. No facade sign shall extend more than 12 inches from the surface
upon which it is attached.
2. Facade signs attached to the lower slope of a mansard roof or to a
pent roof shall be attached flat to the roof or within an
architecturally compatible dormer.
C. Awning signs. Awning signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Signs on awnings shall be limited to the lower vertical fringe of the
awning; or, on curved awnings, the lower one-third.
2. Lettering on awnings shall not exceed six inches in height.
3. Awning signs shall be permitted in lieu of facade signs and shall
comply with the size limitations of facade signage.
D. Canopy Signs. Canopy signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Canopy signs are only permitted in conjunction with gasoline
service stations and similar commercial uses where the canopy is
required to provide cover and protection for outdoor equipment
and service areas.
2. No more than one canopy sign shall be allowed per canopy fascia,
and no more than two such signs per canopy shall be permitted.
3. No part of the canopy sign shall be less than 12 feet nor more than
18 feet above ground level.
4. The area of a canopy sign shall not exceed 50% of the area of the
canopy fascia or 30 square feet, whichever is less.
E. Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs shall comply with the
following requirements:
1. All such signs shall be permanently affixed to the ground or to a
structure.
2. Copy shall be changed electronically or by means of moveable
lettering and shall not be changed more than once every 24 hours.
Changeable copy signs that are changed more frequently shall be
considered animated signs.
§ Z-515.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.3
AO:575
3. Changeable copy signs may not be located in any residential zoning
district, excepting institutional uses.
4. Changeable copy signs may be either freestanding, canopy, or
facade signs.
5. Changeable copy signs for commercial uses shall be limited to the
advertising of live performances and motor fuel prices.
F. Directional Signs. Directional signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Directional signs that are freestanding shall not exceed 2.5 feet in
height and may be located at the streetline, provided that such
signs do not obscure the vision of motorists.
2. Directional signs shall not exceed three square feet in area.
3. Directional signs shall contain no commercial message.
G. Directory Signs. Directory signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. The sign shall be located within the site or complex so as to allow
motorists to leave the flow of traffic and safely read the directory;
or, shall be placed at the main entrance to a building.
2. The sign may contain a map or floor plan diagram, as the case may
be, indicating the location of the buildings or offices listed on the
directory.
3. Any such sign shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area.
4. A freestanding directory sign shall not exceed five feet in height.
H. Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Projecting signs may extend over the right-of-way line.
2. The plane of the sign's message shall be perpendicular to the
surface of the building to which it is attached.
3. No portion of the sign may be lower than nine feet when located
above a street, sidewalk, or other pedestrian way.
I. Time and Temperature Signs. Time and temperature signs shall comply
with the following requirements:
1. Time and temperature signs shall be permitted in any district in
which commercial uses are permitted, provided that they do not
encompass more than 20% of the allowable sign area for the type of
sign upon which they are placed.
§ Z-515.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.3
AO:576
§ Z-515.4. Signs in the R-C, R-L, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential
Districts.
In the R-C, R-L, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts the following signs
only shall be permitted:
§ Z-515.5. Signs in the CBD Central Business District.
In addition to those signs otherwise allowed in Residential Districts, the
following signs shall be permitted for non-residential uses in the CBD
Central Business District:
2. Time and temperature signs shall be permitted in addition to any
other allowable signage for the property.
3. The time and temperature display may alternate, provided that the
period of time that one display is shown is not less than one second.
A. Signs for Residential and Institutional Uses.
1. One residential facade sign shall be permitted per premise.
2. One freestanding sign identifying a multi-family housing
development shall be permitted on each street frontage that
provides direct access to the property, provided that such sign does
not exceed 32 square feet in sign area.
3. One freestanding sign identifying an institutional use shall be
permitted on each street frontage that provides direct access to the
property, provided that such sign does not exceed 32 square feet in
sign area. The freestanding sign may contain a changeable copy
portion not to exceed 24 square feet in area, provided that the total
sign area does not exceed 32 square feet.
B. Signs in accordance with § 515.2M of this section, excepting window
signs.
C. Signs for non-residential uses. Non-residential uses in residential
districts, excepting institutional uses hereinabove, shall be permitted
signs in accordance with § 515.5.
A. Freestanding Sign. One freestanding sign may be erected not to exceed
12 square feet in area nor six feet in height.
B. Facade or Projecting Sign. One facade or one projecting sign may be
erected facing each street frontage. The permitted sign area shall be
5% of the total facade area, or a maximum of 16 square feet, whichever
is less.
C. Changeable Copy. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted for
institutional uses, establishments booking live performances, and for
service stations selling motor fuel. Such signs shall not exceed 12
§ Z-515.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.5
AO:577
§ Z-515.6. Signs in C-2, Service Commercial, C-3, General
Commercial and O Office Districts.
In the C-2, C-3, and O Districts the following signs only shall be permitted:
square feet in area and shall be integrated with permanent copy
freestanding or facade signs as otherwise permitted.
D. Directory Signs. One directory sign shall be permitted attached to the
facade at a main entrance, rear entrance, or stair access to upper
floors. One additional directory sign shall be permitted at the entrance
to a main driveway for any lot exceeding one acre in size.
E. Menu Signs. Restaurants or other eating establishments may erect one
additional facade sign for the placement of a menu or other bill of fare,
provided the sign does not exceed four square feet in area.
F. Awning Signs. Signs on awnings shall be permitted; however, any such
sign shall be considered a facade sign for the purposes of this section
and shall adhere to the sign limitations thereof.
G. Signs in accordance with § 515.2M.
H. Time and Temperature. One time and temperature sign shall be
permitted per commercial premises.
A. Freestanding Sign. One freestanding sign may be erected on each
street frontage that contains a minimum of 100 feet of lot frontage and
with direct vehicular access from that street. The permitted sign area
shall be 1/2 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building
frontage, or a maximum of 40 square feet, whichever is less. No such
freestanding sign shall exceed 12 feet in height. Freestanding signs
shall contain only one commercial message.
B. Facade Sign. One facade sign may be erected facing each street
frontage with direct vehicular access from that street. The permitted
sign area shall be 5% of the total facade area, or a maximum of 20
square feet, whichever is less. For retail centers with multiple tenants,
each individual store shall be permitted one facade sign not to exceed
1/2 square feet of sign area per linear front foot of store or 16 square
feet, whichever is less.
C. Canopy Sign. One 1 sign each on opposite ends of a canopy fascia may
be permitted as otherwise allowed under § 515.3D.
D. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted only for institutional uses.
E. Directional signs shall be permitted provided each sign does not exceed
three square feet in area.
F. Directory Signs. One directory sign not to exceed six square feet shall
be permitted at a main entrance.
§ Z-515.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.6
AO:578
§ Z-515.7. Signs in P&R Parks and Recreation District.
In the P&R District the following signs only shall be permitted:
§ Z-515.8. Design Standards for Signs.
Signs erected in the City of Lambertville shall conform to the following
design guidelines and standards. In this section, guidelines are overall
principles to be used in the design of signs. Standards are to be followed in
the placement and design of signs unless specifically waived by the Planning
Board.
G. Menu Signs. Restaurants or other eating establishments may erect one
additional facade sign for the placement of a menu or other bill of fare,
provided the sign does not exceed four square feet in area.
H. Signs in accordance with § 515.2M.
I. Time and Temperature. One time and temperature sign shall be
permitted per commercial premises.
A. Freestanding Sign. One freestanding sign may be erected on each
street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet in area.
B. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted only for institutional uses.
C. Directional signs shall be permitted provided each sign does not exceed
three square feet in area.
D. Directory Signs. One directory sign not to exceed six square feet shall
be permitted at a main entrance.
E. Signs in accordance with § 515.2M.
A. Design Guidelines.
1. Signs should strengthen the architectural diversity of the City's
buildings. Signs which obscure or ignore a building's architecture
should be avoided.
2. Signs should be appropriate for the era in which the building was
constructed.
3. Signs should not alter the way in which a building functions. Signs
should not block light into a building.
4. Signs should be integrated with a building's architecture in terms
of form, materials, and size.
5. Designers should strive for creativity in the form and variety of
signage within the size limitations set forth herein.
6. Designers should include symbols, images, and other objects to
convey the type of establishment using the sign.
§ Z-515.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-515.8
AO:579
7. The typeface used to represent words should convey the character
of the establishment and the era of the building.
B. Design Standards.
1. Facade sign locations. The following facade sign locations are
recommended.
a. Single story commercial buildings. The parapet wall above the
glass storefront.
b. Two or more story commercial buildings. The wall above the
glass storefront but below the window sills of the second floor.
If there are projecting cornices or beltlines separating the first
and second stories, the facade sign should be placed below
them.
c. Commercial buildings converted from residences. Next to the
first floor doorway or window, below any porch or added
mansard or pent roof between the first and second floors.
2. Freestanding sign location. Freestanding signs should be set back
from the sidewalk five feet, or 10 feet from the curbline if there is
no sidewalk.
3. Projecting sign locations. Projecting signs for first floor
establishments should be just below the second floor windows.
Projecting signs for second floor or higher establishments should
be located above the second story windows.
4. Contrast. The contrast of a sign's lettering and symbols with its
background should be sharp to convey legibility.
5. Sign complexity. Facade and freestanding signs oriented towards
motorists should convey no more than seven items of information.
More complex signage should be limited to projecting signs
oriented towards pedestrians.
6. Sign materials. Sign materials should relate to the architectural
style of the building. Where modern buildings are designed to
evoke an earlier era, signage should reflect that age. The following
standards are recommended:
a. Pre World War I: Painted or carved, smooth surfaced wood;
carved stone; cast brass; tinned and forged metal; and goldleafed
lettering.
b. World War I to 1940: Any of the above, plus individual wood or
metal letters on building facade.
c. 1940 to 1960: Any of the above, plus neon signs.
§ Z-515.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-515.8
AO:580
§ Z-516. SITE PLAN REVIEW. [Ord. No. 99-13]
§ Z-516.1. Site Plan Approval Required.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for any
building or use or enlargement of any building or use or development unless
a site plan is first submitted and approved by the City of Lambertville
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as the law permits, and no
certificates of occupancy shall be issued unless all construction conforms to
the approved plan.
§ Z-516.2. Exemptions from Site Plan Review. [Ord. No. 18-2017]
Site plan review and approval shall not be required for:
d. 1960 to present: Any of the above, plus internally illuminated
plastic faced signs, internally illuminated individual letters,
and sandblasted wooden signs.
Consideration will be given to other sign materials or to more
modern signage materials for older buildings provided that the
purposes of the design guidelines are maintained.
7. Illumination. In general, unless the building belongs to the present
era, internally illuminated signs are discouraged. Illumination
should be accomplished through external floodlights trained on the
sign face.
A. Building permits for individual lot applications involving only a
detached one- or two-dwelling unit building.
B. Accessory buildings as otherwise permitted for subsection 516.2A uses.
C. Other buildings incidental to residential uses.
D. The alteration or repair of an existing building which is not either a
detached one- or two-dwelling unit building, or change in authorized
use, upon recommendation by the Zoning Officer and ratification by the
Board having jurisdiction that the alterations or repair:
1. Will not result in additional lot coverage whether by buildings or
site improvements.
2. Will not increase the number of required off-street parking or
loading spaces.
3. Will conform to the maximum and minimum zoning standards as
set forth herein.
4. Is not proposed in conjunction with a use requiring a conditional
use permit.
§ Z-515.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-516.2
AO:581
§ Z-516.3. Site plan review waiver — Recommendation and
Approval. [Ord. No. 18-2017]
E. The provisions of this section shall not limit the requirements for
submission and approval of subdivisions as otherwise required by Code
of the City of Lambertville or City ordinance.
A. The Board of Jurisdiction, on its own authority or with the
recommendation of the Zoning Officer as set forth herein, may waive
the requirement for site plan approval whenever there is a
determination that the proposed development, alteration, repair, or
change of use or occupancy does not affect the existing conditions of
the lot or premises, including: topography, vegetation; drainage;
floodplains; marshes and waterways; open space; walkways; means of
ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping; structures; signs;
lighting and screening devices; intensity of use; changes in seating or
floor space requirements; changes in parking allocations, and other
considerations of site plan review.
B. The Zoning Officer shall have the authority, in the first instance, of
reviewing initially an application seeking waiver of formal site plan
review for compliance with the standards set forth herein for granting
of the waiver, if such initial review is sought by the applicant. If the
conditions for a waiver have been presented, the Zoning Officer shall
recommend in writing that the Board having jurisdiction formally ratify
the recommendation and grant the requested waiver, with or without
conditions, by itself or in connection with any other action to be taken
or relief to be granted with respect to the application. The submission
of escrows for professional review shall not be required for this initial
review and recommendation of the waiver application by the Zoning
Officer and ratification and approval thereof by the Board having
jurisdiction. If the Zoning Officer or Board having jurisdiction
determine that the waiver cannot be granted without the submission of
additional information requiring professional review for its proper
evaluation, the deposit and escrow provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply to the application.
C. Any applicant desiring a waiver under this section shall present
sufficient credible evidence to allow the Zoning Officer and the Board to
reach such conclusions as would permit the grant of the waiver. Such
evidence shall consist of sketches, property descriptions, methods of
operation, photographs, testimony, or other documentation or
information as the Zoning Officer and the Board may require. The
reviewing Board, on its own authority or in reviewing a
recommendation for granting the waiver, shall render its decision based
on such evidence and may attach conditions to any waiver so granted.
The waiver shall only be deemed to have been granted formally upon
the affirmative vote of the Board to do so.
§ Z-516.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-516.4
AO:582
§ Z-516.4. Submissions Required.
The owner or applicant shall submit four black line prints to the Planning
Board at least three weeks before the meeting at which discussion is
desired. One copy shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall either approve or disapprove the site plan within 90
days of the date of proper filing or upon such further time as agreed to by
the applying parties but not before the expiration of the thirty-day period
within which the County Planning Board may submit a report on said site
plan.
§ Z-516.5. Plan Submissions and Requirements.
Each site plan submitted shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet,
prepared by a licensed architect, or engineer, including accurate lot lines
certified by a licensed engineer or land surveyor, submitted on one of four of
the following standard sheet sizes (8 1/2 inches by 13 inches; 30 inches by
42 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 15 inches by 21 inches) and including
the following data:
§ Z-516.6. Plan Information.
Each site plan submitted to the Planning Board for approval shall have the
following information shown thereon or be annexed thereto:
A. North arrow;
B. Scale;
C. Existing and proposed street names if any;
D. Contour lines at two foot intervals;
E. Title of plan; streams;
F. Total acreage to one hundredth of an acre;
G. Total building coverage in acres and percent of lot;
H. Total number of parking spaces;
I. All dimensions needed to confirm conformity to the Zoning Ordinance
such as but not limited to buildings, lot lines and yard areas;
J. A small key map giving the general location of the parcel to the
remainder of the municipality; and
K. A separate map showing the site in relation to all remaining lands in the
applicant's ownership.
A. Size, height, location and arrangement of all proposed buildings and
structures, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance,
including a rendering of such building or a typical building showing
front, side and rear elevations.
§ Z-516.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-516.6
AO:583
§ Z-516.7. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2002-12]
B. Proposed circulation plans including access streets, aisles and lanes,
driveways, parking spaces, loading areas, loading berths or docks,
pedestrian walks, and all related facilities for the movement and
storage of goods, vehicles and persons on the site and for access and
egress to and from all parts of the site. Such plans shall be accompanied
by cross-sections of streets, aisles lanes and driveways and shall adhere
to the following provisions:
1. § 509, Off-Street Parking and Loading and specific zone
requirements of this Ordinance.
2. §§ 600 and 700 of the Land Subdivision Ordinance.
3. Sidewalks shall be provided from each building entrance/exit along
expected paths of pedestrian travel such as, but not limited to,
access to parking lots, driveways, other buildings and across
common yard spaces between buildings where pedestrian traffic
can be expected to be concentrated.
C. Landscaping plan including seeded and/or sodded areas, grading,
fencing, signs, recreation areas, shrubbery, trees and buffer areas in
accordance with the following standards:
1. §§ 600 and 700 of the Land Subdivision Ordinance.
2. §§ 501, 507, 509, 515, 517, 518, and other requirements of this
Ordinance.
3. Existing and proposed wooded areas and the location of new
shrubs and trees.
D. The proposed location of all drainage, sewage and water facilities with
proposed grades, capacities and materials to be used. Such plans shall
be reviewed by the City Engineer with recommendations to the
Planning Board. Proposed lighting facilities shall be included showing
the direction and reflection of the lighting.
E. A written description of the proposed operations of the building(s)
including the number of employees or members of non-residential
buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be worked and the
maximum number of employees on each shift; expected truck and
tractor-trailer traffic; emission of noise, glare, air and water pollution;
safety hazards, and anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the
building design.
F. For proposals in the CBD Zone a written description of the use and
conformity to provisions and requirements of the CBD Zone regarding
preservation of appearance and character of the CBD Zone shall be
submitted.
§ Z-516.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-516.8
AO:584
§ Z-516.8. Purpose for Site Plan Regulations.
In any event, the standards noted above and elsewhere in this Ordinance
shall be for the general purposes of:
§ Z-517. CONDITIONAL USE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
§ Z-517.1. Evaluation Criteria.
The Planning Board, in the evaluation of an application for a conditional use,
shall make the following findings in any approval of such use:
A. Enhancing the neighborhood.
B. Providing adequate access and off-street parking and loading facilities
for employees and visitors.
C. Providing fencing and/or landscaping where reasonably necessary for
safety and/or aesthetic purposes.
D. Preventing uses which may or may not tend to endanger life or property
or create hazards from fire, explosion, radiation or produce
objectionable smoke, heat, glare, vibration, or noise whether or not any
of such hazards are confined to the property shown on the site plan.
E. Requiring that all raw materials, fuel, goods in process, finished goods,
machinery, equipment, trucks and other motor vehicles shall be
confined within areas which are either housed or screened from public
view from abutting streets or adjoining residential properties.
F. Prohibiting the emission of noxious, toxic or corrosive fuels, gases or
odors or the exhaust of waste into air of dust or other substances.
G. Providing off-street parking areas which shall meet the construction
standards set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance for street.
H. Preserving the appearance and character of the CBD Zone.
A. The use for which an application is submitted is specifically permitted
as a conditional use in the zoning district in which the proposed use
would be located.
B. The design, arrangement, and nature of the proposed use will not
increase the danger of fire, or panic, or otherwise endanger the public.
C. Reasonable consideration shall be made as to the compatibility of the
proposed use within the existing neighborhood or community including
the number of employees or users of the property, the potential effect
upon adjacent property values, the need for the proposed use in the
community, and the mitigation of potentially adverse environmental
effects.
D. The proposed use shall not impair an adequate amount of light or air to
adjacent properties.
§ Z-516.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-517.1
AO:585
§ Z-517.2. Site Plan Review Required.
All conditional uses shall also be required to obtain site plan approval,
unless the Planning Board shall grant a waiver from such requirement.
§ Z-518. SWIMMING POOLS.
All pools shall require a building permit prior to installation.
§ Z-518.1. Private Swimming Pools.
Private swimming pools shall adhere to the standards of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
§ Z-518.2. Public and Club Swimming Pools.
Public swimming pools or clubs intended for open use of the public or to
club members shall adhere to the following standards:
E. The proposed use shall not overcrowd the land or create an undue
concentration of population.
A. Conformance to Standards. Conditional uses shall conform to any
additional standards specified for the use in question in the applicable
zoning district.
B. Burden of Proof. The applicant for a conditional use shall have the
burden of proof in establishing that the criteria for so granting such use
shall have been met. In all cases the applicant's burden of proof shall
contain sufficient and credible evidence to fully support the assertions
made by the applicant.
C. Effect of Approval. In the granting of an approval for a conditional use,
the applicant shall secure a building permit or, in the case where no
building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy, within one year
from the date of approval, otherwise the granting of the conditional use
shall be deemed null and void.
A. Said pools shall be located within a lot area of a minimum of one acre
within such area may also be located terraces, change house,
refreshment stand and similar accessory uses.
B. The pool shall occupy no more than 20% of the lot area. Said area shall
include total water surface including separate wading pools, swimming
tanks, and diving tanks.
C. No edge of any pool or separate swimming tank shall be closer to any
property line than 20 feet.
D. The pool shall be enclosed with a fence or, in lieu thereof, located on a
terrace, or landscaped, or surrounded by structures or any combination
of the above or similar techniques in order to control access to the
immediate pool area.
§ Z-517.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-518.2
AO:586
§ Z-518.3. Apartment and Townhouse Pools.
Pools included as part of the overall development of high rise or garden
apartments or townhouses, whether open to the public or used as a private
facility for the apartment residents, shall adhere to the following standards:
E. The pool shall be lighted both internally and externally but in no case
shall any light be directed in a direct or indirect fashion upon any
adjacent property. All standards used for exterior lighting shall not
exceed 25 feet in height and shall be no closer than 25 feet to the edge
of any pool. All lighting shall be in compliance with the applicable
National Electrical Code.
F. All pools shall be constructed below the surface of the ground except
that for a period not to exceed one swimming season, any public pool
may be erected above ground after which such pool shall be located
below ground if it remains on the same tract.
G. All pools shall be landscaped to effectively screen the view and noise of
the pool from neighboring properties.
H. All loud speakers or public address systems shall be located on or in the
immediate area of the pool and be directed so that said speakers are not
directly aimed at any adjacent residential buildings.
I. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 30 square feet
of water surface.
A. Pools shall be located within an area no less than 4,000 square feet that
is devoted to the use of the pool.
B. The total area of the surface of the water including separate wading
pools, swimming tanks and diving tanks shall be no more than 40% of
the land area devoted to the use of the pool.
C. No edge of any pool or separate swimming tank shall be closer to any
building or property line than 20 feet.
D. The total land devoted to the use of the pool shall be enclosed with a
fence no less than eight feet in height nor more than 10 feet in height.
E. The pool shall be lighted both internally and externally but in no case
shall any light be directed in a direct or indirect fashion upon any
apartment house or adjacent property. All lighting shall be in
compliance with the applicable National Electrical Code.
F. All pools shall be constructed below the surface of the ground.
G. If any portion of the pool, part of the land devoted to the use of the pool,
light standard or loud speakers are located closer to any residential
building or other property line of another lot than 50 feet, adequate
buffers of trees and shrubs shall be provided.
§ Z-518.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-518.4
AO:587
§ Z-518.4. Maintenance of Pool Area.
All pools referred to in §§ 518.1, 518.2, and 518.3 shall have all the areas
surrounding the pool made and kept neat and attractive so as to be in
conformity with surrounding property and no rubbish, debris, or litter shall
be permitted to remain or accumulate in or about the pool.
§ Z-519. STEEP SLOPES. [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3,
7-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
§ Z-519.1. Purpose.
A significant percentage of the undeveloped land within the City of
Lambertville and particularly that acreage which is east of NJ Route 29 is
characterized by slopes in excess of 15% (hereinafter referred to as steep
slopes). The Environmental Resources Inventory, which was adopted as part
of the Lambertville Master Plan on January 15, 1992 and updated on May
2008 includes a description of the environmental impacts associated with
development on steep slopes and includes a map, entitled "Slopes", which
depicts the areas of steep slope and their relative gradients.
Lands which slope greater than 15% are widely recognized to warrant
special development standards in order to protect properties below the
steep slopes from nuisances, such as stormwater flooding and slope erosion
with sediment and debris deposition, to minimize the cost of public services
and facilities related to new development, to preserve significant woodlands
and wildlife habitat and to preserve natural visual amenities such as
ridgelines and scenic vistas. The special requirements of steep slopes have
been recognized by the NJ State Planning Commission, the NJ Department
of Environmental Protection [and Energy (Coastal Resources Regulations)],
the NJ Council on Affordable Housing, the NJ Department of Community
Affairs (Model Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance), the Regional Plan
Association and many municipalities through local land use regulations.
It is the purpose of this section to protect the health, safety and welfare
of people and property within the City of Lambertville from improper
construction and site development on steep slopes and hillside areas within
the City. More particularly, but without limitation, this section is intended
to establish performance standards and design guidelines for development
to address the peculiar hazards which exist in hillside areas by reason
of erosion, siltation, flooding, soil slippage, surface water runoff, pollution
of potable water supplies from nonpoint sources, elimination of mature
woodlands and wildlife habitat and destruction of unique and predominant
views.
It is a further purpose of this section to encourage the appropriate planning
design and development of sites within hillside areas to permit reasonable
utility of the land for its zoned use while achieving the legitimate public
purposes of preservation of significant natural resources, protection of
private property and efficiency of governmental operations.
§ Z-518.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-519.2
AO:588
§ Z-519.2. Applicability.
This § 519 shall be applicable to any application for development or land
disturbance to steep slopes with an area of greater than 150 square feet
within the City of Lambertville.
§ Z-519.3. Definitions.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements on
areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 15% as measured over
any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two feet or less.
§ Z-519.4. Designation of Area.
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a 10% slope; a 1.5 foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a 15% slope; a two-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a 20% slope (see Steep
Slopes Illustration diagram at § 519.12). Applicants shall submit a steep
slope analysis to the Board having jurisdiction showing slope classes: 1)
0% — 15%; 2) 15.1% — 20%; 3) 20.1% — 30%; and 4) greater than 30%,
all of which shall be delineated on a plat conforming to the requirements
of sections 513, 516.5, and 516.6. The analysis shall be based upon a
topographic survey, prepared by a licensed NJ surveyor (PLS) or engineer
(P.E.), which shows elevations at two foot intervals with slopes measured
between adjacent contour lines.
§ Z-519.5. Steep Slope Limits.
A. For steep slopes any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
1. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
2. Disturbance on areas of steep slopes shall be limited according to
the following schedule:
§ Z-519.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-519.5
AO:589
§ Z-519.6. Applications Which Require Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board Approval.
Extent of Slope
Maximum Extent of Disturbance of
Sloped Area
0% — 15% No limit, but adhere to design
guidelines
15.1% — 20% 30%
20.1% — 30% 10%
30.1% + No disturbance permitted
B. The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans to the appropriate
Board having jurisdiction over the development application that the
proposed development and topography of the new disturbance is not
located in areas with a 30% or greater slope and does not exceed the
limit of development in § 519.5 above.
A. Applications for development of any lot containing slopes in excess of
15% shall be accompanied by a steep slope analysis showing slope
classes of 0% to 15%, 15.1% to 20%, 20.1% to 30%, and greater than
30% (see Steep Slopes Illustrations diagram at § 519.12). Any
application pertaining to a lot depicted with steep slopes on the Master
Plan map entitled "Slopes" shall include a steep slopes analysis. The
analysis shall be based upon a topographic survey, prepared by an
appropriately licensed NJ professional, which shows elevations at two
foot intervals with slopes measured between adjacent contour lines.
B. The Board of Jurisdiction, when reviewing variance applications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 to the standards set forth in § 519.5, as
part of its consideration and determination of the statutory positive and
negative criteria, shall consider the following:
1. For applications to exceed the limits on disturbance on slopes of
15% — 20% and 20% — 30% the applicant must demonstrate that:
a. The site cannot be reasonably utilized for its zoned use without
the requested relief;
b. The extent of relief is the minimum needed to permit
reasonable utilization of the site;
c. All applicable standards regarding stormwater management
will be satisfactorily addressed including the proper protection
and stabilization of all disturbed areas consistent with the
design techniques established by the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Standards, adopted and amended by the
New Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee; and,
d. The proposed development adheres to the design guidelines
for steep slopes at the greatest practicable extent.
§ Z-519.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-519.6
AO:590
§ Z-519.7. Existing Lots That Do Not Require Planning Board or
Zoning Board Approval and Contain Slopes Greater Than 15%.
2. For application to disturb slopes greater than 30%, the applicant
must demonstrate that:
a. All utility of the site for its zoned use would be effectively
foreclosed without the requested relief;
b. The extent of relief is the minimum needed to permit
reasonable utilization of the site;
c. All applicable standards regarding stormwater management
will be satisfactorily addressed including the proper protection
and stabilization of all disturbed areas consistent with the
design techniques established by the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Standards, adopted and amended by the
New Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee; and,
d. The proposed development adheres to the design guidelines
for steep slopes at the greatest practicable extent;
e. For every 250 square feet of 30% or over steep slope disturbed,
the maximum allowable impervious cover shall be reduced by
10%.
No variance or other relief may be granted without a showing
that such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan
and the zoning ordinance. The applicant will be required to
post a bond, prior to building permit issuance, of an amount
satisfactory to the Board's Engineer, that will be held by the
City to restore and/or stabilize a site that has been disturbed
and not properly stabilized for more than six months (this is
not to be interpreted as replacing the timing for compliance
with the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and
the jurisdiction of the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation
District). The bond shall not be released until the City Engineer
has certified that permanent stabilization has been achieved.
C. Applications for development of any lot containing slopes in excess of
15% shall conform to the design guidelines in this section.
A. Applications for building permits or for site disturbance on pre-existing
lots containing slopes in excess of 15% shall be accompanied by a steep
slope analysis showing slope classes of 0% to 15%, 15.1% to 20%,
20.1% to 30%, and greater than 30% (see Steep Slopes Illustrations
diagram at § 519.12). Any application pertaining to a lot depicted with
steep slopes on the Master Plan map entitled "Slopes" shall include a
steep slopes analysis. The analysis shall be based upon a topographic
survey, prepared by a licensed NJ surveyor (PLS) or engineer (P.E.),
§ Z-519.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-519.7
AO:591
§ Z-519.8. Cluster Development for Parcels with Steep Slopes.
Where permitted as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district,
development of a lot or lots affected by steep slopes as defined herein may
be approved by the Planning Board, provided the following criteria are met:
which shows elevations at two foot intervals with slopes measured
between adjacent contour lines.
B. The applicant may apply to the City Engineer for permission to limit the
extent of the topographic survey to be submitted if, for instance, only a
small portion of the lot will be impacted by the proposed improvements/
site disturbance. Alternatively, the applicant's engineer may
demonstrate that the proposed improvements/site disturbance is of
such a de minimis extent, proven by analysis using existing LiDAR
topographic data (New Jersey Highlands Council), is sufficient to
provide adequate information for the City Engineer to review such
proposed improvements/site disturbance.
C. Any application for a building improvement, either freestanding (such
as a shed) or an addition to an existing structure (including decks),
which involves combined building coverage and site disturbance of not
more than 150 square feet in area shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section, provided that the applicant has not
previously applied for such exemptions within three years of the date of
application.
D. The Zoning Officer shall review and have the authority to approve
applications for disturbance of slopes in connection with building
permits or for site disturbance on pre-existing lots which conform to the
requirements of § 519.5.
E. Applications for site disturbance which are limited solely to removal of
trees and/or vegetative cover need not include a grading plan in the
submission, except for operations requiring road construction and/or
heavy equipment access.
A. The conditions for cluster residential housing shall be as follows:
1. The site shall be served by public water and sewer.
2. A minimum of 25% of the total site area shall be constrained by
steep slopes.
3. The applicant shall submit an alternative subdivision plan meeting
the design requirements of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.) which demonstrates that the site
cannot reasonably be developed with the same number of lots
permitted under the conventional development of the underlying
district.
§ Z-519.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-519.8
AO:592
B. The maximum gross density of the development shall be based on the
limitations of the underlying district.
C. Allowable uses and housing types shall be the same as the limitations of
the underlying district.
D. The following minimum residential lot standards shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet measured along the road frontage
unless a curve or cul-de-sac in which case it shall be measured at
the setback line.
3. Minimum Front Setback: 25 feet measured from the front property
line.
4. Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet for detached; 15 feet for ends of
attached unit buildings.
5. Minimum Rear Yard: 25 feet.
E. The land area that would otherwise be required for house lots but is not
used by the permitted lot size reduction shall be devoted to common
open space.
The cluster residential development shall be arranged to create a
connected systems of common open space. The open space shall be
owned and maintained by a Homeowner's Association in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 or dedicated to the City of Lambertville if
accepted by the Governing Body. The open space shall be maintained
and preserved in perpetuity for conservation, open space, agriculture
and/or recreational uses as directed by the Planning Board. Covenants,
deed restrictions, or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership
of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for
maintenance; maintenance of taxes and insurance; compulsory
assessment provisions guarantees that any homeowners association
formed to own and maintain open space will not be dissolved without
the consent of the Planning Board; and any other specification deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
F. The open space shall be maintained in accordance with a land
management plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
Planning Board. The developer shall provide copies of deed covenants
with prospective purchases or conservation easements with the City
describing land management practices to be followed by the party or
parties that are responsible for open space. Further subdivision or open
space land, or its use other than agriculture, conservation and
recreation shall be prohibited.
G. All other steep slope provisions set for in § 519 shall apply.
§ Z-519.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-519.9
AO:593
§ Z-519.9. Design Guidelines for Development on Steep Slopes.
Due to the environmental sensitivity of steep slopes, development of
properties which contain steep slopes should be carefully designed to
minimize adverse environmental impacts. Applicants proposing
development on steep slopes shall conform their site design to the following
guidelines to the greatest practicable extent.
A. Development on steep slopes should produce the minimum feasible site
disturbance in areas of steep slope. Site improvements should be
clustered on lands of relatively low slope;
B. The development should be consistent with the natural contour of the
site, and minimize grading and alterations of natural landforms. All
disturbances of steep slopes shall be stabilized with temporary and
permanent erosion control consistent with anticipated sunlight levels,
extent and degree of disturbance, and manufacturers criteria and
methods.
C. Padding or terracing of building sites should be minimized;
D. The development should retain natural topographic features such as
drainage swales, stream beds and banks, ridge line vistas, rock
outcrops and mature plant formations. Natural points of runoff
discharge shall not be altered and no new locations of stormwater
discharge shall be proposed. Additional volume of runoff generated
shall be infiltrated to the maximum extent. Disturbed runoff paths shall
receive permanent stabilization, such as with a Turf Reinforcement Mat
or other substantial product acceptable to the Board's Engineer.
E. The development should minimize the extent to which it impairs the
visual integrity of the slopes when viewed from publicly accessible
vantage points including but not limited to the developed areas of
Lambertville generally west of NJ Route 29;
F. The development should provide for protection of maximum feasible
vegetation of the steep slope; and,
G. Mature trees should be retained and integrated into new hillside
residential development. Existing live trees with a trunk diameter of at
least eight inches measured four feet above the grade which are located
within the area of the proposed site disturbance or within any portion of
the site under 30% slope within 50 feet thereof shall be located on the
site survey. The removal of any such trees is prohibited unless it is
specifically permitted by the Board of Jurisdiction.
H. Exposed soils and topsoil piles should be adequately stabilized
throughout construction according to regulations and best
management practices established by the United States Department of
Agriculture — Natural Resource Conservation Service.
§ Z-519.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-519.9
AO:594
§ Z-519.10. Conflicts and Severability.
§ Z-519.11. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel (i.e. City
Engineer or Zoning Officer) of the City of Lambertville, of any person or
entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition
which is in violation of this § 519 is discovered, a civil action in the Special
Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of
the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process.
Nothing in this § 519 shall be construed to preclude the right of the City of
Lambertville, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings
I. The scale of new buildings should be compatible with existing
structures. Single story elements, setbacks, overhangs, roof pitches,
and landscaping should be used to minimize the impact of exterior wall
surfaces.
J. Roofs should be fragmented to avoid a monotonous appearance while
following the angle of the slope.
K. The maximum height of a proposed building should not exceed the midpoint
of the tallest building on the adjacent uphill lot.
L. All new structures should be setback a minimum of 50 feet from a ridge
top.
M. The limits of clearing on the construction site must be tightly drawn
around the area of proposed disturbance. All natural vegetation outside
of this area shall be protected during construction through the
placement of snow fencing at drip lines and other means of vegetative
protection.
A. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this § 519 are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this § 519 apply.
B. Severability.
1. Interpretation. This § 519 shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provisions of New Jersey or Federal law.
2. Notwithstanding that any provision of this § 519 is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the § 519 shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
3. The provisions of this § 519 shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ Z-519.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-519.11
AO:595
hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection
of this § 519 shall constitute a separation and distinct offense independent
of the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued
pursuant to this § 519. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
The penalties set forth in Article X Violations, § 1000, of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Lambertville shall be applicable to violations of this
§ 519.
§ Z-519.12. Steep Slope Illustration.
§ Z-520. HOME OCCUPATIONS. [Ord. No. 99-13]
Home occupations are divided into minor and major types depending on the
intensity of the use. Home occupations meeting the criteria for minor home
occupations shall be classified as such. Home occupations not meeting
the criteria for a minor home occupation shall be considered major home
occupations. Uses not meeting either category shall not be permitted as
home occupations.
§ Z-520.1. Minor Home Occupation.
A minor home occupation shall meet the criteria within this subsection.
A zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer precedent to the
commencement of the minor home occupation. The criteria for a minor
home occupation are as follows:
A. The use shall be conducted entirely within the primary dwelling or
accessory building associated with it.
B. No more than 50% of the first floor or basement area or 250 square
feet, whichever is less, of the dwelling unit or accessory structure on
the same lot may be used for the minor home occupation.
C. No display of products shall be visible from the street, nor shall any
article be sold or offered for sale on the premises.
§ Z-519.11 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-520.1
AO:596
§ Z-520.2. Major Home Occupation.
A major home occupation shall meet the criteria within this subsection. A
conditional use permit shall be obtained from the Planning Board precedent
to the commencement of any major home occupation. The criteria for a
major home occupation are as follows:
D. No more than two clients, patrons, or customers may be on the
premises for business or professional purposes at any one time.
E. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
F. No sounds emanating from the minor home occupation use shall be
audible outside the residence.
G. No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio
and television reception in neighboring dwellings nor create other
nuisances by its operation.
H. The minor home occupation shall not employ any person not resident on
the premises in the performance of the occupation.
I. No sign identifying or advertising the minor home occupation shall be
permitted.
J. Deliveries shall be limited to package (e.g., United Parcel Service)
services or utilization of the owner's passenger vehicle.
K. No additional off-street parking to accommodate the minor home
occupation shall be allowed.
L. The major home occupation shall not be open for customers, clients or
patrons before 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. on weekends nor
after 8:30 p.m. on any day of the week.
A. The use shall be conducted entirely within the primary dwelling or
accessory building associated with it.
B. No more than 50% of the first floor or basement area or 450 square
feet, whichever is less, of the dwelling unit may be used for the home
occupation.
C. No display of products shall be visible from the street, nor shall any
article be sold or offered for sale on the premises.
D. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
E. No sounds emanating from the home occupation use shall be audible
outside the residence.
F. No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio
and television reception in neighboring dwellings nor create other
nuisances by its operation.
§ Z-520.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-520.2
AO:597
§ Z-520.3. Prohibited Home Occupations.
The following uses shall not be considered home occupations:
§ Z-521. FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS. [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-07]
Any development within the municipality shall comply with the provisions
of Chapter XIX, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Code of the City of
Lambertville.
§ Z-522. DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-12]
G. No major home occupation shall employ more than one non-resident.
H. One non-illuminated sign attached to a facade of the building, or, fence
or wall, not to exceed two square feet, may be permitted identifying the
major home occupation.
I. The home occupation shall not reduce the parking or yard requirements
of the dwelling.
J. Where parking is provided, no more than three parking spaces per
property, including required residential parking, shall be allowed. All
parking associated with the home occupation shall be screened from
view of any public street behind a combination of hedging, landscaping
or fencing.
K. Deliveries shall be limited to package (e.g., United Parcel Service)
services or utilization of the owner's passenger vehicle.
L. The major home occupation shall not be open for customers, clients or
patrons before 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. on weekends nor
after 8:30 p.m. on any day of the week.
A. Automobile repair, refurbishing or servicing.
B. Barber shops and beauty salons.
C. Bed and breakfast accommodation.
D. Body piercing and tattooing.
E. Medical and dental offices.
F. Real estate office.
G. Spray painting and refinishing operations.
H. Taxi and limousine service.
I. Home occupations primarily involving public assembly.
§ Z-520.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-522.1
AO:598
§ Z-522.1. Purpose.
Development contributes to increased flooding, increased channel erosion
and increased quantities of pollutants. Regulation of increased drainage
runoff from development can control some of the adverse impacts on the
City's water resources. The City Engineer will review each development
disturbing land in excess of 3,000 square feet for conformance to the design
standards set forth herein to regulate the discharge of drainage runoff.
§ Z-522.2. Applicability.
The Drainage Requirements contained herein are applicable to any site plan
and any subdivision, minor or major, which will result in the disturbance of
3,000 square feet of land area. In the case of a minor or major subdivision,
the land disturbance shall be determined on the basis of the proposed
improvements, present or future, including but not limited to, site grading
and impervious coverage.
Any imposed conditions will be based upon the drainage runoff that is
generated on or by the land development and its overall impact to City,
County, or State drainage facilities. However, in cases where impervious
surface is being added to a developed site, conditions may be imposed only
on the new coverage if it can be shown that existing site runoff conditions
are adequately addressed and the cumulative effect is of no detriment to
City, County or State facilities.
All projects must conform to City standards unless the County or State
standards are more restrictive.
§ Z-522.3. Submission Requirements.
The following information is required for each proposed project.
A. Topography and Features. Topography of the site shall extend a
minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development,
showing two-foot contour intervals at a minimum. The plans will also
indicate existing surface water drainage structures, marshlands,
woodlands, wetlands, existing man-made structures, roads, utilities,
property boundary with metes and bounds and significant natural and
man- made features not otherwise shown. Include all the watershed
boundaries and time of concentration paths for pre-developed
conditions. Natural ponding areas must be shown.
B. Vicinity. Indicate at least the following: roads, pedestrian ways, access
to the site, adjacent land uses, existing open space, public facilities,
utilities, drainage (including, specifically, streams and other surface
water shown on U.S.G.S. and soils map), and other significant features.
C. Stormwater Management. Indicate the location of proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for managing
stormwater and sediment control, and other permanent structures.
Clearly show areas where alterations in the natural terrain, cover, and
§ Z-522.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-522.3
AO:599
grade are proposed, and changes in natural cover, including lawns and
other landscaping. Soil types based upon the Soil Conservation Service
Soil Survey will be shown. Show all the post-developed watershed
boundaries and time of concentration paths. All natural and proposed
ponding areas must be shown. Any unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features should be identified.
D. Stormwater Management Report.
1. Project description including total area to be paved or built upon,
estimated land to be occupied by stormwater management
facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the plan
to manage surface water.
2. Computations of average "C" values or runoff curve numbers (CN)
must include soil types and existing and proposed land uses. Use
Table 2-2a - Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas from SCS
Technical Release 55 for SCS Method, or as approved by the City
Engineer for the Modified Rational Method.
3. Maximum discharge and total volume of runoff which would occur
from the project area before and after development for the
following storms:
* One and 1/4 inch of rainfall occurring within two hours, or One
Year, twenty-four-hour SCS Type III Storm
* The specified design storms: two-, ten- and 100-year, twenty-fourhour
SCS Type III.
The source of any computerized programs should be clearly
referenced by name and date of last update.
4. Calculations for runoff after development must include detention
characteristics and hydrograph routings. Calculations for
determination of the time of concentration must be provided. The
path of surface runoff used to determine the time of concentration
should be shown on a topographic map for pre-developed
conditions and for post-developed conditions. Time of
concentration and travel time calculations are to be completed in
accordance with Chapter 3 of the SCS Technical Release 55.
Calculations must be made for off-site and uncontrolled drainage
areas.
5. Design and calculations of temporary sediment basins, rip-rap
aprons, swales and other soil erosion and sediment control features
must be provided. Design and calculations will be in conformance
with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey.
6. Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for onsite existing or
proposed storm sewer collection systems, culverts, and other
§ Z-522.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-522.3
AO:600
§ Z-522.4. Design Standards.
stormwater facilities. The designer shall verify that existing
downstream conveyance, natural or manmade facilities, can pass
any increase in runoff from the site. Stability of natural conveyance
features is to be ensured.
7. Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for stream delineations,
floodway and flood hazard limits in accordance with the NJDEP
Stream Encroachment Technical Manual and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act (N.J.A.C. 7:13).
A. General Standards. The project plans submitted should demonstrate
careful consideration of the general and specific concerns of the
applicable municipal, regional and state stormwater management
programs and be based on environmentally sound site planning,
engineering and architectural techniques. The design shall conform
with the provisions of the City's Steep Slopes Ordinance when
applicable. (See § 519)
B. Alternatives to Detention Basins.
1. Tanks, infiltration pits, dry wells or other acceptable methods may
be used for the purpose, with appropriate consideration for
groundwater pollution, potential length of life and feasibility of
continued maintenance consistent with NJDEP regulations and
guidelines. It is not necessary that stormwater management
requirements be satisfied by means of detention basins. The use of
infiltration systems is recommended for the full water quality storm
volume whenever possible. Certain types of infiltration practices
are subject to the NJDEP Discharge to Groundwater Regulations.
2. Nonstructural management practices, such as cluster land use
development, open space acquisition, conservation of agricultural
and critical constraint lands, stream encroachment and flood
hazard control should be coordinated with detention requirements.
3. Volume control is encouraged such as trenches and dry wells.
Infiltration facilities must be carefully analyzed for permeability of
soil, seasonal high water table and necessity for pretreatment of
sediments in order to prevent clogging. Even more important, it is
absolutely essential that possible groundwater contamination be
taken into account.
4. The applicant will demonstrate that:
a. There is at least three feet or more vertical separation between
the bottom of the infiltration facility and the seasonal high
water table proven by soil logs taken in the location of the
proposed basin;
§ Z-522.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-522.4
AO:601
§ Z-522.5. Flood and Erosion Control Standards.
b. The soil texture is sand, loamy sand or sandy loam as described
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Soil permeability
testing is required in the location of the proposed basin;
c. Runoff is pretreated to remove TSS (Total Suspended Solids)
prior to discharge into the infiltration facility;
d. The infiltration basin bottom is scarified after the basin is
formed, after which no machinery or equipment may enter
within the basin;
e. The entire volume of runoff generated by the water quality
design storm is contained in the infiltration facility and
recharged into the ground within 72 hours;
f. An analysis is provided to demonstrate the safety and stability
resulting from excess flows from the facility in the event of an
outlet failure;
g. Provision is made for additional capacity capable of holding an
estimated 20 years of suspended load that bypasses
pretreatment. Calculations shall be in accordance with "The
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual",
February 2004, Chapter 4, "Stormwater Pollutant Removal
Criteria".
5. Detention basins and berms may be seeded with a wildflower mix
or planted with appropriate vegetation provided the function is not
compromised.
A. Detention Facilities.
A detention facility should accommodate site runoff generated from
two-, ten- and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storms, considered
individually (in each case a Type III Rainfall as defined in Soil
Conservation Service Publications). Runoff greater than that occurring
from the 100-year twenty-four-hour Storm will be passed over an
emergency spillway or a bypass system. Detention will be provided
such that after development the peak rate of flow from the site will
not exceed the corresponding flows, from the site prior to development.
Detention basins alone do not reduce the increased volume of runoff
caused by development; therefore, the discharge rate must minimally
be adjusted to safely control the increased volume.
It is possible for flooding in a given watershed to be aggravated by
the combined effects of detention basins, if the basins are improperly
placed. Detention basins located in downstream areas hold back peak
flows so that the flow coincides with the peak flow from upstream.
This situation must be investigated with supporting calculations of
§ Z-522.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-522.5
AO:602
downstream effects. Water quality controls are required at a minimum
in all cases.
Detention basins with a permanent pool of water must provide safety
ledges and/or gently sloping sides. Provisions must be made for proper
water circulation, control of algae, insect control and continued
maintenance including dredging to maintain proper depth.
Dry detention basins should be shaped to blend with the natural
topography. The bottom of the dry detention basin must be at least
two feet vertically above the seasonal high groundwater table. Dry
detention basins are to be graded to provide a positive overland flow
unless in the case of plunge pools or scour holes. Underdrains may be
considered for assisting positive drainage.
B. Outlet Devices.
In all cases, multiple level outlets or other fully automatic outlets are
to be designed so that discharge rates from the development for the
design storms will not be increased from what would occur if the
development were not constructed. Outlet waters must be discharged
from the development at such locations and velocities as not to cause
additional erosion or cause additional channels downstream of the
development. No outlets will be permitted directly into adjacent lands
without proof of a zero increase in the rate of runoff and a stability
analysis of the off-site channel. If there is no stable outlet downstream,
an off-site easement must be obtained to provide a stable outlet. Outlets
from detention facilities are to be designed to function without manual,
electric, or mechanical controls.
Location of the principal outlet should allow for easy vehicle access.
The outlet structure must be designed to withstand all anticipated
pressures and/or loadings. Outlet structures will involve multi-stage
outlet systems. The lowest outlet will be designed to achieve prolonged
retention requirements for water quality control. The remaining outlets
located above the water quality peak detention pool elevation must
control the required design storms.
Debris and sediment will accumulate around the outlet structure. Trash
racks with hinges or other devices are required to protect the outlet
from clogging. The inclined vertical bar rack is recommended for the
lower stage outlets to facilitate debris removal. The inside of the outlet
structure should be depressed below the lowest outlet to minimize
clogging of this outlet due to sedimentation.
C. Dams.
Any stormwater basin that impounds water through the use of an
artificial dike, levee or other barrier may be subject to the New Jersey
Dam Safety Standards. All such dams must be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained in compliance with said Standards and all
§ Z-522.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-522.5
AO:603
other applicable laws and approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
The minimum top width of the embankment must be 10 feet. Side
slopes of the settled embankment should not be less than three
horizontal to one vertical. The minimum elevation to the top of the
settled embankment must be one foot above the water surface created
by the maximum design storm passing over the emergency spillway
in a completely clogged outlet structure condition. Design height of
the basin embankment is required to be increased 10% where hauling
equipment is used and 5% where compaction equipment is used.
D. Emergency Spillways.
Emergency spillways are required on all detention basins and will
be designed to pass the entire SCS 100-year, twenty-four-hour postdeveloped
peak discharge tributary to the detention basin at a
minimum. Detention basins with dams subject to N.J.A.C. 7:20, the
New Jersey Dam Safety Standards, must comply with those Emergency
Spillway Requirements.
Emergency spillways are to be located in cut sections wherever
possible. Stable channels must be provided to convey stormwater
through the emergency spillway to the discharge points. Discharge
from the emergency spillway must also not cause soil instability both
onsite and offsite.
E. Off-Site Drainage.
Stormwater runoff from areas off-site may be passed across the
development site without detention. If the off-site drainage enters the
detention facility provided for the development, the detention facility
design must handle this additional flow.
A point of interest analysis is encouraged to determine the change in
runoff downstream of the site.
F. Uncontrolled Runoff.
Since it is difficult to control 100% of the development site stormwater
runoff, provisions must be made to regulate uncontrolled runoff to the
maximum extent practical. Uncontrolled runoff is stormwater flow not
tributary to detention basins or other stormwater control facilities on
the development site.
The total peak runoff from the site after development cannot exceed
pre-developed rates at all locations leaving the site, therefore
uncontrolled runoff will be allowed only if:
1. The stormwater control facilities on-site are adequately sized to
reduce the composite (summation of controlled and uncontrolled)
peak rates of runoff to below pre-developed conditions for each
tributary location offsite.
§ Z-522.5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-522.5
AO:604
§ Z-522.6. Interpretation.
If the terms of this section shall be in conflict with those of another
ordinance of the Code of the City of Lambertville, then the restriction which
imposes the greater limitation shall be enforced.
§ Z-523. ADOPTION OF LAMBERTVILLE DESIGN GUIDELINES.35
[Added 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-28]
The Mayor and Council of the City of Lambertville have approved the
inclusion of the design standards in the Zoning Chapter and adopted by
reference the Lambertville Design Guidelines, dated September 2, 2009, as
prepared by Mosaic Planning and Design, LLC.
2. The uncontrolled runoff will not exceed pre-developed peak rates at
the point of discharge. Uncontrolled runoff must be limited to
overland and swale flows.
G. Joint Detention Facilities. In many instances, the provisions of separate
detention facilities for a number of single sites may be more expensive
and more difficult to maintain than provisions of joint facilities for a
number of sites. In such cases, the City may be willing to consider
provisions of joint detention facilities, which will fulfill the requirements
of this regulation. In such cases, the City may approve a properly
planned staged program of detention facilities.
H. Detention Facilities in Flood Hazard Areas. Detention facilities
proposed within Flood Hazard Areas are required to be designed in
accordance with applicable NJDEP standards and approved by NJDEP.
I. Exceptions. When properly sized detention facilities are unable to be
constructed and the aforementioned requirement cannot reasonably be
adhered to, the developer may be required to provide adequate
drainage facilities in such a manner as to not overburden the City,
County or State drainage facilities, and to share in the costs of
improvements to existing City, County or State drainage structures and
facilities requiring enlargement, modification or reconstruction as a
result of the increase in runoff from the development. To facilitate the
review of proposed drainage facilities for a development, design
calculations prepared by the developer's engineer must be submitted
with the development plan.
35.Editor's Note: The Design Guidelines can be found on file in the City Clerk's Office and
may be found online with the Land Use Ordinances, Zoning Appendix.
§ Z-522.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-523
AO:605

ARTICLE VI
Standards for Review of Applications36
§ Z-600. STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS. [Added
4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
Development plans shall be so designed as to enhance the general
appearance of the City of Lambertville and to promote the harmonious
use of land; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from
fire, panic, or other dangers; to promote the general health, safety, and
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land, buildings and roadways by an undue concentration of population;
to encourage development which would facilitate pedestrian access and
the use of mass transit; to encourage creative development and design
consistent with the policies of the Master Plan of the City of Lambertville,
and the regulations promulgated herein. Applications for development shall
be reviewed for meeting the standards for development contained within
this Ordinance and other land development regulations of the City and more
particularly the following specific objectives:
§ Z-600.1. Development Compatibility.
All development shall permit and encourage only those uses of the land
which, through the standards adopted in this Ordinance, provide for
flexibility in planning and development and that respect the natural
character of the land, the drainage system, soil capabilities, groundwater
and aquifer recharge quality, and to include only those uses that are
compatible with allowed uses in the zoning district and existing uses on
adjacent lands. Such compatibility shall be determined on the basis of
inventories of the natural features of the site, plans indicating the physical
relationship among types of uses and any natural or man-made barriers,
existing or planned, between different uses both within and adjacent to the
proposed development, and sufficient information to determine the effect of
such development upon the quality of life of the City of Lambertville.
§ Z-600.2. Relationship to Lambertville Master Plan.
All development shall be planned and designed to achieve the goals and
objectives for land development as are or may be set forth in the
Lambertville Master Plan duly adopted by the Planning Board with regard
to conservation, historic preservation, community facilities, recreation,
open space, recycling, affordable housing, utility distribution, circulation,
community design standards and guidelines, land use, fiscal impact,
economic development, and the goals for development of adjacent
municipalities, Hunterdon County and the State.
36.Editor's Note: Former Article VI, Exceptions and Modification, repealed by Ord. No.
2001-07.
§ Z-600 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-600.3
AO:607
§ Z-600.3. Relationship to Lambertville Development Patterns.
All development shall be planned and designed to achieve the City's goals
of permitting and encouraging a population density and a development
pattern in the municipality that facilitates the provision of public utilities
and services, including public water and public sewerage, storm drainage
systems, recreation areas, public schools, state, county, and local roads, in
an orderly, functional and economical manner.
§ Z-600.4. Conservation of Open Space.
Common open space and adequate recreation areas shall be set aside in
suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of the residents and
the owners of the development and those portions of the project that,
because of their natural features, constitute important visual amenities
and environmental resources. Development is intended to create after
completion a continuity of open space resulting from the integration of
upland, wetland, floodplain and surface water areas in accordance with the
goals and objectives of the Master Plan.
§ Z-600.5. Appearance and Aesthetic Control.
All development shall be planned and designed to promote and achieve
aesthetically pleasing views from and to various land uses. The creation and
promotion of such aesthetic conditions shall strengthen and preserve the
municipality's unique environmental heritage and promote the civic pride,
prosperity, and general welfare of the residents of the development, the
municipality, and visitors thereto.
§ Z-600.6. Review Guidelines.
The following guidelines shall be used in the review of any application for
development or conditional use:
A. Regard for Natural Features. All residential and non-residential uses
shall be designed with regard to the topography and natural features of
the site. The effects of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures and
hours of sunlight on the physical layout and form of the proposed
buildings shall be taken into account. Special consideration shall be
given to the preservation of natural features, including large trees,
stands of specimen vegetation, groves, waterways, aquifer recharge
areas, scenic, paleontological, archaeological, cultural, and historic
sites and other community assets within the site area, and the reduction
of impacts on wildlife. The development shall be designed and
programmed so as to minimize tree clearance and the destruction of
natural amenities associated with the same.
B. Siting of Buildings. All housing and supporting uses shall be sited so as
to enhance privacy for residential uses, ensure natural light for all
principal residential rooms, and to the greatest extent possible be
§ Z-600.3 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-600.6
AO:608
designed to promote passive solar energy technology. Buildings' layout
shall be reviewed for arrangement, efficiency and aesthetic quality.
C. Fiscal Impact. The fiscal costs to the City and Board of Education from
providing services to the development shall be considered in relation to
the gain of revenue and its impact upon the municipal and school board
tax rates.
D. Relationship to Community Facilities. Housing shall be conveniently
served by community facilities and open space.
E. Circulation. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and
adjacent to the site with particular emphasis on the provision and
layout of parking areas, off-street loading and unloading, the movement
of people, goods and vehicles from access roads within the site,
between buildings and between buildings and vehicles. In particular
the Board of jurisdiction shall ensure compliance in site design with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as it may be amended or superseded.
The Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and are safely
and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall
be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on
these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress
to the site. The circulation shall be consistent with City, county, and
state requirements.
F. Open Space. Open space within all planned unit developments shall be
planned and designed to achieve the City goal of insuring that adequate
recreation areas are set aside in suitable locations to provide for the
recreation needs of the residents and owners of the planned unit
development; and that those portions of the City that, because of their
natural features, constitute important visual amenities and
environmental resources are maintained in accordance with sound
conservation practice.
G. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be reviewed for the ability to integrate
the site elements of topography, water, buildings, parking and loading
areas, and the buffering of incompatible uses. Landscaping shall be
reviewed for diversity, including species, function, sculpture, fencing,
walls, and other landscaping elements.
H. Lighting. Adequate lighting for the function of the site shall be reviewed
for the safe movement and security of persons and vehicles. Particular
attention shall be made to the minimization of glare and impact upon
adjacent property.
I. Signs. Signs shall be evaluated for the aesthetics of their design and
their harmony with other signs on- and off-site, the architectural design
of the building or buildings to which they relate and the type of
development or pattern of the built environment surrounding the
location of the sign or signs. The location of signs shall be reviewed for
the purpose of removing any hazard to pedestrians or motorists.
§ Z-600.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-600.6
AO:609
§ Z-601. STANDARDS FOR GRANT OF VARIANCE. [Added 4-16-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-07]
§ Z-601.1. Lack of Detriment.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Article
unless such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
§ Z-601.2. Expiration of Variances.
Any variance from the terms of this Article hereafter granted by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures, or
permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by limitation unless
such construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted
use has actually been commenced, within 12 months from the date of
entry of the judgment or determination of the Zoning Board of Adjustment;
except, however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided
shall be tolled from the date of filing and appeal from the decision of
J. Utilities, Solid Waste Management and Recycling. Storm drainage,
sanitary and solid waste disposal including recycling, water supply,
electricity supply, telephone and cable television service shall be
reviewed and considered. Emphasis shall be given on the adequacy of
existing systems and the need for improvements, both on- and off-site to
adequately provide for the development's needs.
K. Compatibility of Residential and Non-residential Development.
Applications for development and conditional uses shall be designed to
assure the compatibility of residential and non-residential uses by:
1. Providing commercial uses with appropriate space and, in
particular, sufficient depth from a street to satisfy the needs of
contemporary uses including the provision of adequately
landscaped off-street parking, buffer areas between commercial
and residential use areas, pedestrian and bicycle circulation
systems connecting the commercial uses to office, residential and
open space uses;
2. Protecting non-residential development and nearby residences
against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and
other hazards, and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust
and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare
and other objectionable influences;
3. Protect residential and non-residential development from the noise,
exhaust emissions, and other negative aspects of congestion of
vehicular traffic.
§ Z-600.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-601.2
AO:610
the Zoning Board of Adjustment to the Governing Body, or to a court of
competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal
or proceeding.
§ Z-602. REVIEW CRITERIA WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT.
[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12, amended by Ord. No.
2014-28; Ord. No. 2006-08; Ord. No. 2016-06]
Applications for development, zoning permits and building permits within
the Lambertville Historic District shall be reviewed for their effect upon
the purpose and intent of the district in accordance with the procedures
of the Historic Preservation Commission in § 902 of the Land Development
Ordinance, the design standards in § 613 of the Land Subdivision
Ordinance, and the review criteria herein.
A. Intent.
1. It is the intent of this § 602 that the Historic Preservation
Commission shall encourage appropriate alterations or repairs to
those landmarks or structures in the district which would be
complimentary to the original or dominant architectural style in the
district and which would enhance rather than detract from the
structure's predominant appearance. This work shall also be
complimentary to adjoining structures.
2. It is intended that demolition of historic structures shall be
discouraged as their loss will be a common loss to the City of
Lambertville and the neighborhood. Moving a landmark or other
property in the historic district should be encouraged only as the
last resort as an alternative to demolition, if there is no other way
to save the structure.
3. It is also intended by this § 602 that the Historic Preservation
Commission shall review plans for new construction so that such
construction is compatible with existing and nearby structures, it is
not intended that new construction be a copy of a particular
historic period or style, but rather that is be compatible in the use
of materials, scale, color, size and setback.
B. Demolitions.
1. In the area of the City of Lambertville that has been placed on the
State and National Register of Historic Places all requests for
demolition permits must be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment, prior to issuance of the
permit. The following criteria shall be used to evaluate any
application to demolish a historic building under this section:
a. Its historic, architectural and social significance.
b. Its potential use for the uses currently permitted by the zoning
ordinance.
§ Z-601.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-602
AO:611
c. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would
be detrimental to the public interest.
d. The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be
reproduced, or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
e. The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values,
generating business, creating new jobs, attracting visitors,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans, attracting
new residents, encouraging study and interest in American
history, stimulating study in architecture and design, educating
citizens in American culture and heritage, or making the City a
more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
f. If it is within the area of the City of Lambertville that has been
placed on the State and National Register of Historic Places,
the probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the
area.
g. If a property owner conclusively demonstrates to the Historic
Preservation Commission that a historic building or structure
within the area is incapable of earning an economic return on
its value, as appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser, the
Planning Board may delay issuance of the demolition permit
for a period of time not to exceed six months. Notice of the
proposed demolition shall be posted on the premises of the
structure in a location clearly visible from the street by means
of a sign approved by the Historic Preservation Commission.
The purpose of this subsection is to encourage the
preservation of historic buildings and to offer the City,
interested persons, historical societies, or other organizations
the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of
such buildings. The Planning Board may at any time during
such delay approve a demolition permit, and at the end of six
months, shall automatically approve a demolition permit, in
which event a demolition permit shall be issued without further
delay.
2. As a condition for the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
provide documentation of the structural condition of the subject
building by an engineer or architect and a preservation specialist,
which concludes demolition is the best and/or only solution. The
permit shall then be issued in conjunction with an approval of the
exterior design of the replacement structure by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
3. The application for a demolition permit shall include the following:
§ Z-602 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-602
AO:612
a. Measured exterior elevations by an architect or engineer and a
preservation specialist.
b. A materials list of the architectural character-defining
elements and the composition of these elements (stone, wood,
metal or other).
c. A list of architectural elements to be reused or salvaged that
form the historic fabric of the building to be demolished.
d. To the extent that the applicant can comply, photo
documentation of the building in its existing and past condition
so that the Board can get a sense of its place in history.
C. Removals Out of the City. In regard to an application to move an historic
structure within the district, or any historic building, to a location
outside the City, the following matters shall be considered:
1. The historic loss to the site of the original location and the district
as a whole.
2. The compelling reasons for not retaining the structure at its
present site.
3. The proximity of the proposed new location to the City, including
the accessibility to the residents of the City and other persons.
4. The probability of significant damage to the structure, either by the
move, or at its new location.
5. The applicable matters listed in § 602.B, hereinabove.
D. Removals Within the City. In regard to an application to move a
landmark or any structure in the historic district to a new location
within the City, the following matters shall be considered in addition to
the matters listed in § 602.E, hereinbelow:
1. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this ordinance.
2. If the proposed new location remains, or will be within the historic
district, the visual compatibility factors shall follow those outlined
in § 612, Community Design Guidelines for Historic Districts, of the
Land Subdivision Ordinance.
E. Other Factors to Be Considered. In regard to an application for
approval of other proposed changes as set forth in the reviewing the
proposed development, the following matters shall be considered:
1. The impact of the proposed change on its historic architectural
character.
§ Z-602 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-602
AO:613
§ Z-603. through § Z-619. (Reserved)
§ Z-620. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. [Added 4-18-2019
by Ord. No. 06-2019]
§ Z-620.1. Development Review Committee Established;
Composition.
§ Z-620.2. Actions to Be Deemed Complete.
The Development Review Committee shall examine each application to
ascertain that all required checklist items required by municipal ordinance
are shown or furnished in the application or accompanying documents,
or that otherwise a waiver has been requested. If all checklist items are
provided and no waivers requested, the application shall be deemed
complete and the applicant shall be so notified. If waivers are requested
as to any items, the Committee shall recommend that the full Board grant
or deny said waivers, with or without conditions, as to the application
at its next regularly scheduled or special meeting. The Board shall, at
its next ensuing regularly scheduled or special meeting held not later
than 45 days from the date of submission of such application with the
Committee's recommendations, decide whether to grant or deny the waiver
or waivers requested and to declare the application with waivers complete.
2. The extent to which there would be involvement of textures or
materials that could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only
with great difficulty.
3. The use of any structure involved.
4. The extent to which a proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view from a public street of a landmark or structure within
a historic district.
F. Application to the Historic Preservation Commission: Fee.
The application fee to the Historic Preservation Commission shall be in
the amount of $50 per application.
A. There shall be a joint standing committee of the Planning Board and the
Zoning Board, designated as Development Review Committee, which
shall be responsible for reviewing applications for completeness.
B. Committee Composition. The Development Review Committee shall
comprise of the Board Engineer, Board Planner, and Board Secretary.
The Board Attorney may attend as needed. The Chair of each Board may
appoint one member of their respective Board to the Development
Review Committee for a one-year term. Vacancies shall be filled at or by
the next regular session of the respective Board. Not more than one
alternate member from each Board may serve on any standing
committee.
§ Z-602 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-620.2
AO:614
The merits hearing, if properly noticed, may occur immediately following
a declaration of completeness from the Board having jurisdiction. If the
Development Review Committee fails to provide notice of incompleteness
with information about the deficiencies within 45 days of the filing, the
application shall be deemed complete.
§ Z-620.3. No Limit on Other Board Powers.
Nothing herein shall otherwise limit the power of the Board having
jurisdiction to grant appropriate waivers, including waivers for submissions
in other contexts, as provided in the Municipal Land Use Law37 and the
City's ordinances, such as waivers coupled with requests for bulk variances
or other appropriate relief.
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ Z-620.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-620.3
AO:615

ARTICLE VII
Relief and Supervision
§ Z-701. ESTABLISHMENT AND JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT.
A Zoning Board of Adjustment to consist of seven members and two
alternate members is hereby established as authorized by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. with powers and duties as prescribed in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70 through 40:55D-76, as amended, together with further powers,
duties and jurisdiction which may hereafter be delegated to it by the
Legislature. Alternate members shall be designated Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2 and shall serve in rotation during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members.
§ Z-702. ACTION BY THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
In the granting of special use permits, hardship variances or land use
variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, a time limit of one year from the date
of approval shall be set within which time the owner shall secure a building
permit from the Construction Official and must commence construction
which shall be diligently pursued or become void.
§ Z-703. APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS TO THE BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or refusal made by the Zoning Officer
based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. Appeals
to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer of the City based on or
made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance or official map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days of filing a notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
B. An applicant may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers established under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 without prior application to the Zoning Officer. Any
application to the Board of Adjustment for a hearing shall be filed with
the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment at least three weeks prior to
the next meeting of the Board of Adjustment.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the decision of the Zoning
Officer or (2) the submission of a complete application for development
to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-59b. Failure of
the Board to render a decision within such 120-day period or within
§ Z-701 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-703
AO:617
§ Z-704. PLANNING BOARD REVIEW FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
No building permit shall be issued for any residential, commercial, public or
quasi-public structure until the site plan has been reviewed and approved
by the Planning Board except that the approval of a site plan for a single
family and two family dwelling or minor repairs and alterations shall not
be necessary. All site plans in the CBD Zone, however, shall be reviewed.
The Planning Board shall review the proposal, determine whether or not the
applicable standards provided by this Ordinance have been observed, note
objections to such parts of the plans as do not meet the standards, make
corrections and recommendations for desired changes to effect compliance
with the Ordinance, be satisfied that the site plan represents the most
desirable alternative for development of the site in compliance with the
Ordinance, and when satisfied that the site plan complies with the
requirements of this Ordinance, shall approve the site plan.
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ Z-703 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-704
AO:618
ARTICLE VIII
Applications and Fees
§ Z-800. APPLICATION AND ESCROW FEES. [Ord. No. 94-24 § 4,
Ord. No. 2000-19, Ord. No. 2002-26, Ord. No. 2010-05; Ord. No.
2010-25; Ord. No. 94-24 §§ 2 — 5; Ord. No. 18-2016; New]
A. Every application for development shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the City of Lambertville in accordance with the following fee
schedule:
Subdivisions
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
Informal Plan (All fees for
informal review shall be a credit
toward fees for review of the
same application for development)
$250 $1,000
Minor Subdivision or Sketch Plat $500 $1,500
Preliminary Major Subdivision
Plat
$2,000 $2,000 + $100 per
lot
Final Major Subdivision Plat $500 $1,000 + $100 per
lot
Site Plan
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
Informal Site Plan: (All fees for
informal review shall be a credit
toward fees for review of the
same application for
development.)
$400 $1,000
Minor Site Plan $500 $1,500
Sign Review $100
Site Plan Waiver $50 $500
Preliminary Site Plan $2,000 $2,500
Final Site Plan $500 $2,000
Other Application & Escrow Fees
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
VARIANCES
Hardship (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c) $500 $1,000
§ Z-800 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-800
AO:619
Other Application & Escrow Fees
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
Use (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a) $1,500 $2,000
OTHER ACTIONS BY BOARD
Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a) $200 $1,000
Interpretation (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b)
$200 $1,000
Non-Conforming Use Certificate
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68)
$200 $1,500
Issuance of Permit for a Building
in Certain Locations (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 and 36)
$500 $2,000
Appeals to City Counsel (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17)
$400 None
Request for Rezoning $2,000 $3,000
Conditional Use Permit $400 $1,000
Boundary Line Amendment $500 $2,000
Certified List of Property Owners
$0.25 per name or $10, whichever
is greater
None
B. Tax Map Revision Fees.
1. Minor and Major Subdivisions.
A fee of $150 per lot or unit shall be charged for all minor and
major subdivisions, residential unit site plans or condominium or
cooperative residential or commercial development to cover the
cost of revising the City tax map. This fee shall be paid prior to
signing the final plat of a major subdivision by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Municipal Agency and City Engineer.
2. Revised Plats.
a. Any proposed revisions to a plat, including all supporting maps
and documents, previously approved by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, which approval is still in effect, shall
require submission of a revised plat and payment of fees in
accordance with the current City requirements.
b. Where changes in the plat are requested by the Municipal
Agency or City Engineer, no fees need be paid.
C. Transcript Fee. A deposit fee of $500 shall be charged for a transcript
and a deposit of $25 shall be charged for a duplicate recording.
§ Z-800 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-800
AO:620
§ Z-801. PURPOSE OF FEES. [Ord. No. 2000-19]
The application charge is a flat fee to cover direct administrative expenses
and is non-refundable. The escrow account is established to cover the
costs of professional services including engineering, legal, planning and
other expenses connected with the review of the submitted materials. In
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, sums not
utilized in the review process shall be returned to the applicant upon
written request. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the applicant
shall be notified by certified mail or personal service of the required
additional amount and shall add such sum to the escrow. Payment shall be
due from the applicant within 15 days of receipt of the notice. If payment
is not received within 15 days, the applicant shall be considered to be in
default, and such default may be grounds for denial of the application.
§ Z-802. MULTIPLE FEES. [Ord. No. 2000-19]
Where one application for development includes several approval requests,
the sum of the individual required fees in accordance with § 800 shall be
paid.
§ Z-803. COSTS OF REVIEW AND INSPECTION. [Ord. No. 2000-19]
Each applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall agree in writing to
pay all reasonable costs for professional review of the application, including
costs incurred with any informal review of a concept plan which may have
preceded the submission of a preliminary application. Additionally, each
D. Fee for Publication of Notice of Decision. A fee of $15 shall be paid by
all applicants at the time of submitting an application for the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment for the publication of the
Notice of Decision.
E. Special Meetings. If requested by the applicant and approved by the
Board, the fee for a special meeting shall be $500.
F. Replenishment of Escrow Balance. The escrow assessed with each
application shall be replenished pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2c.
G. Zoning Permit Application. The fee for review of the Zoning Permit
application as required under § 900.2 shall be $35, payable at time of
submission of application.
H. Additional Development Fees.
1. See Land Development Review Ordinance §§ 1201 and 1202 for
Affordable Housing.
I. Applications to the Historic Preservation Commission.
See Zoning Ordinance § 602.
§ Z-800 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-803
AO:621
applicant shall agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for the municipal
inspection of the constructed improvements. All such costs for review and
inspection must be paid before any construction permit is issued and all
remaining costs must be paid in full before any occupancy issued or bonding
is released.
§ Z-804. COURT REPORTER. [Ord. No. 2000-19]
If an applicant desires a court reporter for the purposes of recording
testimony, the sole cost of taking such testimony and transcribing it shall
be at the expense of the applicant. The applicant shall arrange for the
reporter's attendance. Any transcription made shall also be provided to the
municipality at the cost of the applicant. The municipality provides for the
tape recording of the proceedings before the Board.
§ Z-803 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-804
AO:622
ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ Z-900. ZONING OFFICER AND ZONING PERMITS. [Amended
6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-06]
§ Z-900.1. Zoning Officer Duties.
The Zoning Officer shall have the general duty and authority to administer
and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall
review and maintain a file of all applications for zoning permits; issue
permits precedent to construction, the use of property and occupancy
thereof as are in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance
or lawful order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; collect all fees that
may be payable to the City under this Article and render an account to the
Chief Financial Officer or designated recipient at the end of each calendar
month and pay over the total amount of such fees collected; make such
reports to Governing Body, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
with respect to his or her work as requested by the municipal agency; and
institute and conduct lawful proceedings to prevent threatened violations
of this Ordinance and/or to correct conditions resulting from the violations
thereof; and prosecute persons who shall have violated or who shall be
engaged in violating any of the terms or provisions of this Ordinance.
§ Z-900.2. Zoning Permits Required.
No person shall hereafter erect, locate, or later any building or portion
thereof or begin or change the use of any building or land without first
obtaining a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer. All applications for
zoning permits shall be in writing and shall be addressed to the Zoning
Officer, shall be signed by the owner of record of the land, shall be made on
such forms as may be prescribed and furnished by the City of Lambertville
and shall contain all information called for by such forms and be
accompanied by such plans as may be required, together with any
additional information that may be requested by the Zoning Officer, in order
that he or she may determine whether the proposed erection, location or
alteration of a building or the proposed use or change of use of land will
comply with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance or lawful order
of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for a development
or variance application, as the case may be. No zoning permit shall be
issued unless and until all outstanding real estate property taxes and/or
municipal liens or judgments have been paid in full. A zoning permit shall
be granted or refused by the Zoning Officer within 10 business days next
after the date on which a complete application has been received. All
applications filed, together with the accompanying plans and documents,
shall be public records. Any zoning permits issued hereunder shall be
subject to the fulfillment of all conditions imposed by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment or the Planning Board provisions of the land development
regulations of the City of Lambertville.38
§ Z-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-901
AO:623
§ Z-901. BUILDING PERMITS.
No building permit for new construction shall be issued unless a zoning
permit pursuant to § 900.2 has first been issued by the Zoning Officer. Every
application for a building permit shall be accompanied by duplicate plans,
drawn in ink, or blueprint, having final approval of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment as required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and
as required by the land development regulations of the City of Lambertville
showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the
exact location, size and height of the structures and accessory structures
existing and proposed, and the lines within which the building or structure
is to be erected or altered, the existing or intended use of each structure or
part of a structure, the number of families or dwelling units the structure
is designed to accommodate, the number and location of off-street parking
spaces and off-street loading areas and such other information with regard
to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and
provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance. One copy of such plans shall
be returned to the owner when such plans shall have been approved by the
Construction Code Official together with such permit as may be granted.
All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of
the lot to be built upon shall be based on actual survey. The lot and the
location of the structure thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before
construction is started. Every application for a building permit shall be
submitted by the owner of the land as indicated on the City of Lambertville
tax assessment records or by a person furnishing a certification from the
land owner granting such permission to the applicant for filing the
application.
§ Z-902. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
§ Z-902.1. Required.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any structure or
part thereof, hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged, wholly or in
part until a Certificate of Occupancy, applied for at the time of application
for a Building Permit, shall have been issued by the Construction Official.
Such Certificate shall show that such structure or part of a structure and
the proposed use thereof conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to issue a Certificate of
Occupancy only when he is satisfied that the structure, or part of a
structure, and the proposed use thereof so conform.
§ Z-902.2. Reason for Denial.
Should the Construction Official decline to issue a Certificate of Occupancy
his reasons for doing so shall be so stated on one copy of the application
and that copy returned to the applicant.
38.Editor's Note: See § 800 for fee. See Code § 3-12 for required payment of taxes and liens.
§ Z-901 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-902.3
AO:624
§ Z-902.3. (Reserved)
§ Z-902.4. Record of Certificates.
A record of all Certificates shall be kept on file by the Construction Official
and copies shall be furnished to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the structure in question. A monthly report of Certificates of
Occupancy issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor.
§ Z-902.5. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
The Construction Officials may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy
for a use of land or a structure which is related to the development of a
permitted use or property. Such permit may be issued for a period of six
months, and no more than one six-month extension may be granted.
§ Z-902.6. Fees. [Ord. No. 18-2016]
Fees for certificates of occupancy may be found in Chapter X, Building and
Housing.
§ Z-903. NEGLECT OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
A. In the event that any landmark or structure in a historic district
deteriorates to the point that, in the best estimate of the Construction
Official, the costs of correcting the outstanding code violations equals
more than 25% of the cost of replacing the entire structure on which
the violations occur, the Construction Official shall serve personally or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the owner of the
landmark listing the violation, the estimate for the abatement, and the
replacement cost of the structure. If the owner does not take all
necessary remedial action within 90 days, or such extensions as the
Construction Official grants, the City may, after 90 days, enter upon the
property and abate such violations itself and cause the cost to become a
lien on the property.
B. Upon receiving the notice the owner may, within 10 days, notify the
Construction Official and request a formal hearing as to the allegations
and estimates set forth in the notice.
C. If the owner does not request a hearing, the procedures set forth in
§ 903.A, hereinabove shall apply. If a hearing is requested, the
Construction Official will at least 10 days before the hearing serve the
owner with a written opinion setting forth his or her reasons and
conclusions. The hearing shall be conducted by the Historic
Preservation Commission at a time and place established by the
Chairperson.
§ Z-902.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-903
AO:625
D. Thereafter, if the owner does not comply, the City may enter into the
premises and, by use of City labor or outside contractors or both,
perform such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
§ Z-903 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-903
AO:626
ARTICLE X
Violations
§ Z-1000. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of the provisions
of this Ordinance or any order, decisions or determination by the Board of
Adjustment shall be subject to upon conviction thereof, a fine of not more
than $200 for each offense. Each and every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ Z-1001. ACTION INSTITUTED BY CITY ATTORNEY OR ZONING
OFFICER.
In case any building or structure is, or is intended to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, or converted, or any building or
structure is, or intended to be used in violation of, or contrary to the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Officer may issue a stop order or
may issue a violation notice requiring appearance in answer to the notice
in municipal court. In addition, the City Attorney may, when authorized
by the Governing Body and in addition to other remedies set forth in the
Statutes of the State of New Jersey and in this Ordinance, institute an action
to enjoin, or any other appropriate action or proceeding, to prevent such
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion to use.
§ Z-1000 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1001
AO:627

ARTICLE XI
District Changes and Ordinance Amendments
§ Z-1100. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
The City of Lambertville may from time to time amend or change by
ordinance the number, shape or area of districts established on the Zoning
Map and other regulations set forth in this Ordinance in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 to 40:55D-16, 40:55D-25 and 40:55D-63, and as
amended.
§ Z-1100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1100
AO:629

ARTICLE XII
Validity
§ Z-1200. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, paragraph, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such judgement shall not
affect, impair, invalidate or nullify this Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part immediately involved in the controversy in
which such judgement or decree shall be rendered.
§ Z-1200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1200
AO:631

ARTICLE XIII
Automatic Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
§ Z-1300. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
Any and all Ordinances or parts thereof in conflict or inconsistent with any
of the terms and provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to such
extent as they are so in conflict or inconsistent, provided, however that
the adoption of this Ordinance shall not prevent or bar the continuance or
institution of any proceedings for offenses heretofore committed in violation
of any existing Ordinances of the City of Lambertville.
§ Z-1300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1300
AO:633

ARTICLE XIV
Effective Date
§ Z-1400. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
in the manner provided by law.
§ Z-1400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1400
AO:635

ARTICLE XV
Stormwater Management
§ Z-1500. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. [Added 4-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-09; amended 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 23-2015]39
§ Z-1500.1. Scope and Purpose.
A. Policy Statement.
Stormwater Management is the process of minimizing stormwater
runoff and directing stormwater appropriate nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures so as to control flooding,
recharge ground water and reduce pollution of water-resources.
Transport of stormwater-related pollutants into local surface and
ground waters can result in: the destruction of fish, wildlife, and
habitats; threats to public health due to contaminated food and drinking
water supplies; and losses of recreational and aesthetic values.
Stormwater management shall occur with the understanding and
acceptance of stormwater as a resource; low impact and non-structural
measures shall be tailored to a site and applied wherever and to the
maximum extent.
B. Purpose.
The purpose of this § 1500 is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development and
to reduce the amount of nonpoint source pollution entering surface
and ground waters. This § 1500 guides new development in a manner
that is proactive and minimizes harmful impacts to natural resources.
Specifically, this § 1500 shall:
1. Reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life, and
property;
2. Minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
3. Minimize the deterioration of existing infrastructures that would
result from increased rates of stormwater runoff;
4. Induce water recharge into the ground wherever suitable
infiltration, soil permeability, and favorable geological conditions
exist;
5. Prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution and improve
future water quality;
6. Maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels and buffers
for their ecological functions, as well as for drainage, the
conveyance of floodwater, and other purposes;
39.Editor's Note: See also the City of Lambertville Stormwater Management Plan dated
March 2005 on file at the City Offices.
§ Z-1500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.1
AO:637
7. Control and minimize soil erosion and the transport of sediment;
8. Minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval;
9. Maintain adequate baseflow and natural flow regimes in all
streams and other surface water bodies to protect the aquatic
ecosystem;
10. Protect all surface water resources from degradation; and
11. Protect ground water resources from degradation and diminution.
C. Applicability.
1. This § 1500 shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
a. Non-residential major developments; and
b. Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS)
at N.J.A.C. 5:21. The provisions of both this § 1500 and the
RSIS are to be applied and reviewed concurrently for any
residential major development.
c. In the case of agricultural or horticultural development that
meets the definition of "major development" under N.J.A.C. 7:8,
a farm conservation plan that addresses the protection of soil
and water resources shall be developed and implemented.
Such a plan shall be approved by the Hunterdon County Soil
Conservation District.
2. This § 1500 shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Lambertville.
3. This § 1500 does not apply, but the goals here within shall be
encouraged, for activities of Hunterdon County, the State of New
Jersey and the government of the United States of America when
those activities are specifically exempted from municipal
regulation by relevant State or Federal law.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this § 1500 are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this § 1500 shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This § 1500
§ Z-1500.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.1
AO:638
§ Z-1500.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 23-2015]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this § 1500 shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this § 1500 its most reasonable application. Where common
definitions exist, the definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.2.
CATEGORY ONE (C1) WATERS — Waters of the State, including unnamed
waterways that appear on Soil Survey and USGS Topographic Quadrangle
within the same HUC 14 watershed, designated in N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.15(c)
through (h) for purposes of implementing the anti-degradation policies set
forth at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.5(d) for protection from measurable changes in
water quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting,
other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources(s).
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than- normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — The Hunterdon County Planning Board, as
designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s).
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications. The design engineer shall note his/her education and
training specific to stormwater management in the qualification process.
shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of New
Jersey laws and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto,
applicable implementing regulations, and any existing or future
municipal NJPDES Permits and any amendments or revisions thereto
or re-issuance thereof. This § 1500 is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other § 1500, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law. Where any provision of this ordinance imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule
or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
§ Z-1500.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.2
AO:639
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center, such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet, as designated by
the State Planning Commission.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity including the clearing, excavating, storing,
grading, filling or transportation of soil or any other activity that causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; well head protection areas; and ground water recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are those identified by the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program, or by the Department
pursuant to the Highlands Act at N.J.S.A. 13:20-32k. and 13:20-34a(4).
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
GROUND WATER — A body of water below the surface of the land in a zone
of saturation where the spaces between the soil or geological materials are
fully saturated with water.
HUC — 14 within which the subject project is proposed (if possible and
practical), or a contribution of funding toward a regional stormwater
control project, or provision for equivalent treatment at an alternate
location, or other equivalent water quality benefit.
HUC-14 — A watershed as defined by the United States Geological Survey
with a fourteen-digit identifier; a subwatershed.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water relative to
natural conditions in the area.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water from precipitation seeps into
the soil to a level below the normal root soil of plant species.
§ Z-1500.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.2
AO:640
LOW IMPACT DESIGN (LID) — Methods incorporating design measures to
replicate pre-development hydrology to reduce the impacts of development
at a lot-level basis, treating rainwater where it falls by creating conditions
that allow the water to infiltrate back into the ground. LID emphasizes
greater infiltration of stormwater on-site rather than regarding the
stormwater as a nuisance condition and disposable.
MAINTENANCE PLAN — A document required for all major development
projects for stormwater management maintenance. The document shall
contain specific preventive maintenance tasks and schedules; cost
estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal;
and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventive and corrective maintenance (including
replacement).
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" or "redevelopment" that
provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or would create
and/or re-create 1/4 acre or more of impervious surface.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Compliance with the specific
objective to the greatest extent possible taking into account equitable
considerations and competing factors, including but not limited to,
environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory
compliance, ability to implement given site-specific environmental
conditions, cost and technical or engineering feasibility.
MITIGATION — An action by an applicant -providing compensation or offset
actions for onsite stormwater management requirements where the
applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance with the stormwater management requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in
this § 1500, and has received a waiver from strict compliance from the
municipality. Mitigation, for the purposes of this § 1500, includes both the
mitigation plan detailing how the project's failure to strictly comply will
be compensated, and the implementation of the approved mitigation plan
within the same
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village, but refers
specifically to the City of Lambertville in this document.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities that are not organized in a compact
form.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES —
Techniques that control or reduce stormwater runoff in the absence of
stormwater structures (e.g., basins and piped conveyances), such as
minimizing site disturbance, preserving important site features including,
but not limited to, natural vegetation, reducing and disconnecting
impervious cover, minimizing slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing
turf grass lawns, increasing time of concentration and maintaining and
enhancing natural drainage features and characteristics.
§ Z-1500.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.2
AO:641
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of plants,
algae and other organisms or vegetation.
NUTRIENT CONCENTRATION — The amount of a nutrient in a defined
volume of water (such as milligrams of nitrogen per liter). The relationship
between nutrient concentration and nutrient load can vary and depends on
the surface water flow, the volume of water in the water body or aquifer,
and watershed characteristics.
NUTRIENT LOAD — The total amount of a nutrient such as nitrogen or
phosphorus entering the water during a given time, such as "tons of
nitrogen per year", or "pounds of phosphorus per day." Nutrients may enter
the water from runoff, ground water recharge, point source discharges, or
the air (in the form of wet deposition such as rain or snow as well as dry
deposition).
PERMEABLE — A surface or land cover capable of transmitting or
percolating a significant amount of precipitation into the underlying soils.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, City of Lambertville, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water to the extent that the
pollutant concentration or level violates either the Ground Water Quality
Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9C) or the Surface Water Quality Standards (N.J.A.C.
7:9B) of New Jersey.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground, and becomes part of a ground water body.
RETENTION — The storage of runoff indefinitely until it is lost through soil
infiltration, evaporation, plant uptake, irrigation, non-potable reuse or any
combination of these destinations.
REVIEW AGENCY (MUNICIPAL) — The municipal body or official that is
responsible for the review of a major development project for compliance
with the stormwater management requirements.
§ Z-1500.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.2
AO:642
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension and
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water
or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities, that could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to ground or surface
water. Source materials include, but are not limited to raw materials,
intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products,
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
SPECIAL RESOURCE WATERS — Water bodies receiving special
protections due to their drinking water status or role as high-quality habitat
for Threatened and Endangered species or species of commercial or
recreational importance. This includes waterways so designated through
the NJ Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8) because of exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional water supply significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional shellfish resource, or exceptional
fisheries resource. Waters so designated are protected by a 300-foot buffer
extending on either side of the waterway measured perpendicular from topof-
bank or center of channel for waterways lacking a defined top-of-bank.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin
or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin),
or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (a constructed stormwater
wetland).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or ground water recharge
§ Z-1500.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.2
AO:643
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow of stormwater on or across the surface
of the ground, in drainage facilities or in storm sewers.
STREAM BUFFER — A strip of land located immediately adjacent to a
stream channel consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetative cover, which
serves as a transition area between uplands and riparian lands. A stream
buffer may encompass wetlands, may be contained within a flood plain or
floodway or may extend beyond a wetland, floodplain or floodway boundary.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER TECHNIQUES — A stormwater management
measure that involves control of concentrated stormwater runoff or
infiltration such as stormwater basins, piped conveyance systems and
manufactured stormwater devices, and can include various types of basins,
filters, surfaces, and devices located on individual lots in a residential
development or throughout a commercial, industrial, or institutional
development site in areas not typically suited for larger, centralized
structural facilities.
THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Endangered Species are
those whose prospects for survival in New Jersey are in immediate danger
because of a loss or change in habitat, over-exploitation, predation,
competition, disease, disturbance or contamination. Assistance is needed
to prevent future extinction in New Jersey. Threatened Species are those
who may become endangered if conditions surrounding them begin to
or continue to deteriorate. Habitats of endangered or threatened species
are those identified by the Department's Landscape Project as approved
by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program, or by
the Department pursuant to the Highlands Act at N.J.S.A. 13:20-32k. and
13:20-34a(4).
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for stormwater runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the
point of interest within a watershed.
TRANSITION AREA — An area of protected upland adjacent to a freshwater
wetland that minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as an
integral component of the wetlands ecosystem. Also called "buffer" area.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ Z-1500.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 23-2015]
§ Z-1500.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.3
AO:644
§ Z-1500.4. Stormwater Management Requirements. [Ord. No.
23-2015]
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
designed to meet the erosion control, ground water recharge,
stormwater retention and stormwater runoff quantity and quality
standards in § 1500.4, as described in technical guidance
documents listed in § 1500.7. As detailed in § 1500.4, to the
maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet
these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the
design along with the practicable nonstructural strategies.
2. The standards in this § 1500 apply to major development as defined
in this § 1500 and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain ground water recharge. The standards
do not apply to major development to the extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management Plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules. When these
standards (§ 523) are applicable, they shall be applied in lieu of
§ 522, Drainage Requirements, of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
A. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in paragraphs B
and C shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this § 1500.4 into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. Documentation of the
use of nonstructural stormwater management measures shall
require the preparation by the applicant of the NJDEP Low Impact
Development Checklist and provide testimony. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any or only specific nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph A.2
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy or strategies considered and provide a basis
for the contention. In both cases, the applicant bears the burden of
proving any impracticability.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
§ Z-1500.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:645
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize the creation of new impervious surfaces and reduce,
break up or otherwise disconnect the flow of runoff over
impervious surfaces;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation, except where native or natural vegetation is
considered invasive;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction;
e. Minimize land clearing and disturbance and overall site
grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Retain native, non-invasive vegetation, plant low-maintenance
landscaping, plant native vegetation, and minimize the
creation of lawns and the use of plantings and vegetation that
require the excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides and
irrigation;
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use,
exposure and/or mobilization of pollutants and prevent or
minimize the release and transport of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy paragraph A.3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
application of fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules. Prior to applying fertilizer, soil tests
must be conducted onsite to determine the type of
fertilization necessary.
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:646
3. Site design features identified under paragraph A.2.i(2) above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions to
this standard see paragraph A.3.c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension. The design engineer
shall match the inlets installed by the City.
c. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in paragraph C.1 are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in paragraph C.1, or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:647
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in paragraphs B and C
shall be:
a. Dedicated to a government agency;
b. Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
Hunterdon County Clerk's office; or
c. Subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. The New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual
provides guidance and qualitative assessment called the Low
Impact Development Checklist for nonstructural stormwater
management strategies that shall be used to describe the measures
proposed by the applicant.
B. Erosion Control, Ground Water Recharge and Stormwater Runoff
Quantity Control Standards.
1. This § 1500.4 contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, maintain ground water recharge, and
control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development
projects.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control and those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules. While the trigger to submit an Application
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certification is
5,000 square feet, there may be instances, such as with steep
slopes, where a lower threshold has merit. In the case where
slopes exceed 15% as defined by the City's Steep Slope
Ordinance, and a 150 square feet is proposed to be disturbed,
an Erosion Control Design must accompany the application.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for ground
water recharge are as follows:
(1) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
ground water recharge in § 1500.5B, the design engineer
shall comply with at least one of the following standards:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post-developed project site maintains
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:648
100% of the site's pre-developed average annual
ground water recharge volume; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that any increase in the project site's
projected stormwater runoff volume produced by the
two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from pre-developed
to post-developed conditions is fully infiltrated.
(2) The following two types of stormwater runoff shall not be
recharged:
(a) Stormwater runoff from areas of high pollutant
loading. High pollutant loading areas are: 1) areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied; 2) areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; 3) areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; and 4) areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with a Department approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such
as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(b) Stormwater runoff from industrial areas exposed to
"source material."
(3) The design engineer/hydrogeologist shall assess and
certify the hydraulic impact on the groundwater table and
design the project site and all site groundwater recharge
measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface
ponding, flooding of basements and other subsurface
facilities, and interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity of a ground water recharge
measure.
c. The minimum design and performance standards for the
control of stormwater runoff quantity are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall demonstrate through hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures will result in retention onsite, with
no discharge, of the runoff from the 1.25 inch, two-hour
rainfall event.
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:649
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post-developed stormwater runoff
hydrographs from the project site for the two-, ten-,
and 100-Year storms do not exceed, at any point in
time, the site's pre-developed runoff hydrographs for
the same storms;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that under post-developed site conditions: 1)
there is no increase in pre-developed stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
100-Year storms; and 2) any increased stormwater
runoff volume or change in stormwater runoff timing
for these storms will not increase flood damage at or
downstream of the project site. When performing this
analysis for pre-developed site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect existing conditions.
When performing this analysis for post-developed site
conditions, all off-site development levels shall reflect
full development in accordance with current zoning
and land use ordinances.
(c) Design onsite stormwater management measures so
that the peak post-developed stormwater runoff rates
from the project site for the two-, ten- and 100-Year
storms are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the
site's peak pre-developed stormwater runoff rates.
Peak stormwater outflow rates for these storms shall
be adjusted where necessary to account for the
discharge of increased stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes from project site areas not controlled by the
onsite measures. The percentages do not have to be
applied to those portions of the project site that are
not proposed for development at the time of
application provided that such areas are: 1) protected
from future development by conservation easement,
deed restriction, or other acceptable legal measures
or 2) would be subject to review under these
standards if they are proposed for any degree of
development in the future.
C. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce by
80% the anticipated post-construction load of total suspended
solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff from the developed site,
expressed as pounds per year. Stormwater management measures
shall also be in conformance with § 1500.4C.8c. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre or more of impervious surface is
being proposed or is reconstructed on a development site. The
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:650
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff
in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for
TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge
specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
Daily limits of TSS (TMDL) may apply to the site development
based on conditions of regulatory approvals.
2. The water quality design storm shall be 1.25 inches of rainfall in
two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1, subject to revision due to subsequent rule
changes. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into
account the implementation of non-structural and structural
stormwater management measures.
3. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, subject to
revision due to subsequent rule changes. The current edition of the
BMP Manual may be found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative BMPs,
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
approved if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative BMPs, removal
rates and computational methods to the review agency.
Documentation for alternative rates and methods shall consist of
published (peer-reviewed) journal article or scientific paper. A copy
of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the
removal rate, including documentation, shall be provided to the
Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:651
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
4. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100, where
R = total TSS percent load removal (expressed as a whole
number) from application of both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable
to the first (upstream) BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable
to the second (downstream) BMP
In cases where three (or more) BMPs are used in series, the
applicant shall calculate the TSS reduction for the two most
upstream BMPs in the series using the above formula, then
substitute the result (R) of that calculation in the formula for "A"
when calculating the combined result with the next BMP in the
series.
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:652
5. If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to the discharge of each drainage subarea,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case
the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
an area-weighted average.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 6.C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
Source: New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual
6. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the post-construction
nutrient load from the developed site in stormwater runoff
generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving
reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent practicable, the
design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 1500.4B and C This
standard may be superceded by a more stringent numeric effluent
limitation imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a
discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits for nutrient loading (TMDL) may apply to
the site development based on conditions of regulator approvals.
7. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual found here:
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/stormwater/bmp_manual2.htm.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all local surface waters and all waters designated Category One at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B, all perennial or intermittent streams that drain into
or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:653
associated HUC14 drainage area, and all perennial or intermittent
streams.
a. C-1 Corridors. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a
special water resource protection area around C-1 corridors in
accordance with the following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession.
(2) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (applies to both C-1
and local stream corridors)
(3) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the C-1 special water resource protection area cannot
comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
(a) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
(b) Stormwater discharges allowed by this section shall
achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
(c) Thermal pollution by stormwater discharges shall be
addressed to ensure no significant increase or
decrease in temperature occurs in the receiving
waterway outside of the mixing zone;
(d) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
review agency that the ecological value and condition
of the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable;
(e) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:654
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
(f) All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be reviewed and approved by the Department prior to
approval by the review agency.
(4) A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject
to paragraph C.8 shall maintain or enhance the current
ecological value and condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in paragraph C.8.a(1)
above.
(5) Paragraph C.8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development and is on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009. (applies to both C-1 and local stream
corridors).
(6) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph C.8.a(1) above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, pre-existing active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the review
agency that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. Waivers
and requests for encroachments from the buffer
requirements applicable to Category One (C1) waters as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9B cannot be granted by any local
board or official, but, as required by State law, can only be
sought and obtained from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
b. Local Stream Corridors. Applicants proposing development on
properties abutting waters and watercourses which are not
designated as Category One (C1) but constitute permanent
freshwater streams and classified as FW1 or FW2 pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4 shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Preserve and maintain a local special water resource
protection area of 75 feet on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
bank outwards or from the centerline of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
structures, vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow
natural succession is provided.
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:655
(2) Applicants must comply with paragraphs C.8.a(2) and a(5)
above.
(3) A waiver to permit encroachment within the designated
local special water resource protection area as defined
above shall be allowed where the applicant can show that
previous development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active residential use, parking, accessory
structure or maintained lawn area). The encroachment
shall only be allowed where the applicant demonstrates
that the functional value and overall condition of the local
special water resource protection area will be maintained
to the maximum extent practicable. All encroachments
proposed under this subparagraph shall be subject to
review and approval by the City of Lambertville Board
having jurisdiction over the application.
D. Maintenance Plan.
The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 1500.9.
E. Exemptions.
The following linear development projects are exempt from the ground
water recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality requirements of § 1500.4B and C:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is constructed of permeable material such as wood chips, unpacked
gravel, and porous pavement (See § 1500.7 for guidance).
F. Waivers from Strict Compliance.
1. A waiver from strict compliance with the ground water recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 1500.4B and C may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.4
AO:656
b. The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis
acceptable to the review agency, that through the use of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
strategies and measures, the option selected complies with the
requirements of § 1500.4B and C to the maximum extent
practicable;
c. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of § 1500.4B and C, existing structures currently
in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be
condemned; and
d. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph F.1.c above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of § 1500.4B and C that were not achievable onsite.
2. A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of
§ 1500.4B and C may be issued only in those cases where an
applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance, other than projects addressed under paragraph F.1,
with the stormwater management requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan,
or in this local ordinance, whichever is stricter. A waiver from strict
compliance for such projects can only be obtained if the applicant
agrees to undertake a suitable mitigation measure meeting the
policy contained in § 1500.13 of this section and Section 6.0 of the
City of Lambertville Municipal Stormwater Management Plan. In
such cases, the applicant must submit a mitigation plan detailing
how the project's failure to strictly comply will be compensated. In
cases where a waiver is granted, an applicant should provide
mitigation, if possible and/or practical within the same HUC-14
watershed within which the subject project is proposed, or
contribute funding toward a regional stormwater control project,
or provide for equivalent treatment at an alternate location, or
other equivalent water quality benefit, in lieu of implementing the
required stormwater control measures on their specific site. See
§ 1500.13, Mitigation Plan, for further details.40
G. Threatened and Endangered Species.
When habitat for threatened and endangered species (see definition
for Environmental Critical Areas in § 1500.2), is present on a site,
stormwater management measures shall be implemented to avoid
adverse impacts caused by pollutant discharge, the creation of
concentrated flow, or the alteration of recharge. Applicants should
40.Editor's Note: The Stormwater Management Plan can be found on file at the City Offices.
§ Z-1500.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.4
AO:657
§ Z-1500.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Ground Water
Recharge. [Ord. No. 23-2015]
consult the City's Environmental Resource Inventory for technical
information.
A. Stormwater Surface Runoff Calculations.
1. In complying with the design and performance standards in
§ 1500.4, the design engineer shall calculate stormwater runoff
using one of the following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation, NRCS
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, and appropriate NRCS
Twenty-Four-Hour design storm, as described in the current
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 — Hydrology,
and the current Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds or superceding document; or
b. The Rational Method for peak stormwater runoff rate
calculations and the Modified Rational Method for stormwater
runoff hydrograph calculations. Use of the Rational Method
and Modified Rational Method are limited to drainage areas of
two acres or less. Neither the Rational Method nor Modified
Rational Method shall be used to calculate runoff volumes for
ground water recharge or stormwater runoff infiltration
purposes. The Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves
determining the rainfall rates in inches per hour for the
Rational Method must be taken from NOAA - National Weather
Service.
2. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for pre-developed
project site conditions using any of the above methods, the project
site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another
land cover may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if: 1) such
land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof site without
interruption for at least two years immediately prior to the time of
application; and 2) the design engineer can document the
character and extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
If more than one land cover other than woods has existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations. All predeveloped
land covers shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic
condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have applied
appropriate conservation practices.
3. In calculating pre-developed site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and
§ Z-1500.4 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.5
AO:658
§ Z-1500.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 23-2015]
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows and
culverts, that reduce pre-developed site stormwater runoff rates
and/or volumes.
4. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour rainfall
depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.
5. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within a drainage area.
6. Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step
methodology as described in the Department's current Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology
described in the current Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds.
B. Ground Water Recharge Calculations.
1. In complying with the design and performance standard in
§ 1500.4, the design engineer-professional hydrogeologist may
calculate ground water recharge in accordance with New Jersey
Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program
as described in the Department's current Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. Alternative ground water recharge
calculation methods may be used upon approval by the Land Use
Board or Municipal Engineer/Hydrogeolgist.
2. Ground Water Recharge may be employed to meet or partially meet
the retention requirement in § 1500.4 paragraph B above.
3. Field testing is required to derive values for permeability
(hydraulic conductivity). Field methodologies that are applied
should be as per N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4 through 7:9A-6.7.
A. Structural Management Measures. Standards for structural
stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
factor into the design the existing site conditions which may cause
the measure to fail, have an adverse effect on water quality or
quantity, or cause harm or damage to persons or property,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands;
flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil
§ Z-1500.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.6
AO:659
type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage
patterns; and significant land filling.
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 1500.7B. All structures must be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board and/or the City Public Works
Director for compliance with this section.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. The
measures are to be sequenced in the site development process so
that erosion control standards are met and so the measure is not
compromised or impaired by construction runoff.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 1500.7.
6. Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Guidelines for Management Measures.
Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual and other
documents as described in § 1500.7. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the review agency that the proposed measure
and its design will accomplish the required water quantity, ground
water recharge, retention and water quality design and performance
standards established by § 1500.4.
C. Manufactured Treatment Devices.
§ Z-1500.6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.6
AO:660
§ Z-1500.7. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
1. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements found in § 1500.4, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department and the applicant has
made a record that non-structural techniques are infeasible for the
site in question.
2. Non-verified manufactured treatment devices may also be used for
purposes other than underground discharge of stormwater, where
such devices provide a clear benefit to stormwater quality or flow
control in a manner that facilitates improved nonstructural
stormwater management controls on the site, or avoids the need
for approval of off-site mitigation. Such devices may be beneficial
as pretreatment to aboveground stormwater management systems.
The benefits of proposed non-verified manufactured treatment
devices must be proved to the satisfaction of the review agency.
3. Manufactured treatment devices may be used only where the
maintenance plan required by § 1500.9 ensures that the
manufactured device will be properly maintained for its functional
lifespan and will be replaced as needed with management
measures that are at least as effective as the original manufactured
treatment device working in accordance with manufacturers
specifications.
A. General Scope.
This § 1500.7 sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This § 1500.7 applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash
and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in the
outlet structure of a structural stormwater management measure.
Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings to ensure proper functioning of the structural stormwater
management measure in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned
in the direction of flow with a maximum bar spacing of
approximately 1/2 the diameter or width of the hydraulic
opening it is protecting. Transverse bars aligned perpendicular
to flow should be sized and spaced as necessary for rack
stability and strength.
b. The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
§ Z-1500.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.7
AO:661
c. The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
2. An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the
top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the
following requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall include escape
provisions as follows:
a. If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation
of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet
structure.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See § 1500.7D for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum slope of
the interior and exterior of an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-6.2(c)3.
d. An emergency drawdown method for detention basins is
required where the permanent pool will be more than 2 1/2
feet deep. This drawdown method must consider downstream
or offsite stability at the outfall in accordance with the
§ Z-1500.7 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.7
AO:662
§ Z-1500.8. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey.
C. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
Figure 1.
Depicted is an elevational view.
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this § 1500, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at § 1500.8c below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate through paragraph C., Submission
Requirements, that the project meets the standards set forth in this
§ 1500.
3. The applicant shall submit to the approving municipal authority the
required number of copies of the materials listed in the checklist
for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 1500.8C of this section.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval.
§ Z-1500.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.8
AO:663
The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a part of
the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or
official from which municipal approval is sought (the review agency).
That review agency shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning
and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this § 1500.
C. Submission Requirements.
The information in § 1500.8C.1 through C.7 below shall be provided
unless a waiver is approved through § 1500.8C.8 below:
1. Existing Site Conditions Base Map (including topography, streams,
roads and current built environment).
The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage
system information as necessary. It is recommended that the
topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends
a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development, at a scale appropriate to show site details, showing
two-foot contour intervals. The following additional elements
should be considered and presented as appropriate and in
combinations sufficient to adequately indicate the existing site
conditions and that of the surrounding environs:
a. Hydrology.
(1) Perennial or intermittent streams as shown on the USGS
7.5 Minute Quadrangle Maps and as indicated in the Soil
Survey of Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
(2) Special water resource protection areas along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys.
(3) Wetlands, NJDEP Linear Non-Tidal Wetlands, Marshlands
and NJDEP Letter of Interpretation findings.
(4) FEMA Q3 Flood Data 100-Year-Floodplains and Floodways.
(5) Geometry of on-site drainage areas.
b. Boundaries and Buffers.
(1) Appropriate buffers to streams, rivers, wetlands,
marshlands, ponds, lakes and other water bodies as
specified in pertinent ordinances, rules, regulations,
statutes or other provisions of law imposed by local,
County, State or Federal agencies.
§ Z-1500.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.8
AO:664
(2) Existing and proposed bearing and distances of property
lines.
(3) Existing and proposed conservation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, sight, utility, drainage and
right-of way easements and dedications.
c. Vegetation and Landscaping.
(1) Pervious and vegetated surfaces, i.e. woodlands,
grasslands and other significant natural features not listed
if being utilized for LID credit.
(2) Native and invasive stands of vegetation.
(3) Vegetated habitat for Threatened and Endangered
Species.
d. Geology and Soils (as indicated in the Soil Survey of Hunterdon
County, New Jersey).
(1) Steep slopes, 10% or > slopes.
(2) Soil types.
(3) Highly erodible soils, with an erodibility factor (K) of 0.40
or <.
(4) Drainage Class and recharge potential.
(5) Colloidal soils.
(6) Depth to bedrock.
(7) Seasonal high water table.
(8) Soils subject to dynamic compaction and compacted soils.
(9) Soil pH.
(10) Shrink swell potential.
(11) Deeply fractured bedrock.
(12) Hardpans and plough pans.
e. Existing Man Made Structures and Activities.
(1) Existing buildings and significant permanent manmade
features.
(2) Roads by classification, parking areas and other
impervious surfaces.
(3) Bridges and culverts.
§ Z-1500.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.8
AO:665
(4) Utilities, sub-surface and above ground.
(5) Mining/quarry operations and blasting areas.
(6) Acid or other hazardous runoff.
(7) Areas of fill and buried debris.
(8) Wellheads and associated ground water withdrawals
pipes, discharges and BMP's of existing stormwater
utilities.
(9) Groundwater mounding.
(10) Septic systems and wells of adjacent lots.
(11) Leaking sanitary lines.
(12) Previous land use (agricultural, industrial, commercial).
2. Environmental Site Analysis.
A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should include
a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and
vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be given to
unique, unusual, or environmentally critical areas and to those that
provide particular opportunities or constraints for development.
The applicant should consult the City's Environmental Resource
Inventory, DEP websites and other pertinent sources of local data.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s).
A map (or maps) at a scale appropriate for the site indicating
the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management
and sediment control, and other permanent structures. The map(s)
shall also clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high ground water elevations. A written description of the
site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions
may also be provided.
4. Stormwater Site Planning and Design Summary. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections
1500.3 through 1500.6 are being met, including both nonstructural
and structural approaches. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being managed or developed to meet the
objective of controlling ground water recharge, stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible. Refer to the
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan and/or the Municipal
§ Z-1500.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.8
AO:666
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan for additional requirements.
It should explain in full the maps required by this section.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map(s). The following
information, illustrated on a map at a scale appropriate for the site,
shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, land
area to remain in natural vegetation, and details of the
proposed plan to infiltrate, manage, control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design and discharge
stability calculations for the pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in
Section 1500.4 of this ordinance.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure. The municipality shall be notified of site
investigation activities and given the opportunity to have a
witness, either prior to approval or as a condition of approval,
as appropriate for the specific type of measure. Subsequent to
approval of the major development, post-construction bulk soil
density and infiltration testing shall be required for all
infiltration measures that were used as justification for
meeting the recharge standard, to ensure that they were
properly constructed.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 1500.9.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The review agency may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 1500.8C.1 through C.6 when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
§ Z-1500.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.8
AO:667
§ Z-1500.9. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 23-2015]
obtain or it would create a significant economic hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
A. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review pursuant to § 1500.1C of this section
shall comply with the requirements of § 1500.9B and C.
B. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development. This plan shall be separate from all other
documents and designed for ongoing use by the site owners or
operators in performing and documenting maintenance and repair,
and by the municipality in ensuring implementation of the
maintenance plan. The final maintenance plan shall be updated and
provided to the municipality post-construction to include an
evaluation based on the specifications of the initial maintenance
plan and as-built conditions.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventive
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal and disposal;
safety needs; identification of methods and disposal sites for
materials removed during maintenance; maintenance
requirements for created wetlands and other ecological systems;
safety devices and systems; warranty and operational standards
from the manufacturers of any manufactured treatment devices
(See § 1500.6C); and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventive and corrective
maintenance (including replacement), using maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures from Section 6 of
the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan, Municipal
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and any relevant regional
stormwater management plan. If the maintenance plan identifies a
person other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
continuing maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of
such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
§ Z-1500.8 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.9
AO:668
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph B.2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on paragraph B.7 below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventive and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measures,
including repairs or replacement to the structures; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non- vegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph .B.2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventive
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph B.2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph B.2 above shall retain, submit annually to the
municipality and make available, upon request by any public entity
with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over
the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
paragraphs B.6 and B.7 above. The report should be submitted to
the Lambertville City Clerk by March 15th of every year that
certifies the completion of maintenance responsibilities for the
prior year.
9. The requirements of paragraphs B.3 and B.4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency of
competent jurisdiction.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health or is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the City or County may immediately
§ Z-1500.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.9
AO:669
§ Z-1500.10. Penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance shall
be subject to a fine or imprisonment in accordance with Section 900 of
the Lambertville Subdivision Ordinance, Section 1000 of the City Zoning
Ordinance, and all applicable sections of the municipal code of the City of
Lambertville. In accordance with the aforementioned codes and ordinances,
in the event the City determines to abate any violation after the owner
thereof has been notified to abate the violation and fails or refuses to do
so, the City, upon completing the abatement, shall be entitled to a lien upon
the property on which the violation took place, in the amount of the funds
expended by the City in conducting the abatement work, which shall run
with the property until satisfied in full, with interest, as provided in State
law for abatement of nuisances.
§ Z-1500.11. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2006-09 adopted 4-17-2006]
This § 1500 shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
Review Agency, or 60 days from the receipt of Ordinance No. 2006-09 by the
Hunterdon County Planning Board if the Hunterdon County Planning Board,
as county review agency, should fail to act.
§ Z-1500.12. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this § 1500 shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this § 1500.
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible
person.
C. Nothing in this § 1500.9 shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
D. The maintenance plan shall specifically provide a specific municipal
right of access for inspection of measures, and for maintenance if
required under paragraph B.9.
E. The person(s) identified in paragraph B.2 above for the long term
maintenance of the facility shall cause to be prepared and submit a
report to the Lambertville City Clerk by March 15th of every year that
certifies the completion of maintenance responsibilities for the prior
year. The responsible party shall allow a representative of the City to
inspect the stormwater management facilities.
§ Z-1500.9 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.13
AO:670
§ Z-1500.13. Mitigation Plan.
The Board having jurisdiction over an application requiring a stormwater
management plan shall have the jurisdiction to grant a waiver from strict
compliance with the performance requirements of this § 1500 or the
Stormwater Management Plan. The waiver may be granted where an
applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance with § 1500, and/or the Stormwater Management Plan upon the
following conditions. The applicant must demonstrate one of the following:
(1) an inability to apply any of the Best Management Practices and
methodologies as defined and approved herein and in the Stormwater
Management Plan, due to an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting the subject property or the structures thereon, resulting
in a peculiar and exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship; or
(2) that the purposes of this § 1500 and Stormwater Management Plan
can be advanced by a deviation from the Best Management Practices and
methodologies as defined and approved herein and in the Stormwater
Management Plan, where the benefits of such deviation substantially
outweigh any detriment.
In requesting a waiver as to any application, the applicant may submit as
reasons for the waiver the site conditions of the proposed project, including
soils types; thin soil cover; low permeability soils, and/or shallow depths
to groundwater (high groundwater levels), unique conditions which would
create an unsafe design, or conditions which would provide a detrimental
impact to public health, welfare or safety.
The waiver cannot be granted due to conditions created by the applicant.
If the applicant can comply with the requirements of § 1500 and the
Stormwater Management Plan through reduction of the size of the project,
the hardship is self-imposed and the Board lacks jurisdiction to grant any
waiver under this section.
The applicant must propose a suitable mitigation method through
submission of a mitigation plan which will conform as closely as possible to
the design and performance standards of this § 1500, through structural or
non-structural stormwater management measures, governing stormwater
quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
The mitigation plan shall include sufficient data and analyses, including an
alternatives analysis, which demonstrate how on-site compliance is to be
maximized.
The mitigation plan must provide stormwater management results
compatible with the same HUC-14 watershed within which the subject
project is proposed. Alternatively, the mitigation plan may (1) provide for
funding toward an offsite or regional stormwater control project, if available
and practicable, or (2) fund an analysis to determine a more appropriate
mitigation method to be presented to the Board for approval; or (3) provide
for equivalent treatment at an alternate location, or (4) provide some other
§ Z-1500.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1500.13
AO:671
equivalent water quality benefit, if an on-site method is not proposed,
provided the results required herein are achieved.
The applicant shall be responsible for locating an appropriate site for
mitigation of the performance section for which the waiver is sought.
The funding option shall be allowed only in situations where there will be
no immediate impact upon a sensitive receptor. Contribution to a regional,
municipal or offsite mitigation plan shall be allowed for any application for
one individual single-family residence. When approved by the Board, receipt
of the financial contribution shall be deemed to satisfy the mitigation
requirement for that application.
The Board having jurisdiction over the individual application may determine
that, due to the size of the project necessary to mitigate for the waiver, it is
not practical to require a mitigation project.
In all instances the Board having jurisdiction over the application shall
have the power to impose additional conditions as may be appropriate
under the circumstances of the application. The Board shall make specific
findings of fact and conclusions consistent with this section (1) showing
the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with § 1500 and the
Stormwater Management Plan and (2) justifying the approval of the
applicant's mitigation plan, in order to satisfy the reporting requirements of
the municipality's NJPDES permit and other applicable state law requiring
the submission of reports to any state or county review agency. The Board
shall also have the power to require mitigation as to applications which
have received waivers from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
For purposes of this § 1500, "Mitigation" shall incorporate the definition
set forth in § 1500.2 and shall include situations where the applicant has
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with the
stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8 in addition
to the requirements set forth in this § 1500.
§ Z-1500.13 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § Z-1500.13
AO:672
ARTICLE XVI
Redevelopment Areas
§ Z-1600. REDEVELOPMENT PLANS.
§ Z-1600.1. Connaught Hill Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2002-27, adopted November 18, 2002, adopted the
Connaught Hill Redevelopment Plan.41
§ Z-1600.2. Lambertville High School Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 22-2018 adopted November 5, 2018, adopted the
Lambertville High School Redevelopment Plan.42
Ordinance No. 01-2020 amended the Lambertville High School
Redevelopment Area, Block 1073, Lots 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 32, 33, and
33.01, Block 1090, Lots 4 and 5, and Block 1091, Lots 1 and 1.01.
41.Editor's Note: The Connaught Hill Redevelopment Plan and accompanying Amended
Zoning Map and Acquisition Map can be found in Appendix 2 to this Zoning Ordinance.
42.Editor's Note: The Lambertville High School Redevelopment Plan may be found in
Appendix 4 of this Zoning Ordinance.
§ Z-1600 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § Z-1600.2
AO:673
Board of Health
Chapter BH1
GENERAL
§ BH1-1. TITLE.
This book shall be known and may be cited as the Board of Health Code of
the City of Lambertville, and is herein referred to as the Board of Health
Code.
§ BH1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH1-2]
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the Board of Health of the City of
Lambertville. The Governing Body serves as the Board of Health.
CITY — Shall mean the City of Lambertville.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Revision, so long as it has been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representative of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS — Shall include and provide that the general
power to adopt health ordinances is contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31. The
penalties that may be provided for a violation of health provisions are
contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-70, 71. The statutory power to adopt a health
code by reference is contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. In addition to
the health regulations contained in this Board of Health Code, the State
Sanitary Code promulgated by the State Public Health Council is by reason
of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9 enforceable in every municipality in this state.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ Z-1600.2 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § BH1-3
AO:674
§ BH1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH1-3]
For the purpose of this Board of Health Code and any other ordinances
heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise
require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Board of Health Code, it shall mean
the prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Any citation of statute, law or ordinance contained in the Board of Health
Code shall be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Board of Health Code
identified by Arabic numbers and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ BH1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH1-4]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of the Board of Health Code
is declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection
or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of the Board of Health Code.
§ BH1-5. PENALTY.
§ BH1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-5.1
AO:675
§ BH1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1993 Board of Health Code
§ BH1-5.1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of the Board of Health Code shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than
$500 for each offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of
the City or before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws
of the State of New Jersey. In addition, the Court shall have the power to
impose other penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
§ BH1-5.2. Separate Violation. [1993 Board of Health Code
§ BH1-5.2]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of the Board of Health Code exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ BH1-6. DISPOSITION OF FEES AND PENALTIES. [1993 Board of
Health Code § BH1-6]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of the Board of Health
Code shall be paid to the City of Lambertville.
Chapter BH2
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE
§ BH2-1. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE.
§ BH2-1.1. Adoption by Reference. [1993 Board of Health Code
§ BH2-1.1]
A Code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances and sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the
Code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ BH2-1.2. Title. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH2-1.2]
The Public Health Nuisance Code established and adopted by this section is
described and commonly known as the Public Health Nuisance Code of New
Jersey (1953).
§ BH1-5.1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § BH2-1.3
AO:676
§ BH2-1.3. Public Record, Certain Sections Not to be Enforced.
[New]
§ BH2-1.4. Violations. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH2-1.4]
Any person who violates, or neglects to comply with any provision of this
section or the Public Health Nuisance Code established herein or notice
issued pursuant thereto, shall upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty
as stated in Chapter BH1, Section 1-5.
§ BH2-2. DUMPING MATERIALS IN STREAMS. [1993 Board of
Health Code § BH2-2]
It shall be unlawful to place, throw or dump, or allow to be placed, thrown or
dumped, any garbage, rubbish, offal or other offensive or injurious material
of any kind in any well, spring, ditch, stream, creek or canal in the City.
§ BH2-3. OVERFLOWING SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED. [1993
Board of Health Code § BH2-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any privy, cesspool or other
similar receptacle in the City to overflow or the contents thereof to escape
upon the ground or into any well, spring, ditch, canal, creek or stream. It
shall be unlawful for any person to maintain in the City any pipe, drain or
sewer discharging foul or injurious liquids from any privy, cesspool or other
similar receptacle on the surface of the ground or into any well, spring,
ditch, canal, creek or stream.
§ BH2-4. BREEDING PLACES FOR MOSQUITO LARVAE OR FLIES
PROHIBITED. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH2-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain in the City any pool, pond,
ditch, stream or other body of water or any accumulation of animal or
vegetable matter in which mosquito larvae or flies exist or breed.
§ BH2-5. SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED FOR THE HOUSING
OF ANIMALS OR FOWL. [1993 Board of Health Code § BH2-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain in the City any shed, coop,
pen or runway for chickens, fowl, rabbits or other domestic animals, unless
same is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
a. Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the clerk of the Board of Health
of the City of Lambertville and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
b. Sections 2.1 (a) and (b) of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New
Jersey (1953) will not be enforced in the City of Lambertville.
§ BH2-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-6
AO:677
§ BH2-6. MAINTAINING CERTAIN ANIMALS OR FOWL IN
BUILDING INHABITED BY HUMAN BEINGS PROHIBITED. [1993
Board of Health Code § BH2-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit to be kept, in any
dwelling house or other building occupied by human beings in the City, any
sheep, goat, chicken or fowl.
§ BH2-7. MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR FLUSH TOILETS.
[1993 Board of Health Code § BH2-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, or allow to be maintained, in
any dwelling or building in the City, any flush toilet unless same is kept in
working order and in a sanitary condition.
§ BH2-8. HEAT IN APARTMENTS. [1993 Board of Health Code
§ BH2-8]
All owners of buildings occupied as residences by more than two families,
where such owners supply heat as part of the rental agreement, shall
provide heat from October 1 in each year to May 1 of the succeeding year
so that the temperatures of such apartments where one or more persons
reside shall always be kept at 68° F. or above, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. in the morning to 10:00 p.m. in the evening.
Chapter BH3
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE
§ BH3-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-1]
This chapter shall be known as the Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments
and Food and Beverage Vending Machine Ordinance of the City of
Lambertville.
§ BH3-2. ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE. [Ord. No. BH
13-2012 § BH3-2]
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. is hereby adopted and shall be enforced in the City
of Lambertville.
§ BH3-3. COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STANDARDS. [Ord. No. BH
13-2012 § BH3-3]
All retail food and beverage establishments shall comply with N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq. relating to the construction, operation and maintenance of
retail food and beverage establishments and this chapter and all violations
are hereby declared to be nuisances and/or hazardous to health.
§ BH2-6 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § BH3-4
AO:678
§ BH3-4. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-4]
As used in this chapter:
NONPROFIT/COMMUNITY SERVICE ORGANIZATION — Shall mean those
organizations which are exempt from tax by the United States Internal
Revenue Service and which present to the Board of Health a tax exemption
number which has been issued to them by that Federal agency and shall
include those with a 501(c)3 status.
PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean those that are not
temporary.
PERSON — Shall mean and include organizations, corporations,
unincorporated associations, individuals, persons, any group of two or more
persons or any other entity.
RETAIL FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean any fixed
or mobile restaurant; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe, luncheonette;
grill; tearoom; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge;
night club; roadside stand; industrial vending establishment; private,
commercial or non-profit organization, institution, or group-preparing,
storing or serving food or beverages; catering kitchen; commissary; box
lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat market; delicatessen; grocery
store; public food market, or similar place in which food or drink is prepared
for retail sale or for service on the premises, or elsewhere (sold for off
premise consumption); and any other retail eating or drinking
establishment where food is served, handled or provided for the public with
or without charge; except that agricultural markets, covered dish suppers
or similar type of church or nonprofit type institution meal services shall
meet the special provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5; provided further, that any
food and beverage vending machine shall meet the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24-4.12 (both of which sections are contained in Title 8, Health, Chapter
24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary code adopted herein).43
TEMPORARY ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall be defined as one in continuous
service for not more than 21 days.
§ BH3-5. LICENSE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. BH1 3-2012 § BH3-5]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food
establishment as defined herein without first having procured an
annual license from the City Board of Health, or to conduct said
activities without complying with any or all the provisions of this
chapter and N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code.
b. No retail food establishment license shall be issued unless the retail
food establishment shall have in its possession and on display a current
43.Editor's Note: Prior source history includes § BH3-1 of the 1993 Revised General
Ordinances of the Board of Health and Ord. No. BH 2004-01.
§ BH3-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-5
AO:679
§ BH3-6. LICENSE APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-6]
§ BH3-7. LICENSE PERIOD. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-7]
§ BH3-8. LICENSE FEES. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-8; Ord. No.
14-2017]
The annual license fees to be paid for issuance of a permanent or temporary
retail food establishment shall be as follows:
satisfactory inspection certificate from the Hunterdon County Health
Department dated within 12 months of the application for said license.
a. Each applicant for a license shall complete an application and provide
all information requested on the application. When requested, each
applicant shall provide further proof to the Board of Health of any
representations contained in the application. Failure to do so shall
result in the application being denied.
b. If there is a material misrepresentation or omission, any license issued
on the basis of that application shall be revoked or suspended.
a. The permanent licenses issued shall be effective for a period of one year
commencing on June 1 and expiring on May 31 and shall be renewable
for succeeding years thereafter upon payment of the annual fee and
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable laws and regulations.
b. Each temporary license shall be issued for a period of time not to
exceed 14 days.
c. All applications for retail food establishment licenses, whether
permanent or temporary, on forms prescribed by the Board of Health
and the required fee shall be submitted to the Board of Health at least
20 days prior to the date of requested issuance or renewal.
a. PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
1. CATEGORY 1: Newsstands, pharmacies, liquor stores, video stores,
and other establishments handling commercially prepared,
prepacked, non-potentially hazardous foods as an incidental part of
their business: $125.
2. CATEGORY 3: All other retail food establishments: $250.
3. LATE FEE: All applications filed after September 1 of each
licensing period: $50.
4. Non-profit community service organizations including public
schools, fire departments, and ambulance and rescue squads: an
exemption from the license fee will be granted to all non-profit
community service organizations with the filing of a copy of their
§ BH3-5 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § BH3-8
AO:680
§ BH3-9. PUBLIC RECORD. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012 § BH3-9]
Three copies of the Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq., have been placed on file in the Office of the Secretary of
the Board of Health and shall remain on file there for use and examination
by the public.
§ BH3-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012
§ BH3-10]
current 501(c)3 or State of New Jersey Charitable Organization
papers.
b. TEMPORARY ESTABLISHMENTS:
1. Temporary food establishments which operate for one to three
days: $95. $95
2. Temporary food establishments which operate for four or more
days (not to exceed 14 days): $145. $145
c. Non-profit community service organizations: $0. $0
d. Public schools, fire departments and ambulance and rescue squads: $0
$0.
An exemption from the number of temporary licenses granted will be
given to all nonprofit entities selling beverages and/or food during
special events held in the City of Lambertville.
a. Any person who violates any provisions of or order promulgated under
this chapter or Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code
(N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.) shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
a fine of up to $500.
b. The Lambertville Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over
proceedings to enforce and collect any penalty imposed because of a
violation of any provisions of this chapter or Chapter 24 of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.). The proceedings
shall be summary and in accordance with the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.); process shall issue at the suit of such local
board and shall be either in the nature of a summons or warrant.
c. The Court may cause a person who refuses or neglects to pay the
amount of a judgment rendered against him and all costs and charges
incident thereto, to be committed to the County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
d. In the event a person shall have been twice convicted within the space
of six months of a violation of this chapter or Chapter 24 of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.), the Court may, in
addition to the imposition of the penalty prescribed by paragraph a of
§ BH3-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-10
AO:681
§ BH3-11. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. BH 13-2012
§ BH3-11]
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to exempt any retail food
establishment from any licensing requirement.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION. [1993 Board of Health
Code § BH1-1; New]
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2002-27 11-18-2002 Adopt
Connaught
Hill
Redevelopment
Plan
P Zoning
2002-28 12-2-2002 Salary and
Benefits
S
2002-29 12-21-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-01 2-5-2003 Administrative
Code: defense
and
indemnification
of City
Employees
P 2,
Administrative
Code
2003-02 4-21-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-03 4-21-2003 Board of
Recreation
Commissioners:
add 2
alternates
P 2,
Administrative
Code
this subsection, order the person to be imprisoned in the County Jail for
any number of days not exceeding one for each dollar of the penalty.
e. In addition to the penalties set forth above, a conviction of a violation of
this chapter and Chapter 24, N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. shall result in
revocation or suspension of the license.
§ BH3-10 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:682
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2003-04 5-19-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-05 5-19-2003 §§ 1 — 9
Salary and
Benefits; § 10
Fee for Off-
Duty Police
Officers
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2003-06 7-21-2003 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2003-07 11-17-2003 Hotel and
Motel
Occupancy
Tax
P 15, Finance
and Taxation
2003-08 8-18-2003 Fire
Prevention
P 11, Fire
Prevention
2003-09 8-4-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-10 9-15-2003 Establish
Hours for
Public Parks
P 4, Police
Regulations
2003-11 10-20-2003 Prohibit 24
Hour Parking
on Public
Park Land
P 4, Police
Regulations
2003-12 10-20-2003 Appropriation S
2003-13 10-20-2003 Appropriation S
2003-14 10-20-2003 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2003-15 10-20-2003 Traffic:
parking
prohibited
certain hours
P 7, Traffic
2003-16 11-17-2003 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:683
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2003-17 12-15-2003 Police
Regulations:
noise for
construction
vehicles
P 4, Police
Regulations
2003-18 12-1-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-19 12-15-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-20 12-15-2003 Bond
Ordinance
S
2003-21 12-15-2003 Traffic: time
limited
parking
P 7, Traffic
2003-22 1-19-2004 Streets and
Sidewalks:
require notice
to public for
driveway
installation
P 14, Streets
and
Sidewalks
BH-2004-01 2-17-2004 Board of
Health
Ordinance:
amend fees,
retail food
establishments
P Board of
Health
2004-01 1-19-2004 Bond
Ordinance
S
2004-02 2-19-2004 Alcoholic
Beverage
Control:
license fees
P 6, ABC
2004-03 2-17-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
2004-04 3-15-2004 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2004-05 3-15-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:684
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2004-06 4-19-2004 Building and
Housing: fees
for
construction
permits
P 10, Building
and Housing
2004-07 4-19-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
2004-08 5-17-2004 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2004-09 5-17-2004 Traffic:
parking
prohibited,
loading zones
P 7, Traffic
2004-10 5-17-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
2004-11 6-21-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
2004-12 6-21-2004 Zoning:
drainage
requirements,
design
standards,
flood and
erosion
P Zoning
2004-13 8-16-2004 Bond
Ordinance
S
2004-14 8-23-2004 Traffic:
loading zone
P 7, Traffic
2004-15 8-23-2004 Building and
Housing: fees
for
construction
permits
P 10, Building
and Housing
2004-16 8-23-2004 Salary and
Benefits
S
2004-17 9-20-2004 Traffic:
reserved
parking
P 7, Traffic
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:685
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2004-18 10-18-2004 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
fees for
additional
garbage
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2004-19 Withdrawn —
2004-20 12-20-2004 Parking:
metered
parking and
parking by
permit,
increase
number of
spaces
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2005-01 1-18-2005 Bond
Ordinance
S
2005-02 Acquisition
and/or
Condemnation
of Real
Property:
redevelopment
S
2005-03 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
fees, extra
bags
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2005-04 2-22-2005 General
Licensing:
contractor
registration
P 5, General
Licensing
2005-05 2-22-2005 Building and
Housing:
alarm
business
P 10, Building
and Housing
2005-06 Number not
used
—
2005-07 Fire
Prevention
P 11, Fire
Prevention
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:686
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2005-08 4-18-2005 Dedicate and
Accept
Property
S
2005-09 4-18-2005 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2005-10 CAP Bank S
2005-11 Not adopted P 9, Animal
Control
2005-12 5-16-2005 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2005-13 Bond
Ordinance
S
2005-14 6-20-2005 Salary and
Benefits; Fee
for Off-Duty
Police
Officers
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2005-15 7-5-2005 General
Licensing:
outdoor
seating
P 5, General
Licensing
2005-16 7-5-2005 Appropriation S
2005-17 8-30-2005 Building and
Housing: fee
waiver for
flood
damaged
properties
P 10, Building
and Housing
2005-18 9-19-2005 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2005-19 11-21-2005 Land
Development
Review:
Growth share
affordable
housing
obligation
P Land
Development
Review
2005-20 11-21-2005 Traffic:
loading zones
P 7, Traffic
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:687
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2005-21 12-19-2005 Zoning:
Conditional
use
apartments in
CBD Zone
P Zoning
2005-22 Salary and
Benefits
S
2005-23 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-01 Rejected —
2006-02 2-21-2006 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2006-03 3-20-2006 Traffic:
parking time
limited
P 7, Traffic
2006-04 3-20-2006 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-05 3-20-2006 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2006-06 3-20-2006 Building and
Housing:
rental of
housing units
P 10, Building
and Housing
2006-07 4-6-2006 CAP Bank S
2006-08 4-17-2006 Zoning:
historic
preservation,
demolition
permit
P Zoning
2006-09 4-17-2006 Zoning:
stormwater
management
P Zoning
2006-10 5-15-2006 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-11 5-15-2006 Traffic:
parking
prohibited
certain hours
P 7, Traffic
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:688
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2006-12 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-13 6-19-2006 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
permits
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2006-14 8-10-2006 Traffic: stop
intersection
P 7, Traffic
2006-15 8-10-2006 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2006-16 8-21-2006 Zoning:
ECHO
housing in RL
and R-1
Districts
P Zoning
2006-17 Void —
2006-18 Referendum
Public
Question:
Recycling
—
2006-19 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-20 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-21 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-22 10-16-2006 Traffic:
parking
prohibited all
times
P 7, Traffic
2006-23 10-16-2006 Land
Development
Review:
affordable
housing
obligation
P Land
Development
Review
2006-24 12-18-2006 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-25 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:689
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2006-26 Bond
Ordinance
S
2006-27 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-01 1-16-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-02 1-16-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-03 Withdrawn S
2007-04 2-20-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-05 3-19-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-06 3-19-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-07 3-19-2007 Building and
Housing:
rental of
housing units
P 10, Building
and Housing
2007-08 3-19-2007 Trailers,
camp cars
and trailer
parks
P 5, General
Licensing
2007-09 3-19-2007 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2007-10 4-16-2007 CAP Bank S
2007-11 4-16-2007 Fees:
wedding and
civil union
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2007-12 4-16-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-13 7-16-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-14 7-16-2007 Building and
Housing:
mechanical
inspection fee
P 10, Building
and Housing
2007-15 8-20-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:690
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2007-16 Rejected —
2007-17 Referendum
Public
Question:
Library
—
2007-18 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-19 11-19-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-20 11-19-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-21 11-19-2007 Bond
Ordinance
S
2007-22 12-17-2007 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2007-23 12-17-2007 Fees: Police
Department
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2007-24 12-17-2007 Alcoholic
Beverage
Control:
license fees
P 6, ABC
2007-25 12-17-2007 Municipal
Parking:
parking and
metered
parking
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2007-26 12-17-2007 Animal
Control: fees
P 9, Animal
Control
2007-27 12-17-2007 Building and
Housing: fees
P 10, Building
and Housing
2007-28 12-17-2007 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
fees
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2007-29 12-17-2007 Streets and
Sidewalks:
street
opening
permit
P 14, Streets
and
Sidewalks
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:691
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2008-01 2-19-2008 Bond
Ordinances
—
2008-02 2-19-2008 Building and
Housing: fees
P 10, Building
and Housing
2008-03 3-17-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-04 6-19-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-05 4-21-2008 Traffic:
parking time
limited;
Parking:
hours, time
limited
P 7, Traffic & 8,
Municipal
Parking
2008-06 4-21-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-07 4-21-2008 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2008-08 6-9-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-09 6-9-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-10 6-9-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-11 7-1-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-12 8-5-2008 CAP Bank S
2008-13 8-5-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-14 8-5-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-15 8-18-2008 Public
question:
open space
S
2008-16 Withdrawn —
2008-17 9-15-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-18 Withdrawn —
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:692
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2008-19 10-20-2008 Capital
Ordinance
S
2008-20 10-20-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-21 11-17-2008 Capital
Ordinance
S
2008-22 11-17-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-23 12-29-2008 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2008-24 12-29-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2008-25 12-29-2008 Bond
Ordinance
S
2009-01 2-17-2009 Municipal
Officers:
procedures,
departments,
boards and
commissions
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2009-02 2-17-2009 Building and
Housing: fees
P 10, Building
and Housing
2009-03 3-16-2009 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2009-04 3-16-2009 Establish
Lambertville
Municipal
Utilities
Authority
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2009-05 3-16-2009 Administration:
Municipal
Housing
Liaison
P 2,
Administrative
Code
2009-06 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:693
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2009-07 6-15-2009 Land
Development
Review:
affordable
housing
development
fee
P Land
Development
Review
2009-08 5-18-2009 Traffic:
regulations
applicable to
St. John's
Cemetery
P 7, Traffic
2009-09 5-18-2009 Salary and
Benefits
S
2009-10 6-3-2009 Defined
Contribution
Retirement
Program
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2009-11 8-17-2009 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2009-12 8-17-2009 Flood
Damage
Prevention
P 19, Flood
Damage
Prevention
2009-13 8-17-2009 Land
Development
Review:
affordable
housing
development
fee
P Land
Development
Review
2009-14 8-17-2009 Bond
Ordinance
S
2009-15 8-17-2009 Bond
Ordinance
S
2009-16 9-10-2009 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2009-17 9-21-2009 Building and
Housing: fees
P 10, Building
and Housing
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:694
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2009-18 Refunding
Bond
Ordinance
S
2009-19 10-19-2009 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2009-20 11-16-2009 Municipal
Officers:
employment
of off-duty
police officers
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2009-21 11-23-2009 Bond
Ordinance
—
2009-22 Not adopted —
2009-23 Not adopted —
2009-24 — Number not
used
—
2009-25 Street
Acceptance
S
2009-26 Number not
used
—
2009-27 Bond
Ordinance
S
2009-28 12-21-2009 Zoning:
design
guidelines
and
standards
P Zoning
2009-29 12-21-2009 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2010-01 2-16-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-02 3-10-2010 Salary and
Benefits
S
2010-03 3-15-2010 Municipal
Parking:
metered
parking,
parking lots
P 8, Municipal
Parking
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:695
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2010-04 2-16-2010 Fees: vital
records
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2010-05 3-15-2010 Renewal of
Municipal
Consent to
Comcast for
cable
television and
communications
system
P 17, Cable
Television
2010-06 3-15-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-07 3-15-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-08 3-15-2005 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-09 4-19-2010 Municipal
Parking:
metered
parking
exception for
holidays
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2010-10 5-17-2010 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
garbage fee
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2010-11 6-9-2010 Establishing
Open Space
Trust Fund
and
authorizing a
Tax Levy
P
2010-12 6-9-2010 Salary and
Benefits
S
2010-13 6-9-2010 Building and
Housing:
scaffolding
P 10, Building
and Housing
2010-14 6-21-2010 Fees: OPRA P 3, Municipal
Officers
2010-15 7-21-2010 CAP Bank S
2010-16 No action —
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:696
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2010-17 8-16-2010 General
Licensing:
contractor
registration
for
nonresidential
sites
P 5, General
Licensing
2010-18 8-13-2010 Municipal
Parking:
permit
parking
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2010-19 8-16-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-20 8-16-2010 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
recycling
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2010-21 8-16-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-22 8-16-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-23 10-18-2010 Building and
Housing:
rental of
housing units
P 10, Building
and Housing
2010-24 9-20-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
2010-25 10-18-2010 Zoning: tax
map revision
fees
P Zoning
2010-26 10-18-2010 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2010-27 11-15-2010 Bond
Ordinance
2010-28 12-20-2010 Readopt
Administrative
Code
P 2,
Administrative
Code
2010-29 12-27-2010 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:697
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2011-01 2-22-2011 Capital
Ordinance
S
2011-02 2-22-2011 Salary and
Benefits
S
2011-03 3-21-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-04 3-21-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-05 3-21-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-06 4-20-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-07 5-16-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-08 5-16-2011 Municipal
Parking: fees,
parking
meters, hours
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2011-09 5-16-2011 Streets and
Sidewalks:
street
opening
permits
P 14, Streets
and
Sidewalks
2011-10 CAP Bank —
2011-11 6-20-2011 Municipal
Parking:
handicapped
parking
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2011-12 6-20-2011 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
fees
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2011-13 6-20-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-14 6-20-2011 Building and
Housing: fees
for
construction
Permits
P 10, Building
and Housing
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:698
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2011-15 7-8-2011 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2011-16 8-17-2011 Zoning: steep
slopes
P Zoning
2011-17 7-18-2011 Salary S
2011-18 7-18-2011 Police
Regulations:
underage
consumption
of alcoholic
beverages on
private
property and
possession in
public
P 4, Police
Regulations
2011-19 10-17-2011 Municipal
Parking: rules
and
regulations
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2011-20 9-19-2011 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2011-21 9-19-2011 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2011-22 9-19-2011 Bond
Ordinance
S
2011-23 9-19-2011 Bond
Ordinance
—
2011-24 11-21-2011 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2011-25 1-18-2012 Animal
Control: fees
P 9, Animal
Control
2012-01 2-21-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
2012-02 2-21-2012 Adopt Staff
Handbook
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2012-03 2-21-2012 Fire
Prevention
P 11, Fire
Prevention
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:699
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2012-04 2-21-2012 Flood
Damage
Prevention
P 19, Flood
Damage
Prevention
2012-05 3-19-2012 General
Licensing:
taxicabs and
liveries
P 5, General
Licensing
2012-06 3-19-2012 Municipal
Parking:
residential
parking
permits
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2012-07 3-19-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S Garbage
Truck
2012-08 4-16-2012 Fees: Tax
Collector
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2012-09 4-9-2012 CAP Bank S
2012-10 5-21-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
2012-11 7-16-2012 Acceptance of
street names
S
2012-12 7-16-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
BH2012-13 9-20-2012 Health
Services: food
license fees
P Board of
Health
2012-14 8-20-2012 Traffic:
loading zone
P 7, Traffic
2012-15 9-19-2012 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2012-16 Defeated —
2012-17 Defeated —
2012-18 11-19-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
2012-19 12-17-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
2012-20 12-17-2012 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:700
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2013-01 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-02 3-19-2013 Administrative
Code: powers
and duties of
Mayor
P 2,
Administrative
Code
2013-03 3-19-2013 Police
Regulations:
noise, change
of times for
noise
P 4, Police
Regulations
2013-04 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-05 Defeated S
2013-06 4-23-2013 CAP Bank S
2013-07 5-21-2013 General
Licensing:
towing
licenses
P 5, General
Licensing
2013-08 5-21-2013 Exercise of
Eminent
Domain
S
2013-09 6-18-2013 Building and
Housing:
construction
permit fees
P 10, Building
and Housing
2013-10 Not adopted —
2013-11 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-12 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-13 6-18-2013 Salary and
Benefits
S
2013-14 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-15 8-20-2013 General
Licensing:
taxicabs,
autocabs and
liveries
P 5, General
Licensing
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:701
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2013-16 8-20-2013 Sanitation
and
Recycling:
garbage and
recycling
containers
P 12, Sanitation
and Recycling
2013-17 8-20-2013 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2013-18 9-17-2013 Traffic: time
limited
parking
P 7, Traffic
2013-19 9-17-2013 Establish
Government
Energy
Aggregation
Program
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2013-20 Bond
Ordinance
S
2013-21 10-10-2013 Special
Emergency
Appropriation
Ordinance
S
2013-22 12-17-2013 Traffic:
parking time
limited
P 7, Traffic
2013-23 12-17-2013 Parking:
residential
permit
parking
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2014-01 1-21-2014 Salary and
Benefits
S
2014-02 2-18-2014 Parking:
residential
permit
parking
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2014-03 2-18-2014 Bond
Ordinance
S
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:702
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2014-04 3-18-2014 Building and
Housing:
landlord
registration
statement
and affidavit
P 10, Building
and Housing
2014-05 4-22-2014 Traffic:
handicapped
parking
P 7, Traffic
2014-06 4-22-2014 Appropriation S
2014-07 5-8-2014 CAP Bank S
2014-08 5-20-2014 Appropriation S
2014-09 5-20-2014 Bond
Ordinance
S
2014-10 7-23-2014 Bond
Ordinance
S
2014-11 5-20-2014 Appropriation S
2014-12 No action —
2014-13 No action —
2014-14 7-15-2014 Municipal
Parking:
residential
parking
permit
P 8, Municipal
Parking
2014-15 No action —
2014-16 7-15-2014 Municipal
Officers:
Amend Staff
handbook,
leave of
absence
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2014-17 7-15-2014 Municipal
Officers:
Human
Relations
Council
P 3, Municipal
Officers
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:703
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Placement in Code
2014-18 7-15-2014 Land
Development
Review:
affordable
housing
development
fees
P Land
Development
Review
2014-19 7-15-2014 Police
Regulations:
urinating in
public
P 4, Police
Regulations
2014-20 8-19-2014 Municipal
Officers:
rates and
charges for
use of Police
Services
P 3, Municipal
Officers
2014-21 8-19-2014 Acquisition of
property
S
2014-22 8-19-2014 Adopts
amendments
to the City
Code
following
review and
recodification
of the City
Ordinances.
Code as
amended
through
August 19,
2014
P Adopting
Ordinance
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
23-2014 9-6-2014 Bond, Special 1
24-2014 Improvements, Special 1
25-2014 Acquisition of equipment, Special 1
26-2014 Not adopted 1
27-2014 10-21-2014 Amends Staff Handbook-donated
sick leave policy — See Supp. No.
2
1
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:704
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
28-2014 11-17-2014 Amends Zoning § 602-review
criteria within Historic District
not codified in Code Supplement
No. 1. See separate Land Use
Volume
1
01-2015 2-17-2015 Bond, Special 1
02-2015 3-16-2015 CAP Bank, Special 1
03-2015 Not adopted 1
04-2015 Not adopted 1
05-2015 3-17-2015 Amends Chapter 5, 5-1.1
taxicabs, auto cabs
1
06-2015 Not adopted 1
07-2015 4-21-2015 Amends 7-4.7, handicapped
parking
1
08-2015 4-21-2015 Capital improvement,
Appropriation-redesign of City's
website, Special
1
09-2015 5-19-2015 Capital improvement, Special 1
10-2015 5-19-2015 Bond, Special 1
11-2015 5-19-2015 Capital improvement, Special 1
12-2015 6-17-2015 Amends Zoning, zoning map, not
codified in Code Supplement No.
1. See separate Land Use Volume
1
13-2015 6-17-2015 Bond, Special 1
14-2015 7-21-2015 Capital 1
15-2015 7-21-2015 Amends Ch. 8, Municipal
Parking, 8-29 Rules and
regulations
1
16-2015 Not adopted 1
17-2015 7-21-2015 Bond, Special 1
18-2015 8-18-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-4.7,
Handicapped parking
1
19-2015 8-18-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-4.7,
handicapped parking
1
20-2015 8-18-2015 Bond, Special 1
21-2015 8-18-2015 Bond, Special 1
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:705
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
22-2015 9-15-2015 Amends Ch. 10, Building and
Housing, 10-8 real estate
disclosure of the Special Flood
Hazard Area
1
23-2015 9-15-2015 Amends Zoning, adds stormwater
management, not codified in
Code Supplement No. 1. See
separate Land Use Volume
1
24-2015 9-15-2015 Amends Ch. 19, Flood Damage
Prevention, 19-1.2, findings of
fact; 19-1.3, statement of
purpose; 19-2, definitions
1
25-2015 9-15-2015 Bond, Special 1
27-2014 10-21-2014 Amends Staff Handbook-donated
sick leave policy, 3-10.2
2
26-2015 11-16-2015 Capital improvements, Special 2
27-2015 11-16-2015 Capital improvements, Special 2
28-2015 12-15-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Municipal
Officers; Procedures;
Departments; Boards and
Commissions; adds 3-14,
nondiscrimination of employees
policy for all contractors doing
business with the City
2
29-2015 12-15-2015 Salary, Special 2
1-2016 Bond, Special 2
2-2016 Bond, Special 2
3-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-4.7,
handicapped parking
2
4-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-4.7,
handicapped parking
2
5-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 14, Streets and
Sidewalks; 14-1.3, fees, street
openings
2
6-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Zoning; 600, Historic
Preservation-application fee to
Historic Preservation
Commission
2
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:706
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
7-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 10, Building and
Housing; 10-1.3, construction
permit fees
2
8-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 8, Municipal Parking
Areas and Metered Parking;
8-2.4, fees for parking lots;
8-25.3, permit parking fees
2
9-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Municipal
Officers, Procedures,
Departments, Boards and
Commissions; adds 3-15,
authorizes credit card processing
fees for payment for City services
and property taxes
2
10-2016 Bond, Special 2
11-2016 3-15-2016 Amends Ch. 5, General
Licensing; adds 5-10, Dealers in
Scrap Metal - electronic
reporting system for scrap metal
dealers
2
12-2016 Not adopted 2
13-2016 CAP Bank, Special 2
14-2016 Bond, Special 2
15-2016 Salary and wage, Special 2
16-2016 Bond, Special 2
17-2016 Bond, Special 2
18-2016 5-17-2016 Adopts for codification the Land
Use Ordinances as amended
2
19-2016 6-21-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic, 7-4.7
Handicapped Parking Application
3
20-2016 8-16-2016 Bond, Special 3
21-2016 7-19-2016 Bond, Special 3
22-2016 No Action 3
23-2016 Bond-COAH, Special 3
24-2016 9-20-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Establishes
Procedures to Adopt Personnel
Policies and Procedures, 3-10;
Repeals Ord. No. 02-2012, Staff
Handbook
3
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:707
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
25-2016 10-18-2016 Bond, Special 3
26-2016 10-18-2016 Bond, Special 3
27-2016 11-22-2016 Bond, Special 3
28-2016 12-20-2016 Bond, Special 3
01-2017 1-17-2017 Bond, Special 3
02-2017 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. 11 Fire Prevention;
11-1.6 Non-Life Hazard Uses;
11-1.7, Complaints; Violations;
11-4, Designation of Fire Lanes,
11-4.1 — 11-4.6
3
03-2017 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.7
Handicapped Parking
Restrictions
3
04-2017 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.5
Parking Time Limited
3
05-2017 Not adopted 3
06-2017 3-21-2017 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
4-3.1 Notice to Remove; Time
Allowed, Removal of Brush,
Weeds, Trash and Debris
3
07-2017 3-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.7
Handicapped Parking
Restrictions
3
08-2017 3-21-2017 Bond, Special 3
09-2017 3-21-2017 Bond, Special 3
10-2017 3-21-2017 Bond, Special 3
11-2017 3-21-2017 Bond, Special 3
12-2017 3-28-2017 CAP Bank, Special 3
13-2017 3-28-2017 Salary, Special 3
14-2017 4-18-2017 Amends Board of Health BH:3-8
License Fees, Retail Food
Establishment Code
3
15-2017 5-16-2017 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
adds 4-15 Registration and
Maintenance of Abandoned and
Vacant Buildings, 4-15.1 —
4-15.14
3
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:708
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
16-2017 6-20-2017 Amends Ch. 3; Amends 3-29,
Government Energy Aggregation
Program
3
17-2017 6-20-2017 Bond, Special 3
18-2017 7-18-2017 Amends Zoning, Land Use; § 111
Subdivision and Site Plan;
§ 516.2 Exemptions from Site
Plan Review; § 516.3 Site Plan
Review Waiver; § 609 Exception
to Application of Site Plan
Regulations
3
19-2017 7-18-2017 Amends Ch. 3 Municipal Officers;
Procedures; Departments,
Boards and Commissions; 3-13
Fees for the Use of City Owned
Properties and/or Parks
3
20-2017 7-18-2017 Bond, Special 3
21-2017 7-18-2017 Capital, Special 3
22-2017 8-30-2017 Amends Ch. 12 Sanitation;
Recycling; 12-1 Definitions;
Appendix C and D, Recycling
Program
3
23-2017 9-19-2017 Bond, Special 3
24-2017 No action taken 3
25-2017 10-17-2017 Bond, Special 3
26-2017 11-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-8
Loading Zones
3
27-2017 10-17-2017 Amends Ch. 10 Building and
Housing; 10-1.3 Fees for a
Construction Permit, adds
Mechanical Inspection Fees
3
28-2017 12-19-2017 Amends Ch. 3 Municipal Officers;
Procedures; Departments,
Boards and Commissions; 3-17
City of Lambertville Human
Relations Council (LHRC), 3-17.4
— 3-17.6
3
29-2017 12-19-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.7
Handicap Parking Restrictions
3
01-2018 2-20-2018 Bond, Special 3
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:709
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
02-2018 3-20-2018 Bond, Special 3
03-2018 3-5-2018 Bond, Special 3
04-2018 3-29-2018 CAP Bank, Special 3
05-2018 4-17-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.7
Handicap Parking Restrictions
3
06-2018 5-15-2018 Bond, Special 3
07-2018 5-15-2018 Bond, Special 3
08-2018 5-15-2018 Bond, Special 3
09-2018 5-15-2018 Bond, Special 3
10-2018 5-15-2018 Amends Ch. 3 Municipal Officers;
Procedures;
Departments, Boards and
Commissions; 3-16.1 Members;
Appointment
3
11-2018 6-19-2018 Bond, Special 3
12-2018 8-21-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-4.7,
Handicapped Parking
3
13-2018 8-21-2018 Bond, Special 3
14-2018 9-17-2018 Amends Ch. 13 Sewer and Water;
adds 13-3, Illicit Connections to
the Sanitary Sewer System
3
15-2018 9-17-2018 Amends Ch. 15 Finance and
Taxation; renames 15-1 to Air
BNB, Home to Go, Priceline,
Hotel and Motel Room
Occupancy Tax, Amends 15-1.2,
15-1.3
3
16-2018 9-17-2018 Amends Ch. 12 Sanitation;
Recycling; Adds 12-4.6, Ban on
Plastics, Styrofoam and
Polystyrene Foam Containers in
Sale of Food Products; Amends
Appendix C Recycling Program
3
17-2018 Bond, Special (defeated) 3
18-2018 9-17-2018 Bond, Special 3
19-2018 11-5-2018 Bond, Special 3
20-2018 10-16-2018 Bond, Special 3
21-2018 No action taken 3
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:710
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Title Supp. No.
22-2018 11-5-2018 Amends Zoning Ordinance;
Adopts Redevelopment Plan for
Lambertville High School
Redevelopment Area, Article 16;
Amends 301, Zoning Map; Adds
Appendix Z:App 4
3
23-2018 11-5-2018 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
repeals 2-9.5, Municipal Housing
Liaison (now in LU, Art. 12)
Amends Land Use, Development
Review Ord.; LU Art. XII,
Affordable Housing; amends
1200-1 through 1200-25; repeals
1201, Development Fees
3
24-2018 Not adopted 3
25-2018 12-18-2018 Amends Ch. 89, Municipal
Parking 8-29, Rules and
Regulations
3
26-2018 12-18-2018 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-4.2 and
7-4.4, fines
3
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
01-2019 2-19-2019 Appropriation NCM 4
02-2019 2-19-2019 Bond NCM 4
03-2019 3-21-2019 Administrative
Code Amendment
Ch. 2 4
04-2019 3-21-2019 Easement NCM 4
05-2019 4-18-2019 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. Z 4
06-2019 4-18-2019 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. Z 4
07-2019 4-9-2019 Salaries NCM 4
08-2019 5-16-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 4
09-2019 5-16-2019 Municipal Parking
Areas and Metered
Parking
Amendment
Ch. 8 4
10-2019 5-16-2019 Administrative
Code Amendment
Ch. 2 4
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:711
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
11-2019 5-16-2019 Municipal Officers;
Procedures;
Departments,
Boards and
Commissions
Amendment
Ch. 3 4
12-2019 5-16-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 4
13-2019 6-20-2019 Building and
Housing
Amendment
Ch. 10 4
14-2019 Not Adopted 4
15-2019 Not Adopted 4
16-2019 7-18-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 4
17-2019 8-22-2019 Municipal Officers;
Procedures;
Departments,
Boards and
Commissions
Amendment
Ch. 3 4
18-2019 9-19-2019 Electric
Aggregation
Program
NCM 4
19-2019 9-19-2019 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. Z 4
20-2019 9-19-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 4
21-2019 9-19-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 4
22-2019 Not Adopted 4
23-2019 9-19-2019 Salaries NCM 4
24-2019 10-17-2019 Finance and
Taxation
Amendment
Ch. 15 4
25-2019 10-17-2019 Municipal Officers;
Procedures;
Departments,
Boards and
Commissions
Amendment
Ch. 3 4
26-2019 10-17-2019 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 4 4
§ DL-1 LAMBERTVILLE CODE § DL-1
AO:712
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
27-2019 11-26-2019 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 4
28-2019 12-19-2019 Building and
Housing
Amendment; Fire
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 10; Ch.
11
4
29-2019 12-19-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 5 4
01-2020 4-23-2020 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. Z 1
02-2020 5-21-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
03-2020 5-21-2020 Bond NCM 1
04-2020 6-10-2020 Bond NCM 1
05-2020 5-21-2020 Bond NCM 1
06-2020 5-21-2020 Bond NCM 1
07-2020 6-9-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 1
08-2020 7-23-2020 Administrative
Code: Department
Of Public Works,
Parks And Public
Property
Amendment
Ch. 2, Art.
VIII
1
09-2020 7-23-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
10-2020 7-23-2020 Salaries NCM 1
11-2020 8-20-2020 Bond NCM 1
12-2020 Not Adopted
13-2020 11-30-2020 Appropriation NCM 1
14-2020 11-30-2020 Purchase of
Property
NCM 1
15-2020 11-30-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
16-2020 11-30-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:713