Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty; Construal of Provisions
[Adopted 12-13-2006 by Ord. No. 1193; amended in its entirety
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 1-1. Violations and penalties.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provisions of this chapter, any
other chapter of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not
exceeding 90 days; or by a fine not exceeding $2,500; or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that the
legislature authorizes an increase in penalties in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, then and in that event it is the intent of this subsection
that any and all such increased penalties shall apply to any violations
occurring hereunder. [Amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-116]
B. Upon conviction of any provisions of this chapter, a minimum penalty of
up to $100 shall be imposed upon the offender. [Amended 12-12-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-116]
C. Upon conviction of any ordinance or section of the Code pertaining to
the unlawful disposal of solid waste or mandatary recyclable source
separation requirements as set forth in § 276-8, a minimum penalty of
up to $100 and a maximum penalty not to exceed $10,000 shall be
imposed on the offender. [Amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-116]
D. The court shall have the power to impose any fine, term of
imprisonment, or period of community service not less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum set forth in this section upon
any person convicted of violating any section of the within Code or
ordinances of the Borough of Lindenwold.
E. Any person convicted of violating an ordinance and/or a section of this
Code within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same
ordinance and/or a section of this Code, and who was fined for the
previous violation, shall be sentenced by the court to an additional fine
as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a
person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine established in this section, but shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the
ordinance and/or section of this Code.
F. The Borough of Lindenwold may waive the additional fine by ordinance
or resolution for a repeated violation of any ordinance and/or section of
the Code. Any person convicted of the violation of any ordinance and/or
section of the Code in the discretion of the court and, in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, shall be imprisoned in the county
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Construal of provisions.
In the construction of this Code, the following rules of construction shall be
observed unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intent:
jail or place of detention provided by the municipality, for any term not
exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
G. In the event the court wishes to impose a fine in an amount greater than
$1,250 upon an owner of real property for violations of housing or
zoning codes of the Borough, then and in that event a thirty-day grace
period shall be provided to said owner in order to cure or abate the
violative condition, and said owner shall also be afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning the said violation. Subsequent
to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250
may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon
reinspection of the property, the Court determines that the abatement
has not been substantially completed.
H. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any provision of this chapter and/or section of the
Code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
A. And/or. The words "and" and "or" may be interchanged if the sense
requires.
B. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.
C. Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural includes the singular.
D. Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
E. Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
F. Time. The hours referred to shall be the prevailing time in the State of
New Jersey.
G. Computation of time. In computing any period of time within which an
act is to be done, the day of the act or event after which the designated
period begins to run is to be excluded. The last day of the period so
computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
§ 1-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Lindenwold
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Lindenwold, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 398,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Lindenwold," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Lindenwold by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Lindenwold"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Lindenwold, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Lindenwold to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-153, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Lindenwold which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 8-6-2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances relating to traffic regulations.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, terms have been updated as
follows:
(1) "Chairman" to "Chairperson."
(2) "Compliance Officer" to "Code Enforcement Officer" and
"Compliance Office" to "Code Enforcement Office."
(3) "Highway Department" to "Public Works Department."
(4) "State Department of Personnel" to "Civil Service Commission."
(5) "Borough Hall" to "Municipal Building."
(6) "Soil Conservation Service" to "Natural Resources Conservation
Service."
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-16C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 3
ADVERTISEMENT AND PUBLICATION
§ 3-1. Authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be permitted to
advertise and/or publicize the advantages of the municipality to residents,
businesses, and/or the general public, utilizing any method of advertising
and/or media within their discretion which shall advertise any advantages
associated with the Borough of Lindenwold.
Chapter 5
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 224.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1
1:9

ARTICLE I
Condominium Conversion Review and Appeal Board
[Adopted 2-22-1982 by Ord. No. 592 (Ch. 7 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 5-1. Creation of Board.2
There is hereby created a Condominium Conversion Review and Appeal
Board consisting of five members who shall administer the provisions of the
Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act.3
§ 5-2. Appointment.4
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Borough Council for three-year terms.
§ 5-3. Duties.
The duties of the members shall be to administer the terms of the Senior
Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act as set forth therein.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:11

ARTICLE II
Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners
[Adopted 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1125 (Ch. 37 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 5-4. Establishment and composition.
Pursuant to and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq., there shall be
and hereby is established a Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners
in the Borough of Lindenwold which shall consist of 12 persons, who must
be residents of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 5-5. Appointments; terms of office; removal; vacancies;
compensation.
§ 5-6. Election of officers.
The following positions shall be elected by the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners at the January meeting each year: Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson, and Secretary.
§ 5-7. Powers and functions.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Lindenwold shall appoint 12
members, as outlined below, as members of the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners. The Commissioners are to represent only
one group as appointed by the Borough Council. To the extent
practicable, the membership of the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners shall include representatives of organized recreation
groups in the Borough of Lindenwold, including but not limited to the
Lindenwold Board of Education, the Lindenwold Baseball Athletic
Association, the Lindenwold Chargers and Spirits, the Lindenwold Boy
Scouts, Linden-Boro Cheerleaders, Lindenwold Basketball Association,
Lindenwold Soccer Club, and the Celebrations Committee, as well as up
to four residents at large. Any new organizations established in the
Borough should be considered for membership.
B. The terms of the members shall be one year, as members are
reappointed at the Borough of Lindenwold's reorganization meeting in
January each year. If there is a vacancy the Borough Council will
appoint a new Commissioner to serve out that term.5
C. Members of the Board are subject to removal at any time for any
reason, after a hearing by the Mayor and Borough Council.
D. No member of the Board shall receive compensation for his or her
services.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:13
§ 5-8. Fees.
The Board may charge and collect a reasonable fee, to offset costs, from
each person or group using any park facility in the Borough of Lindenwold.
Fees would be charged according to the schedule in § 224-1E.
§ 5-9. Liaison officer.
The member of Borough Council who is the head of the Public Works and
Sewer Authority of Lindenwold shall be the liaison officer between the
Borough Council and the Board of Commissioners.
§ 5-10. Application submittal procedure.6
Applications can be obtained from the Borough Clerk and also returned
to the Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk will review for completeness
(checklist provided) and date sensitive applications. If the application is
incomplete, it will be immediately returned to the applicant and missing
information identified. If it is date sensitive, the Chairperson will be
immediately notified so a determination can be made to hold an emergency
meeting if needed. When a completed application is received it will be given
A. The Board of Commissioners shall review, approve and schedule all
programs, sporting activities and other events that may be appropriate
for the residents of the Borough of Lindenwold presented to it by the
Celebrations Committee or any other organization.
B. The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall have the right and
authority close the use of any park area or facility as deemed
appropriate.
C. In order to carry out these purposes, the Board shall add the following
functions:
(1) To promote the recreational programs and facilities of the Borough.
(2) To recommend to the Mayor and Borough Council plans and
programs for the use of Borough recreational facilities, including
playgrounds, and local recreational programs for the residents of
all ages within the Borough.
(3) To act as a coordinating agency to the community on recreational
matters and as a liaison between the Borough and local, regional,
county or state recreational groups, public or private.
(4) To recommend to the Borough Council the establishment of
recreational programs and facilities to meet the needs of the
residents of the Borough of Lindenwold.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 5-10
1:14
to the Director of Public Works and then delivered to the Board's meeting
place.
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:15
Chapter 10
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 10-1. Procedure for presentation and approval of claims.7
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Lindenwold shall first
submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim to the responsible executive agency, specifying particularly how the
bill or demand is made up and a certification of the party claiming payment
that it is correct. No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment
unless the voucher has attached to it or includes a certification from a
designated Borough employee having personal knowledge of the facts that
the goods have been received by or the service has been rendered to the
Borough of Lindenwold and that those services or goods are consistent
with an existing contract or purchase order. The Chief Financial Officer
or Borough Administrator shall have the duty to audit, warrant and make
recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 10-2. Examination and listing of claims and bills.8
The bill or claim, duly certified, shall be presented to the Municipal Clerk
for inclusion in the proceedings of the next immediate formal meeting
of the governing body, and it shall be the duty of the Chief Financial
Officer or Borough Administrator to examine all bills or claims submitted
for payment in order to ascertain if proper administrative procedures have
been followed. All claims or bills to be considered by the governing body
shall be listed systematically and without preference, and said list shall be
made available to every member of said governing body prior to formal
action by that body.
§ 10-3. Action by governing body.9
Claims shall be considered by the Borough Council, which shall approve the
same, except that if said governing body rejects any claim presented to it,
it shall state the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Chief Financial Officer or Borough Administrator with
such instructions as the governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 10-4. Recording of claims.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that
the governing body has by formal action approved the same, with
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 10-4
1:16
appropriate records as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approval or disapproval of bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 10-5. Disbursements; veto of payment by Mayor.10
The Chief Financial Officer shall make the disbursements upon receipt of
an order by the governing body, attested by the Borough Clerk. In the event
that the Mayor vetoes the payment of any claims or bills, the Chief Financial
Officer may be authorized to make payment by a vote of the governing body
whereby at least 2/3 of Council shall vote to override such veto of any claim
or bill.
§ 10-6. Certification of approval; required signatures.11
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, the
Municipal Clerk shall turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer or
designee, who shall forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment
thereof, which said checks shall be signed by the Mayor and thereafter
signed by the Municipal Clerk and the Chief Financial Officer or designee.
After preparing checks for the payment of claims, the checks shall be
recorded in the proper books of accounts and thereafter mailed to the
claimants.
Chapter 16
COURT, MUNICIPAL
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:17

ARTICLE I
Court Established
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 8, Art. I, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 16-1. Creation.
There shall be established in the Borough of Lindenwold a Municipal Court
to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold."
§ 16-2. Appointment of Judge; term.
The Court shall be presided over by a Judge, appointed by the Mayor and
Council for a term of three years from the date of his appointment.
§ 16-3. Qualifications of Judge.
The qualifications of the Judge shall be those as required by law.
§ 16-4. Court Administrator; term.12
There shall be an Administrator of the Court who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Council for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment.
§ 16-5. Compensation of Judge and Administrator.13
The Judge and the Administrator shall receive such annual compensation as
the Mayor and Council shall, by ordinance, adopt from time to time.
§ 16-6. Jurisdiction.
The Court shall have jurisdiction as follows:
A. Violation of motor vehicle and traffic laws.
B. Violation of fish and game laws.
C. Violation of Borough ordinances.
D. Violation of disorderly persons offenses and petty disorderly persons
offenses in the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice. [Amended
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587]
E. Violation of state poor laws.
F. Violation of state child laws.
G. Violation of state institution and agencies laws.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:19
§ 16-7. Practice and procedure.
The practice and procedure shall be governed by state law, subject to rules
as promulgated by the Supreme Court.
§ 16-8. Costs and fees.
All costs and fees, when collected, shall become municipal funds and shall
be turned over to the custodian of Borough funds.
§ 16-9. Disposition of fines and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by
Ord. No. 587]
All fines and penalties shall be disposed of according to law.
H. Such other functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction in criminal cases
heretofore exercised by any Justice of the Peace, Police Justice, Police
Magistrate or Recorder. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587]
I. That of a Committing Magistrate or Judge.
J. Such other jurisdiction as may be provided by law.
§ 16-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 16-9
1:20
ARTICLE II
Public Defender Application Fee
[Adopted 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1002; amended in its entirety
4-12-2000 by Ord. No. 1072 (Ch. 8, Art. II, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 16-10. Fee amount; waiver; method of payment.14
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall determine and approve a fee not
in excess of $200 per application for a public defender. The Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold is authorized, based upon his
or her determination, to waive the fee, or part of the fee, only upon a clear
and convincing showing that the application fee represents an unreasonable
burden on the person seeking representation. The Judge of the Municipal
Court of the Borough of Lindenwold is specifically authorized to require
that the application fee be paid at once or in installments over a period of
four months or less from the date of the application by the person seeking
representation.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-10
1:21
Chapter 22
FIRE DISTRICT
§ 22-1. Creation; boundaries.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70, there is hereby created a Fire District which
shall have as its boundaries the Borough of Lindenwold, in the County of
Camden and State of New Jersey.
§ 22-2. Powers and duties of Commissioners.
The Commissioners of the Fire District herein established shall have the
powers, duties and functions within said district to the same extent as in the
case of municipalities relating to the prevention or extinguishment of fires
and the regulation of fire hazards as set out in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-81.
§ 22-3. Administration.
The Fire District hereby established shall be administered by Fire
Commissioners who shall be elected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70 et seq.
Chapter 28
LIBRARY
§ 16-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 22-3
1:22
ARTICLE I
Public Library
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 26, Art. I, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 28-1. Library established.
There is hereby established within the Borough of Lindenwold a library to
be known as the "Public Library of the Borough of Lindenwold."
§ 28-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1
1:23

ARTICLE II
Library Advisory Board
[Adopted 11-21-1977 by Ord. No. 473 (Ch. 26, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 28-2. Creation; membership.15
There shall be created an Library Advisory Board consisting of seven
residents of the Borough of Lindenwold, whose members shall be appointed
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 28-3. Terms and vacancies.
The members of the Board shall serve for a term of three years each and
until their successors shall be appointed and qualified, except that for the
members first appointed two shall be appointed for a term of one year, two
for the term of two years and three for the term of three years. Vacancies
on said Board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose
term shall become vacant.16
§ 28-4. Library Board powers. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 1241]
The Library Advisory Board is charged with adopting such rules and
regulations for the operation of the library as they deem appropriate,
including the establishment of fines and penalties.
§ 28-5. Library theft. [Added 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 1241]
A. A person commits library theft in violation of this section by:
(1) Knowingly and intentionally removing any library material from the
premises of the library without authority to do so.
(2) Failing to return any library material within 30 days after receiving
written notice by mail or personal communication from the library
demanding return of such material.
B. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed
$1,000 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
16.Editor's Note: Original § 26-4, Rules and regulations, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 1241.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:25
Chapter 34
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 5.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 16.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 52.
§ 28-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 28-5
1:26
ARTICLE I
Prosecuting Attorney
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 35, Art. I, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 34-1. Office created.
There is hereby created the office or position of Prosecuting Attorney in and
for the Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden and State of New Jersey.
§ 34-2. Qualifications.
The Prosecutor of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be an attorney at law
admitted to practice in the State of New Jersey.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-2
1:27

ARTICLE II
Public Information Officer
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 35, Art. V, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 34-3. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Public Information Officer in and for
the Borough of Lindenwold, in the County of Camden, New Jersey.
§ 34-4. Eligibility requirements.
The minimum eligibility requirements for this office shall be graduation
from high school with at least five years' experience in the journalistic field.
§ 34-5. Duties.
The Public Information Officer shall prepare all of the news items worthy
of public dissemination in their proper form and contact the various news
media for publication after having prepared the news items.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-5
1:29

ARTICLE III
Registrar of Vital Statistics
[Adopted 5-15-1972 by Ord. No. 295 (Ch. 35, Art. VI, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 34-6. Scope of position.
The person chosen for the position of Registrar of Vital Statistics shall have
charge of the work involved in obtaining reports of and recording births,
marriages and deaths in the municipality.
§ 34-7. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of such person are as follows: to develop the
procedures for obtaining prompt and accurate reports of births, marriages
and deaths; to pass upon the certificates and other forms used in reporting
births, marriages and deaths; to make needed statistical compilations and
organize such calculations in the form of tables; to study the reporting of
births, marriages and deaths for the purpose of checking the completeness
and accuracy of the reports and the means of improving registrations; to
issue certified copies of birth, marriage and death records and collect fees
therefor and account for the money collected; to determine the manner
in which records and files are to be kept; to address groups interested in
the reporting and compilation of births, marriages and deaths; to perform
confidential and supervisory clerical work which requires the exercise of
discretion and judgment; to prepare statistical and other reports containing
findings, conclusions and recommendations; and to prepare and maintain
essential records and files.
§ 34-8. Qualification requirements.
The person chosen to be Registrar of Vital Statistics shall meet the following
qualifications:
A. Graduation from high school or vocational high school or possession of
an approved high school equivalent certificate or any equivalency in
education and experience.
B. Two years of experience in stenographic and clerical work or one year
of supervisory stenographic and clerical experience.
C. Thorough knowledge of the laws relating to the reporting and
registration of births, marriages and deaths; of giving correct
information to varied types of inquirers and of the statistical methods to
be used in compiling sound and informative reports from the data
collected and of the establishment and maintenance of a needed system
of reports and records and general files over a long period of years; and
problems and procedures involved in administrative and stenographic
work of a high level.
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-8
1:31
D. Ability to analyze the laws relating to the reporting and registration of
births, marriages and deaths and apply them to specific cases; to
establish a simple and efficacious system of records of births, marriages
and deaths; to handle correspondence with numerous and varied types
of inquirers; and to devise suitable forms.
E. Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental defects
which would impair the proper performance of the required duties or
which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
§ 34-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 34-8
1:32
ARTICLE IV
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Adopted 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 314 (Ch. 35, Art. III, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-9. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk in and for the
Borough of Lindenwold, in the County of Camden, New Jersey.
§ 34-10. Duties.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk will prepare the payroll, complete forms for
insurance claims, file, answer the telephone, type and assist the Borough
Clerk.
§ 34-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-10
1:33

ARTICLE V
Deputy Municipal Court Administrator
[Adopted 3-19-1973 by Ord. No. 316 (Ch. 35, Art. II, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 34-11. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Municipal Court
Administrator in and for the Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden and
State of New Jersey.
§ 34-12. Powers and duties.
The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator shall assist the Municipal Court
Administrator in all the Administrator's duties and act as Administrator in
the Administrator's absence.
§ 34-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-12
1:35

ARTICLE VI
Secretary and Administrative Assistant to Mayor
[Adopted 12-20-1976 by Ord. No. 447 (Ch. 35, Art. IV, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-13. Position created; compensation. [Amended 10-19-1981 by
Ord. No. 587]
The position of Secretary and Administrative Assistant to the Mayor is
hereby created at an annual salary as provided for in the Annual Salary
Ordinance.
§ 34-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-13
1:37

ARTICLE VII
Community Relations Officer
[Adopted 6-25-1980 by Ord. No. 547 (Ch. 35, Art. VII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-14. Position created; term.
There is hereby created the position of Community Relations Officer of the
Borough of Lindenwold, who shall be appointed annually and shall serve a
term of one year or until his successor is appointed.
§ 34-15. Duties.
The duties of the Community Relations Officer shall be to serve as a liaison
to the various civic, religious and other community groups within the
Borough of Lindenwold and to coordinate their relations with the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 34-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-15
1:39

ARTICLE VIII
Aide to Council
[Adopted 6-25-1980 by Ord. No. 548 (Ch. 35, Art. VIII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-16. Position created; term.
There is hereby created the position of Aide to Council of the Borough of
Lindenwold, who shall be appointed annually and shall serve a term of one
year or until his successor is appointed.
§ 34-17. Duties.
The duties of the Aide to Council shall be to aid members of Council in
dealing with specific matters and grievances presented to them by members
of the community.
§ 34-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-17
1:41

ARTICLE IX
Public Relations Officer
[Adopted 6-25-1980 by Ord. No. 549 (Ch. 35, Art. IX, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-18. Position created; term.
There is hereby created the position of Public Relations Officer of the
Borough of Lindenwold, who shall be appointed annually and shall serve a
term of one year or until his successor is appointed.
§ 34-19. Duties.
The duties of the Public Relations Officer shall be to disseminate
information about the governmental functions of the Borough of Lindenwold
to the public and to aid the other officers of the Borough of Lindenwold in
the dissemination of such information.
§ 34-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-19
1:43

ARTICLE X
Senior Citizens Advisor
[Adopted 6-25-1980 by Ord. No. 550 (Ch. 35, Art. X, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-20. Position created; term.
There is hereby created the position of Senior Citizens Advisor of the
Borough of Lindenwold, who shall be appointed annually and shall serve a
term of one year or until his successor is appointed.
§ 34-21. Duties.
The duties of the Senior Citizens Advisor shall be to aid both Mayor and
Council and the senior citizens of Lindenwold in furthering the welfare of
said senior citizens.
§ 34-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-21
1:45

ARTICLE XI
Administrator
[Adopted 11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 559; amended in its entirety
9-13-1995 by Ord. No. 979 (Ch. 35, Art. XI, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 34-22. Position established.
The office of Borough Administrator in and for the Borough of Lindenwold
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
§ 34-23. Appointment; term of office; removal.
§ 34-24. Compensation; expenses; outside employment.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of Borough Council.
B. The Borough Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the governing
body. The Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the
governing body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the governing body. The governing body
may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect; provided,
however, that the governing body shall cause to be paid to the
Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary
for the next three calendar months following the adoption of the
resolution.
C. In the event of removal, resignation, absence or disability of the
Administrator, the Mayor shall appoint an Acting Administrator to serve
for 90 days or until an Administrator is appointed pursuant to
Subsection A, whichever is sooner.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be paid a salary fixed and adopted by
the Council in the Annual Salary Ordinance. He shall receive no
additional compensation for other positions whose titles he may hold
but shall be reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of his office, subject to approval by the governing body.
B. The Borough Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the
Borough and shall not hold any other outside employment.
C. Unless otherwise provided, no Acting Administrator shall be paid more
than his regular salary while serving in that capacity, but he shall be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
his office. If the governing body by resolution increases the
compensation of the Acting Administrator during his tenure, such
increased compensation shall not exceed the minimum salary provided
in the Salary Ordinance for the position of Administrator.
§ 34-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-25
1:47
§ 34-25. Qualifications.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive
and administrator qualifications. Previous experience in local government
is essential, and possession of a master's degree in public administration,
business administration or municipal management shall be preferred.
§ 34-26. General responsibilities.
§ 34-27. Duties and responsibilities.
The Borough Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough of Lindenwold and responsible to the Mayor and Borough Council
for the administration of all Borough affairs, and with the following powers
and duties:
A. Chief administrative officer. The Borough Administrator shall be the
chief administrative officer of the Borough of Lindenwold and shall
direct and supervise the administration of all departments and officers
of the Borough government, following consultation with and subject to
the approval of the governing body. The authority of the Mayor and
Borough Council to supervise the administration of all departments
shall be transmitted through the Borough Administrator where not
prohibited by state statute, and all subordinate employees of the
Borough shall be responsible to said authority.
B. The Borough Administrator shall be required in all instances to consult
and confer with and obtain the consent of the Mayor or the members of
Council who serve as Chairperson or Co-Chairperson of a particular
department prior to instituting or undertaking any action with respect
to said department, and the Borough Administrator shall implement all
decisions and orders as directed by the Mayor and Borough Council.
A. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Borough, except as otherwise provided by law.
B. Recommend to the Mayor and/or Borough Council the appointment
and, when necessary, suspension or removal of department heads and
all other employees except the Borough Clerk and Municipal Attorney.
C. Attend all meetings of the governing body with the right to take part in
the discussion and to receive notice of all regular and special meetings
of the governing body and all advisory committees.
D. Ensure that all laws and all acts of the governing body subject to
enforcement by him or by officers and employees subject to his
direction and supervision are faithfully executed.
E. Serve as the budget officer and prepare and submit to the governing
body a proposed budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message.
§ 34-25 LINDENWOLD CODE § 34-27
1:48
F. Submit to the governing body and make available to the public a
complete report of finances and administrative activities of the Borough
as required by the Mayor and Borough Council.
G. Direct the finances of the Borough and maintain a compilation and
analysis of budget costs and estimates.
H. Keep the Mayor and Borough Council fully advised as to the current
financial condition and future needs of the Borough and make such
recommendations to it concerning the affairs of the Borough as he
deems appropriate.
I. Organize and establish a central purchasing system.
J. Purchase all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are
provided in the municipal budgets.
K. Approve all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final approval by the
governing body.
L. Purchase all materials, supplies, equipment and labor under contract
required by any department, office or agency of the Borough.
M. Establish a proper purchasing and requisitioning procedure.
N. Authorize any transfer of supplies, materials and equipment between
departments and offices and, with the authorization of the governing
body, sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, materials and
equipment.
O. Negotiate contracts for the Borough, other than personnel or labor
contracts, as authorized and directed by and subject to the approval of
the governing body, and ensure that all terms and conditions favorable
to the Borough in any statute or contract are faithfully kept and
performed and, upon knowledge of any violation, immediately make
said violation known to the governing body.
P. Prepare and present to the governing body an annual report of the
Borough affairs, which shall include a report from each department
head.
Q. Act as liaison between the Borough and the various state, county and
federal agencies with respect to all applications for funds or services
needed or required by the Borough.
R. Review and supervise the Borough's insurance program and policies.
S. Receive and review any complaints concerning the functions and
obligations of the Borough made by any of its residents or taxpayers
and maintain a permanent record of all complaints and the disposition
of said complaints.
T. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
Borough Council.
§ 34-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-27
1:49

ARTICLE XII
Assistant Prosecutor
[Adopted 1-28-1981 by Ord. No. 566 (Ch. 35, Art. XII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-28. Office created; duties.
There is hereby created the office of Assistant Prosecutor in and for the
Borough of Lindenwold, whose duties shall be to aid the Prosecutor in
presenting and prosecuting all manner of traffic, quasi-criminal and
criminal matters in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold
and such other courts, including the preparation and presentation of any
appeals from that Court in courts of higher jurisdiction. These duties shall
also include advising and consulting with the Police Department in the
preparation of these cases, as well as being available to the police and other
departments and public to provide advice and assistance.
§ 34-29. Term.
This office shall be appointive. The person to serve shall be appointed
annually for a one-year term at the Borough reorganization meeting and
shall serve until December 31 of that year or until his successor is qualified.
§ 34-30. Eligibility.
The Assistant Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 34-31. Salary.
The salary shall be set by the Borough's Salary Ordinance as adopted
annually unless otherwise agreed to by the Mayor and Council.
§ 34-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-31
1:51

ARTICLE XIII
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 569 (Ch. 35, Art. XIII, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 34-32. Position created; term.
There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Officer with the
Borough of Lindenwold, which office shall be by appointment of the Mayor
with confirmation of the Council.
§ 34-33. Code Enforcement Officer to be employee of Borough.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be an employee of the Borough of
Lindenwold and shall divide his time as required in performing the
necessary functions of that office.
§ 34-34. Duties.
The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be as follows:
A. To perform all inspections and enforcement duties provided for in the
General Property Maintenance Code in the Borough of Lindenwold as
amended.17
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Property Maintenance Code.
§ 34-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-34
1:53

ARTICLE XIV
Deputy Court Administrator/Typist
[Adopted 8-17-1981 by Ord. No. 579 (Ch. 35, Art. XIV, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 34-35. Position created.
The position of Deputy Court Administrator/Typist is hereby created of and
in the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 34-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-35
1:55

ARTICLE XV
Deputy Director of Public Works
[Adopted 4-18-1983 by Ord. No. 620 (Ch. 35, Art. XV, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-36. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Director of Public Works in
and for the Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden, State of New Jersey.
§ 34-37. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Deputy Director of Public Works will be to
assist the Director in all matters and shall include the general supervision,
coordination and liaison over the activities of the Public Works Department,
Engineer and the streets, streetlighting, storm sewers, trash and garbage
collection and insect control.
§ 34-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-37
1:57

ARTICLE XVI
Supervisor of Accounts
[Adopted 7-6-1983 by Ord. No. 627 (Ch. 35, Art. XVI, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-38. Position created.
The position of Supervisor of Accounts is created for and within the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 34-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-38
1:59

ARTICLE XVII
Sanitation Driver
[Adopted 7-6-1983 by Ord. No. 628 (Ch. 35, Art. XVII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-39. Position created.
The position of Sanitation Driver is created for and within the Borough of
Lindenwold.
§ 34-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-39
1:61

ARTICLE XVIII
Principal Clerk/Typist
[Adopted 7-6-1983 by Ord. No. 629 (Ch. 35, Art. XVIII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-40. Position created.
The position of Principal Clerk/Typist is created for and within the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 34-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-40
1:63

ARTICLE XIX
Assistant Violations Clerk
[Adopted 7-6-1983 by Ord. No. 630 (Ch. 35, Art. XIX, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-41. Position created.
The position of Assistant Violations Clerk is created for and within the
Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 34-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-41
1:65

ARTICLE XX
Automotive Mechanic
[Adopted 8-15-1983 by Ord. No. 632 (Ch. 35, Art. XX, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-42. Position created.
The position of Automotive Mechanic is created for and within the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 34-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-42
1:67

ARTICLE XXI
Mechanic's Helper
[Adopted 9-7-1983 by Ord. No. 636 (Ch. 35, Art. XXI, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-43. Position created.
The position of Mechanic's Helper is created for and within the Borough of
Lindenwold.
§ 34-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-43
1:69

ARTICLE XXII
Deputy Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 10-3-1984 by Ord. No. 666 (Ch. 35, Art. XXII, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 34-44. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Code Enforcement Officer of
the Borough of Lindenwold. This position shall be an annual appointment of
the Mayor and with the confirmation of the Borough Council.
§ 34-45. Duties.
The Deputy Code Enforcement Officer's duties shall be to assist the Code
Enforcement Officer in all respects in the performance of his duties.
§ 34-46. Salary.
The salary of the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall be set annually in
the Borough's Salary Ordinance as with other employees.
§ 34-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-46
1:71

ARTICLE XXIII
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 3-8-1989 by Ord. No. 803 (Ch. 35, Art. XXIII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 34-47. Position created.18
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., the
position of Chief Financial Officer of this municipality is hereby created. The
term of office shall be for four years.
§ 34-48. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be a municipal finance officer who has been
certified as such in accordance with the procedures, rules and regulations
of the Division of Local Government Services of New Jersey. The position
of Chief Financial Officer is created in order to carry out responsibilities,
duties and obligations set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
§ 34-49. Compensation; appointment.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be compensated in accordance with the
local Municipal Salary Ordinance. Said Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 34-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-49
1:73

ARTICLE XXIV
Preference in Hiring for Residents
[Adopted 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1325]
§ 34-50. Procedure established.
A. Lindenwold residents submitting an application for any available
position in the Borough of Lindenwold will be given preference before
other applicants.
B. If the governing body shall determine that there cannot be recruited a
sufficient number of qualified residents for available specific positions
or employments, the local unit shall advertise for other qualified
applicants. Those individuals shall be given preference before other
applicants in the following order of priority from greatest to least:
(1) Other residents of the county in which the municipality is situate.
(2) Other residents of counties contiguous to the county in which the
municipality is situate.
(3) Other residents of the state.
(4) All other applicants.
C. The hiring authority shall first give preference to and appoint qualified
residents of the Borough of Lindenwold. From there, the hiring
authority shall appoint all those in class one and then those in each
succeeding class in the order above listed and shall appoint a person or
persons in any such class only to a position or positions, or employment
or employments, remaining after all qualified applicants in the
preceding class or classes have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment. The preference established by this section shall in
no way diminish, reduce or affect the preferences granted pursuant to
any other provisions of the law. A local unit which has recruited and
hired officers and employees under the provisions of this section shall
require such officers and employees, as a condition of their continued
employment, to comply with the provisions of the New Jersey First Act
(N.J.S.A. 52:14-7).
§ 34-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-50
1:75
Chapter 38
PAYROLL ACCOUNT
§ 38-1. Creation; deposit of moneys. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 587]
The Treasurer of the Borough of Lindenwold is hereby authorized to create
a bank account for the Borough of Lindenwold to be designated as the
"Borough of Lindenwold payroll account," to which, from time to time, said
Treasurer shall deposit to the credit of said payroll account all moneys
due before deductions to all officers and employees of said Borough of
Lindenwold upon receipt of a warrant for the amount due such payroll
account and shall charge the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.19
§ 38-2. Payroll procedure.20
A. The Borough of Lindenwold has biweekly payroll, and employees are
paid biweekly. The Deputy Treasurer is responsible for preparing the
biweekly payroll. Biweekly timecards/timesheets are turned into the
Deputy Treasurer every Monday with the exception of holidays. The
payroll is entered in house no later than Tuesday of every other week
and transmitted to a third party, CASA Payroll. CASA Payroll processes
the payroll and delivers it to the Borough for distribution.
B. The Treasurer shall thereafter oversee all checks drawn on said payroll
account to the employees entitled to payment therefrom and to the
District Director of Internal Revenue, the State of New Jersey, and any
other agency, court, corporation or person for such amounts as may be
due by virtue of payment to said employees.
C. At each regular meeting of the governing body, the Treasurer shall
submit for its approval or ratification, as the case may be, the necessary
payrolls for the amount due the several officers and employees for
compensation. The payroll shall be considered by the governing body in
due course and approved if found to be correct.
D. In the case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Deputy Treasurer
shall, and it shall be his/her duty to, see that such error or adjustment is
properly corrected and an appropriate record made thereof.
E. Such officers as may be designated by the governing body are hereby
authorized to sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account upon
due notice that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the
proper department and by the proper certifying authority, which
19.Editor's Note: Original § 38-2, Annual approval of account, of the 1981 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 34-50 LINDENWOLD CODE § 38-2
1:76
Chapter 42
PENSIONS
[The New Jersey Division of Pension and Benefits administers all of
the statewide retirement plans. There are three types of retirement
systems for which employees of the Borough of Lindenwold are
eligible for membership in accordance with the statutes and
regulations as follows: 1) Public Employees' Retirement System
(PERS); 2) Police and Fire Retirement Systems (PFRS); 3) Defined
Contribution Retirement Program (DCRP). For more detailed
information about the retirement systems, view the Division of
Pensions and Benefits Website: www.nj.gov/treasury/pensions.]
Chapter 44
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committeess and commissions — See
Ch. 5.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 34.
Pensions — See Ch. 42.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 52.
§ 44-1. Establishment of titles for public employment; salary
ranges.
The Borough of Lindenwold shall by ordinance establish titles for public
employment by the Borough of Lindenwold and salary ranges for Borough
of Lindenwold employees. (Said titles shall conform to the New Jersey Civil
Service Act21 and regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Civil Service
Commission.)
§ 44-2. Adoption and amendment of personnel policies.
The Borough of Lindenwold shall by resolution adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures, including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment,
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough of Lindenwold.
certifying authority and committee shall be those designated in a
resolution of the governing body.
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq.
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:77
§ 44-3. Implementation; enforcement.
The Mayor shall be responsible to implement and enforce the personnel
practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant to this
chapter. If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and any duly
adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services
contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or
law shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall prevail.
Chapter 46
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 44-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 44-3
1:78
ARTICLE I
Off-Duty Employment
[Adopted 11-17-2000 by Ord. No. 1082]
§ 46-1. Purpose.
For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the services
of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Borough of Lindenwold Police
Department and to authorize the outside employment of Borough police
while off duty, the Borough hereby establishes a policy regarding the use of
said officers.
§ 46-2. Escrow accounts.
A. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept policerelated
employment only during off-duty hours and at such time as will
not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or
emergency duty for the Borough.
B. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall obtain the
approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted if, in the
opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent with
the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Department
and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who are to perform the work.22
A. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Borough of Lindenwold Police Department
shall estimate the number of hours such law enforcement services are
required, which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of
Police, and shall establish an escrow account with the Borough Clerk
depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administration fees set forth in § 46-4 for the total estimated hours of
service.
B. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described have been deposited
with the Borough Clerk. No officer shall provide any such services for
more hours than are specified in the request for services.
C. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or posted
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:79
§ 46-3. Requests for services.
All requests to the Borough for services of off-duty law enforcement offers
in the Borough of Lindenwold Police Department shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police for posting at least 10 days before such services are
required. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by the Borough,
shall be treated as an employee of the Borough; provided, however, that
wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the
pension benefits of law enforcement officers so employed, nor shall hours
worked for outside employment be considered in any way compensable as
overtime.
§ 46-4. Compensation. [Amended 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 1123;
9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 1138; 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1203; 4-9-2008
by Ord. No. 1230; 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 132423]
See Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-34.
until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed.
D. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 46-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 46-4
1:80
ARTICLE II
Establishment and Organization
[Adopted 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1132]
§ 46-5. Department created; membership. [Amended 6-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 1278]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Lindenwold a Police
Department which shall consist of no more than a Chief of Police, one
Captain, two Lieutenants, eight Sergeants and 30 patrolmen.
§ 46-6. Responsibilities of Department.
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Borough of Lindenwold; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 46-7. Appropriate authority designation; responsibilities.
The Director of Public Safety as named by the Borough Council shall be
designated as the appropriate authority as provided in the New Jersey
Statutes. The appropriate authority shall be responsible for the overall
performance of the Police Department. The appropriate authority shall
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
Police Department and for the discipline of its members.
§ 46-8. Chief of Police; responsibilities.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority, the Chief of Police shall:
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during
§ 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:81
§ 46-9. Suspension; reduction in rank; removal.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the
Police Department's rules and regulations.
§ 46-10. Qualifications for appointment to Department.
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The appropriate authority may also
require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department shall
successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological examination.
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the appropriate authority.
§ 46-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 46-10
1:82
Chapter 52
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
[The currently effective ordinances providing for the salaries and
compensation of the officers and employees of the Borough are on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk.]
Chapter 57
SEWER SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 260.
§ 57-1. Dissolution of Municipal Utilities Authority.
The Lindenwold Borough Municipal Utilities Authority (LBMUA) created by
the Borough by ordinance adopted on October 13, 1960, be and the same is
hereby dissolved, subject to the terms and conditions hereof.
§ 57-2. Injunction against further action without consent.
The LBMUA is hereby enjoined from taking any further action without
the consent of the Borough. Simultaneously upon the effective date of
the dissolution as set forth in § 57-7 of this chapter, the LBMUA shall
cease all operations and activities, which operations and activities shall
be transferred to the Borough automatically and without further action by
either the Borough or the LBMUA.
§ 57-3. Transfer of title to all facilities.
Upon the effective date of the dissolution as set forth in § 57-7, all real and
personal property, facilities and contracts of the LBMUA shall be deemed
transferred to the Borough. The existing officers of the LBMUA are hereby
authorized and directed to execute any documents or instruments
necessary to transfer legal title to all real property, personal property,
facilities and contracts to the Borough upon the effective date of the
dissolution herein, notwithstanding the dissolution of the LBMUA.
§ 57-4. Payment of all creditors and obligees.
Upon the effective date of the dissolution as set forth in § 57-7, the Borough
shall assume all legal obligations to pay all existing and outstanding
creditors and obligees of the LBMUA.
§ 46-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-5
1:83
§ 57-5. Assumption of services.24
The Borough shall create a sanitary sewer utility fund for the purpose of
assuming the operation of the services previously provided by the LBMUA.
The Borough shall amend its ordinances to effectuate the transfer of said
obligations from the LBMUA to a sanitary sewer utility in accordance with
the provisions of law, which services are necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the users of the system. Upon the effective date of the dissolution
as set forth in § 57-7, the Borough shall assume the operation of the services
previously provided by the LBMUA.
§ 57-6. Approval of Local Finance Board.
This chapter shall be submitted to and approved by the Local Finance Board
of the State of New Jersey in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:5A-20. The final adoption of this chapter by the Borough shall represent
conclusive proof of the fact that this chapter has received the approval of
the Local Finance Board. Immediately upon the adoption of this chapter, the
aforesaid shall be filed with the Local Finance Board and with the Secretary
of the State of New Jersey, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-20.
§ 57-7. Effective date of dissolution.
The dissolution of the LBMUA shall take effect simultaneously with the
creation of a sanitary sewer utility by the Borough for the assumption of the
obligations of the LBMUA services previously provided by the LBMUA and
the transfer of all funds from the LBMUA to the Borough.25
§ 57-8. Authorization to take all necessary action.
The members of the Borough Council, Borough Administrator, Treasurer,
Chief Financial Officer, Borough Clerk and other employees, as directed by
the Borough Council, are hereby authorized and directed to take any and
all steps necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. The members
of the LBMUA, its officers, employees, engineer and Council are hereby
authorized and directed to take all steps necessary to effectuate the purpose
of this chapter.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Sewer Use.
§ 57-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 57-8
1:84
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 65
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
§ 65-1. Purpose.26
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, actuating a device
at the police headquarters of the Borough of Lindenwold and/or at the
Camden County Communications Center in Lindenwold, New Jersey, and
requiring a response thereto by the Police Department, the Fire District or
other municipal agencies.
§ 65-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any location requiring a response to any type of alarm
signal. The terms of this chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm companies
from providing service by private source to other offices within or without
the Borough of Lindenwold so long as such activity is not connected to the
alarm console and/or does not require a police response; except, however,
that any person having a premises protected by any alarm device shall still
be responsible for the registration thereof in accordance with the provisions
herein provided.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and located within the confines of the police
headquarters of the Borough of Lindenwold and/or the Camden County
Communications Center and/or any other official location recognized by all
parties herein.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm console or Police Department telephone system providing warning of
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 57-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:85
ALARM DIALER — Any type of automatic telephone dialing device using the
telephone system to transmit an alarm to the Police Department.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
ALARM SYSTEM — The activity of maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing, or causing to be maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed, in or on any
building, place or premises, any device designed or used for the detection of
unauthorized entry or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful
act, or both, and the detection of fire or smoke or any hazards affecting the
safety of citizens and/or their property.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or an
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder and includes as well
alarms caused by the malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant
equipment, but shall not include alarms created by a malfunction of the
alarm console.
HARD-WIRE ALARM — An alarm system that is wired directly to the alarm
console which will be maintained at the Camden County Communications
Center, Lindenwold, New Jersey, and/or the Lindenwold Borough Police
Department or other location officially recognized by all parties indicated
herein.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console, such as burglar alarms actuating
bell or siren devices.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation,
association or any other legal entity.
§ 65-4. Registration; application and fees.
A. Any person, firm or corporation that owns or operates an alarm device
or a local alarm shall make application for the installation, operation
and continuance thereof, in writing, to the Borough Clerk on the form
provided by the Borough Clerk's office, which application shall contain
at least the location of the device, the name of the installer of said
device, the type of device, provisions relating to false alarms and
testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm and other information as may be required by the Borough Clerk.
B. Local alarms shall be registered and a reduced fee shall be charged
therefor.
C. For alarm devices, the registrant shall pay whatever charges are
required by any alarm company making such installation and, in
addition thereto, such charges as are herein provided for to the
§ 65-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 65-4
1:86
§ 65-5. Permit for connection to police switchboard required.
No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any telephone device or
telephone attachment that automatically selects a telephone trunk line of
the Police Department of the Borough of Lindenwold and then reproduces
any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary or other
emergency or relay by human agency a like message without first having
obtained a written permit from the Borough Clerk, and no person shall
install, maintain, use or permit to be used any robbery, burglary or
emergency alarm system which automatically or semiautomatically
terminates in any private establishment or telephone answering service and
which is relayed by the recipient of the alarm by a telephone call to the
Police Department without having first obtained a written permit from the
Borough Clerk.
§ 65-6. General regulations.
Borough of Lindenwold for the alarm control panel, and circuit rental
charges as may be determined under this chapter as well as the
registration fee, false alarm charges and any other fees herein provided
for.
D. Any applicant who shall register an alarm device or a local alarm shall
be deemed to have released the Borough of Lindenwold and any of its
employees from any liabilities or damages arising from or on account of
the use and maintenance of the alarm console and related activities,
and said applicant shall indemnify and hold the Borough of Lindenwold
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising
therefrom.27
E. Owners of alarm dialer devices shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in this chapter.
A. Dial alarms.
(1) Dial alarms shall only be coded to dial a special separate number,
which number can be obtained from the Chief of Police or agent,
and no dial alarm shall be coded to dial the number of the general
police switchboard of the Borough of Lindenwold.
(2) The message must conform to an approved format on application.
(3) The total length of a message should not exceed 15 seconds.
(4) A message is to be received by police headquarters twice, but no
more than three times.
(5) In the event that any person has a dial alarm device in existence at
the time of the passage of this chapter, he shall have 30 days in
27.Editor's Note: Original § 61-4E, regarding fees for telephone lines, of the 1981 Code,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 65-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-6
1:87
§ 65-7. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police may, from time to time, promulgate written rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Director of Public Safety, in order
to provide for recordkeeping and efficient operation and management of
said system.
which to pay the annual fee. Any person not so complying shall
be liable to a penalty payable to the Borough of Lindenwold, as
provided by § 65-14.
(6) Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general
police number, upon discovery thereof, shall receive notice in
writing from the Chief of Police requiring the owner to comply with
the terms of this chapter, and if the owner fails to do so within 30
days of the receipt of said notice, he shall then be liable to pay the
Borough of Lindenwold a penalty as provided for in § 65-14.
(7) All components of such equipment must be maintained by the
owner in good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with the operational requirements of this chapter,
the Chief of Police or his agent, with the approval of the Director of
Public Safety, shall demand that such device be disconnected until
such time as compliance with current requirements is
reestablished.
B. Any permittee utilizing any alarm system shall provide for a repairman
to be on call at all times, and such service shall be provided within eight
hours of notification of the permittee by the Police Department of any
malfunction of any equipment.
C. The Chief of Police, with the consent of the Director of Public Safety,
shall have the right to refuse service on any and all habitual false alarm
offenders and to disconnect any malfunctioning equipment from the
alarm console until such time as the malfunction has been corrected, as
well as refusing response to such habitual false alarm offenders.
D. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative, with the consent of the Director
of Public Safety, for noncompliance with this chapter. Each and every
day said equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate
violation. Any permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed
as having consented to the inspection of the premises on which said
alarm devices are installed at reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or
his designated representative.
E. All audible alarms shall be equipped with a time relay or battery to limit
the sounding of an alarm to 10 minutes or less.28
28.Editor's Note: Original § 61-7, Fees and charges, of the 1981 Code, which immediately
followed this section, as amended 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 739, was repealed 6-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 747.
§ 65-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 65-8
1:88
§ 65-8. Application forms; terms and conditions of permits.
§ 65-9. Investigation; expiration and renewal of permit.
§ 65-10. Suspension and revocation of permit.
A. Application forms and tie-in instructions shall be in a form prescribed
by the Chief of Police and shall be available in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
B. Terms and conditions. Upon application, permits shall be granted
subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) The applicant shall furnish, when required, complete information
and specifications relating to the system to be provided. The
information shall include specific data relating to the service of
false alarms and testing procedures, if desired.
(2) No person other than the applicant and his designated agents and
employees shall exercise the privilege.
(3) The applicant shall maintain his equipment in good condition and
repair and maintain an adequate work force and equipment to
repair, maintain and service such system.
(4) No permit shall be transferred or assigned in any manner.
(5) An excessive number of false alarms will be penalized as provided
herein and will subject the subscriber to disconnection.
(6) No subscriber will fail or refuse to respond to a police summons in
reference to deactivating an alarm, whether or not the same is
legitimately or falsely activated and regardless of the type of alarm.
A. The Police Chief shall cause an investigation to be made and submit the
results thereof to the Borough Clerk, who shall issue the permit if the
Chief of Police finds that the system in the police switchboard or in the
Police Department will not jam the switchboard, constitute a nuisance
or otherwise interfere with or hinder the proper operation of the police
work of the Borough.
B. All such permits issued under this chapter shall expire on January 31
following the year in which a permit is granted. Thereafter, the Borough
Clerk may issue a renewal permit, provided that on or before January
31 of the succeeding year a request is made in writing for the renewal
of said permit, and there shall be charged and paid by the applicant a
renewal fee for each and every year as provided herein.
A. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Police Chief as provided herein.
B. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Police Chief when it shall appear that:
§ 65-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-10
1:89
§ 65-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Chief or Borough Clerk in
denying a permit or in the suspension or revocation of any permit provided
for by this chapter may appeal to the Director of Public Safety of the
Borough of Lindenwold by serving written notice of such appeal upon the
Borough Clerk.
§ 65-12. Liability.
§ 65-13. False alarms. [Added 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 739]
In the event that any subscriber shall have more than two false alarms in
any consecutive thirty-day period, upon the third such false alarm, he shall
be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $25
upon conviction in the Municipal Court. Each succeeding violation within
the same thirty-day period shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 upon
conviction in the Municipal Court.
(1) The permittee, his agents or employees willfully failed or did not
comply with a request by a member of the Police Department to
proceed immediately to the location of the permittee's alarm and
render necessary services.
(2) The permittee, his agents or employees knowingly installed or
maintained a faulty alarm device. An inordinate number of false
alarms shall be prima facie evidence that such alarm device is
knowingly a faulty device.
(3) The permittee has breached the terms and conditions of the permit
or has failed to comply with Departmental rules or the other
provisions of this chapter, or the privilege so granted has been
abused to the detriment of the public.
A. Notwithstanding the payment of any fee as herein required and/or the
receiving or issuance of any permit as herein required, the Police
Department of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or maintenance of
the device or devices so installed, and the Borough of Lindenwold and
its authorized agents hereby assume no liability whatsoever for any
failure of any such equipment, failure to respond to any such alarms or
for any act of omission or commission as a result of any such alarm,
device or system.
B. The applicant or permittee, upon the acceptance of such permit, hereby
agrees to hold and save harmless the Borough of Lindenwold, its agents
or employees from any liability whatsoever in connection with any such
alarm system or the operation of the same.
§ 65-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 65-14
1:90
§ 65-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-16-1987 by Ord. No.
73929]
Except as otherwise provided, any person, firm or corporation found guilty
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold of a violation of the
terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 69
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 224.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 65-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-14
1:91

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Operation
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 63, Arts. I, III and IV, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 69-1. Purpose.30
This article is for the purpose of regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages
in the Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden, and State of New Jersey,
in accordance with the provisions of an act of the Legislature entitled
"An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933,31 as amended and supplemented, and in accordance with the rules
and regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable hereto, and in accordance
with the rules and regulations existing herein or hereafter adopted by
competent municipal authority not inconsistent with said Act or said rules
and regulations of said State Director.
§ 69-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person or association of natural persons,
association, trust, company, partnership, corporation, organization, or the
manager, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
SALE — Every delivery of any alcoholic beverage otherwise than by purely
gratuitous title or the solicitation or acceptance of an order for any alcoholic
beverage, and including exchange, barter, traffic in, keeping and exposing
for sale, serving with meals, delivering for value, peddling, possessing with
intent to sell and the gratuitous delivery or gift of any alcoholic beverage by
any licensee.
§ 69-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate, use or maintain
any store, dwelling or other buildings for the sale or exposure for sale of any
of the beverages authorized by the above-mentioned Act of the Legislature,
or to conduct the business of or otherwise engage in selling or distributing
such beverages, within the corporate limits of the Borough of Lindenwold,
without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 69-4. License application.
A. Any persons who may desire a Class C license, that is, either a plenary
retail consumption license or a plenary retail distribution license as
provided in said Act, shall first make application therefor on a blank
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-4
1:93
§ 69-5. License subject to certain regulations.
Any such license shall be subject to the provisions of said Act and of this
article and to the police regulations and ordinances of this Borough.
§ 69-6. Hours of operation. [Amended 6-19-1972 by Ord. No. 297;
3-20-1978 by Ord. No. 483; 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 491; 6-16-1980 by
Ord. No. 544; 11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 591; 12-1-1982 by Ord. No.
613; 3-21-1983 by Ord. No. 617]
§ 69-7. Hours extended.
Notwithstanding the provision of any Borough ordinance limiting the hours
for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Lindenwold, any
licensee may also sell such beverages between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. on January 1, commonly known as "New Year's Day."
form which shall be furnished by the Borough Clerk. Said application,
when fully completed and accompanied by cash or a certified check for
100% of the requisite license fee, shall be filed with the Borough Clerk,
who shall present the same to Borough Council at the next meeting
thereof for the issuance of a license subject to the rules and regulations
and in accordance with the provisions of the said Act if said applicant
shall be duly qualified for and entitled to a license thereunder. Any such
license shall not be valid unless sealed with the corporate seal of the
Borough, attested by the Borough Clerk, and the license fee paid in full.
B. Any person who may desire a club license or a renewal of a club license
shall, in addition to any other requirements imposed by law, deliver to
the Clerk a list of members entitled to use the applicant's facilities. The
list may be amended by the applicant from time to time to reflect new
members. The applicant shall also supply to the Clerk a copy of the
club's bylaws setting forth the requirements and qualifications of
members and guests. [Added 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1073]
A. No licensee hereunder shall operate, keep or permit to be kept open for
the sale or distribution of beverages any place so licensed between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday, or between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sundays. All lights outside of the building
must be extinguished and music discontinued at 2:30 a.m. and the
premises cleared of all patrons by 3:30 a.m.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no establishment operating under a
club license and located in an R-1 Zone shall operate, keep or permit to
be kept open for the sale or distribution of beverages between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. The
premises of any establishment operating under a club license in an R-1
Zone shall be cleared of patrons, members and/or guests by 12:30 a.m.
on Sunday through Thursday and by 2:30 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.
[Added 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1073]
§ 69-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 69-8
1:94
§ 69-8. Hours for outdoor activities. [Added 6-14-2000 by Ord. No.
1073]
No licensed establishment operating in a residential zone shall permit any
outdoor activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except for
the coming and going of patrons.
§ 69-9. Display of license.
Every license shall be exposed to the public view in a conspicuous place on
the premises licensed, and any failure to do so shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the place where alcoholic beverages are being sold is
unlicensed.
§ 69-10. License fees. [Amended 2-21-1972 by Ord. No. 278;
12-16-1974 by Ord. No. 36932]
The annual fees for alcoholic beverage licenses in the Borough of
Lindenwold are provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule,
§ 150-11.
§ 69-11. Payment of fees.
All license fees shall be paid in cash or certified check to the order of the
Borough of Lindenwold, New Jersey, and shall be paid into the Borough
treasury.
§ 69-12. Violations and penalties.33
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
33.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 69-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-12
1:95

ARTICLE II
Purchase and Consumption by Minors
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 63, Art. II, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 69-13. Entry into licensed premises prohibited. [Amended
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587; 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1073]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 years to enter any
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 69-14. Purchase prohibited. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
58734]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 years to purchase,
attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him or her any alcoholic
beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 69-15. Misrepresentation of age prohibited. [Amended
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587; 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1073]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to misrepresent
or misstate his or her age for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee
or any employee of any retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverage to him or her.
§ 69-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
58735]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code.
§ 69-17. Display of regulations concerning minors required.
A copy of this article shall be displayed at all times in every establishment
within the Borough of Lindenwold which is the holder of a plenary retail
consumption license, a plenary retail distribution license or a club license.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 69-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-17
1:97

ARTICLE III
Open Containers in Public Places
[Adopted 8-18-1975 by Ord. No. 399 (Ch. 63, Art. V, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 69-18. Open containers in public places prohibited. [Amended
6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1073]
No person shall have in his or her possession any open container containing
an alcoholic beverage in any place generally open to or accessible by
the general public, including but not limited to any roadway, parking lot,
sidewalk, playground, park and/or public building, but specifically not
including any premises licensed for the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages or any commercial establishment which invites patrons to
consume patron-provided alcoholic beverages.
§ 69-19. Open containers in vehicles prohibited.
An open bottle or open container containing liquor, beer, wine or other
alcoholic beverage in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the
same is in the possession of all of the occupants thereof and in violation
hereof.
§ 69-20. Exceptions by permission on request.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lindenwold, for good cause shown,
may permit the drinking of beer at public parks or in other public areas
by a resolution of the Borough Council, which resolution shall be preceded
by a written request of the organization or organizations seeking such
permission, addressed to the Borough Council, and which resolution shall
state the hours within which such permission is granted and the exact
location where such permission shall be in force.
§ 69-21. Violations and penalties.36
A violation of this article shall constitute an offense punishable as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 69-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-21
1:99
Chapter 75
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 199.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 386.
§ 69-21 LINDENWOLD CODE § 69-21
1:100
ARTICLE I
Cats
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 97, Art. I, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 75-1. Registration required; fees; certificate of registration.
[Amended 6-14-1989 by Ord. No. 815; 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1296;
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat or cats, male or female,
within the limits of the Borough of Lindenwold shall report to the Clerk or
designee annually, by January 31 of each year, his or her name and address
and shall give the name, breed, color and sex of each and every cat kept by
said person and shall, within said time, pay to said Clerk or designee the
sum as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-7, as
a license fee and a registration fee for each and every cat or cats, and said
Clerk shall furnish the owner or keeper of the same with the certificate,
signed by said Clerk, stating the registry number of the cat, its name, breed,
color and sex and the name and address of its owner or keeper, which
certificate shall be valid and effective from the date of its issuance to the
first day of January in the ensuing year. Upon proof by affidavit of the loss of
any certificate or metal tags hereinafter provided for, the Clerk or designee
shall issue a duplicate certificate or tag upon payment of the fee provided
in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-7.
§ 75-2. Rabies inoculation required. [Added 9-16-1985 by Ord. No.
693; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
No license shall be issued or granted nor shall any official registration tag
be issued or granted for any cat unless the owner or person maintaining the
same provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered
in accordance with the regulations of the United States Department of
Health and Human Services or has been certified exempt as provided by the
regulations of the State Department of Health. Such vaccination shall be
repeated at intervals as provided by the regulations of the State Department
of Health and shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by
such veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
§ 75-3. Record of registrations.
The Clerk or designee shall keep a book for the purpose of registering the
name of the owner of every cat, the description of the cat as set forth in the
registration certificate and the number of the license certificate issued.
§ 75-4. Registration tag.
The Clerk or designee, upon receipt of the fee prescribed by § 75-1 of this
article, shall furnish with each certificate of registration a metal tag on
which shall be inscribed the registry number, which shall correspond to the
number set forth in the certificate, and the year in which the certificate is
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:101
issued, which said tag shall be securely affixed to the collar or strap worn
by the cat.
§ 75-5. Leashes; running at large. [Added 1-8-1992 by Ord. No. 894]
§ 75-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
58737]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
A. Any cat off the premises of any person owning, keeping or harboring
the same shall be accompanied by a person capable of controlling the
cat and who has the cat upon a leash not exceeding six feet in length or
in a crate or box or otherwise securely confined so as to prevent it from
running at large.
B. Any owner or keeper of any cat found running at large in the Borough of
Lindenwold, whether said animal is registered or unregistered, shall be
in violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided herein.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 75-6
1:102
ARTICLE II
Dogs; Animal Control
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 97, Art. II, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 75-7. Registration required; fees; certificate of registration.
[Amended 11-20-1978 by Ord. No. 502; 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587;
7-19-1982 by Ord. No. 607; 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 634; 7-2-1986 by
Ord. No. 720; 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 129638]
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog within the limits of the
Borough of Lindenwold shall report to the Clerk or designee, annually, by
January 31 of each year, his or her name and address and shall give the
name, breed, color and sex of each and every dog kept by such person and
shall pay to the Clerk or designee the sum as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-7, as a license fee for each dog. The
Clerk shall furnish the owner with a certificate signed by the Clerk stating
the register number of the dog, its name, breed, color and sex and the
name and address of its owner or keeper. No license shall be issued or
granted nor shall any official registration tag be issued or granted for any
dog unless the owner or person maintaining the same provides evidence
that the dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated against
rabies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a or has been certified exempt
as provided by regulations of the State Department of Health.
§ 75-8. Record of registrations.
The Clerk or designee shall keep a book for the purpose of registering the
name of the owner of every dog, the description of the dog as set forth in
the registration certificate and the number of the license certificate issued.
§ 75-9. Registration tag.
The Clerk or designee, upon receipt of the fee prescribed by § 75-7 of this
article, shall furnish with each certificate of registration a metal tag on
which shall be inscribed the registry number, which shall correspond to the
number set forth in the certificate, and the year in which the certificate is
issued, which said tag shall be securely affixed to the collar or strap worn
by the dog.
§ 75-10. Impoundment; notice; redemption. [Amended 10-19-1981
by Ord. No. 58739]
The Animal Control Officer shall take into custody and impound, or cause
to be taken into custody and impounded, any dog running at large found to
be unregistered or, if registered, without a collar having the prescribed tag
attached thereto; the Animal Control Officer or other constituted authority
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:103
shall, immediately following the taking and impounding of any dog or dogs
pursuant to the provisions of this article, cause a notice in writing of such
taking and impounding to be mailed to the owner of such dog or dogs and
also to the nearest office of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, and the same will be destroyed unless claimed by said owner or
organization within seven days from the mailing of said notice.
§ 75-11. License required to establish kennel.40
Any person or corporation who shall engage in the business of boarding
animals, or breeding or raising animals for sale, or housing more than
three dogs or three cats, shall be considered as keeping a kennel, and no
person shall keep a kennel within the limits of the Borough of Lindenwold
without first complying with N.J.A.C. 8:23aa-1 through 1.13 and requesting
approval from the Joint Land Use Board, the Lindenwold Code Enforcement
Officer and Camden County Health and Human Services. Upon receiving
these approvals, said person or corporation shall apply for a Lindenwold
mercantile license and a Lindenwold sanitary code license.
§ 75-12. Leashes; running at large. [Added 11-20-1978 by Ord. No.
502; amended 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 665]
§ 75-13. Vicious dogs. [Added 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 665; amended
5-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1160]
Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which habitually
attacks other dogs or domestic animals shall be deemed to be vicious dog
for the purpose of this section. An appropriate Borough official shall receive
and investigate complaints against dogs, and when any dog complained
against is deemed to be a vicious dog, an appropriate Borough official shall
report the facts to the Municipal Judge, who shall cause the owner or person
harboring such dog to be notified, in writing, of the complaint against such
dog and to appear before him at a stated time and place. At the time set for
such hearing, the Judge shall inquire into the facts and give all interested
persons an opportunity to be heard under oath and to be represented by
counsel. The Judge shall decide in accordance with the evidence before him,
and, if he decides that such dog complained of is a vicious dog, notice of
A. Any dog off the premises of any person owning, keeping or harboring
the same shall be accompanied by a person capable of controlling the
dog and who has the dog upon a leash not exceeding six feet in length
or in a crate or box or otherwise securely confined so as to prevent it
from running at large.
B. Any owner or keeper of any dog found running at large in the Borough
of Lindenwold, whether said animal is registered or unregistered, shall
be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided
herein.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 75-13
1:104
such decision shall be given to the owner or person harboring such dog.
No dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog shall be permitted
to be upon any street or public place in the Borough except while securely
muzzled and under a leash of not more than six feet in length, and the owner
or person harboring any such vicious dog who permits it to run at large
upon any street or public place in the Borough while not securely muzzled
and under a leash of not more than six feet in length shall be guilty of a
violation of this article.
§ 75-14. Disturbing the peace. [Added 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 66541]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks or
cries so as to disturb the public peace.
§ 75-15. Control of dog defecation. [Added 2-18-1985 by Ord. No.
665]
No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer, permit or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway,
road bypass, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk or upon any public property whatsoever or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the private property in the last
instance. If any such person shall permit such dog to soil, defile, defecate on
or commit any nuisance on the areas aforesaid, he or she shall immediately
remove and dispose of all feces and droppings deposited by such dog, which
removal shall be in a sanitary manner by a shovel, container, disposal bag,
etc. In a multidwelling complex, the tenant dog owner shall take his dog to
the only designated walking area for dogs or other animals which shall be
provided and maintained in a sanitary manner by the management of the
complex. On the dog owner's own property, he shall maintain the property
in a sanitary manner in order to prevent any noxious odors, attraction of
vermin breeding or any other public health nuisance to neighbors.
§ 75-16. Number of dogs and cats restricted; applicability. [Added
11-30-1972 by Ord. No. 310; amended 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 665;
1-24-2001 by Ord. No. 1086; 5-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1160]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons who constitute a
single household within the limits of the Borough of Lindenwold to
keep, harbor or maintain more than three dogs and three cats at any
one time within said single household.
B. This limitation shall not be applicable to properly licensed kennels,
animal pounds or pet shops or to any dog or dogs or cat or cats who
have not yet attained the age of six months.42
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-17
1:105
§ 75-17. Certain animals prohibited. [Added 5-11-2005 by Ord. No.
1160]
No person or entity shall keep any goats, sheep, horses, pigs, swine, cattle,
poultry or fowl of any kind in the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 75-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
587; 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 66543]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-17 LINDENWOLD CODE § 75-18
1:106
ARTICLE III
Feeding Wild Animals and Waterfowl
[Adopted 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1235]
§ 75-19. Findings.
It has been well established that the feeding of wild animals and waterfowl
is both detrimental to the animals and causes a public health nuisance and
safety hazard that is detrimental to the health and general welfare of the
public.
§ 75-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., or on or near the sea; an aquatic fowl, including but not limited
to ducks, geese, swans, heron, and egrets.
WILD ANIMAL — Includes any animal which is not normally domesticated
in this state, including but not limited to bears, coyotes, deer, feral cats,
foxes, groundhogs, opossums, raccoons, skunks, and waterfowl.
§ 75-21. Feeding prohibited.
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed, bait, or in a manner
provide access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl in the Borough
of Lindenwold on lands either publicly or privately owned. This section
shall not apply to the feeding of farm animals.
B. No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement, salt,
seed or birdseed, fruit, or grain in a manner that would constitute an
attractant to any wild animal or waterfowl.
C. No person shall fail to take remedial action to avoid contact or conflict
with wild animals, which may include the securing or removal of
outdoor trash, cooking grills, pet food, bird feeders or any other similar
food source or attractant after being advised by the Borough to
undertake such remedial action. Further, after an initial contact or
conflict with a wild animal, no person shall continue to provide, or
otherwise fail to secure or remove, any likely food sources or
attractants, including, but not limited to, outdoor trash, grills, pet food
or bird feeders.
D. Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(1) Any agent of the Borough authorized to implement an alternative
control method set forth in any approved community-based deer
management plan and possessing a special deer management
§ 75-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-21
1:107
§ 75-22. Feeding of other songbirds and other backyard birds
permitted.
Feeding of other songbirds and other backyard birds shall be permitted
outdoors at such times and in such numbers that:
§ 75-23. Enforcement.
§ 75-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c. 46;44 or
(2) Any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant
to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions
of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
A. Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects
the rights of surrounding property owners and renders other persons
insecure in the use of their property;
B. Does not create an accumulation of droppings on the property and
surrounding properties;
C. Does not become an attractant for rodents or other wild animals; and
D. Bird feeders are placed at least five feet above the ground.
A. Each property owner shall have the duty to remove any above-named
materials or device placed on the owner's property in violation of this
article.
B. Failure to remove such materials or device or to make such
modifications within 24 hours after notice from the Borough shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
C. Code enforcement personnel, Camden County Health Department
personnel, animal control officers and all police officers of the Borough
of Lindenwold are hereby given full power and authority to enforce this
article.
D. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 23:4-42.6.
§ 75-21 LINDENWOLD CODE § 75-24
1:108
ARTICLE IV
Pet Store Sales
[Added 6-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
§ 75-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — A presentation for sale or adoption, an advertisement
for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or
cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization as defined.
§ 75-26. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
A. Licensing of pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.14.
B. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
C. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or a cat that is younger than
eight weeks old.
§ 75-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-26
1:109
Chapter 88
BUILDING SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
§ 75-26 LINDENWOLD CODE § 75-26
1:110
ARTICLE I
Television Monitoring and Recording Systems
[Adopted 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1236]
§ 88-1. System required in certain retail establishments.
Any retail establishment with hours of operation during any period of time
between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be equipped with a television
monitoring and recording system approved by the Lindenwold Borough
Police Department.
§ 88-2. Standards and requirements.
The Lindenwold Borough Police Department shall develop standards and
requirements for such systems and shall develop an application/permit
system to enforce the provision of this article.
§ 88-3. Waivers.
The Chief of Police is empowered to issue waivers from this article in the
appropriate circumstances.
§ 88-4. Violations and penalties.45
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code.
45.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-4
1:111
Chapter 92
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119. Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
§ 92-1. Size of numbers; materials.
§ 92-2. Color and visibility.
Each number and/or letter shall be of such a color as to contrast with the
immediate background so that said number will be clearly visible from the
opposite side of the street.
§ 92-3. Location; maintenance.
A. Size.
(1) All house numbers must be at least three inches high, single-family
dwelling and duplex houses.
(2) All multifamily dwellings, including apartments, condos, and
townhouses, shall have a building number and/or letter which must
be at least 12 inches high, in addition to entrance door number.46
(3) All places of business numbers must be at least three inches high.
B. All numbers must be made of metal, wood or plastic.
C. All numbers must be readable from a minimum of a fifty-foot distance.
[Added 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1255]
A. All house numbers shall be placed on or over the front door or front
window or on either side of the entrance. In those instances when the
house is not clearly visible from the opposite side of the street, the
assigned numbers shall be clearly displayed on a sign placed at the
entrance driveway or walkway. After the number has been displayed or
affixed to any home or building, it shall be unlawful to cover or conceal
the number or to permit it to be covered or concealed either by natural
growth or foliage or otherwise. Said number must be properly
maintained so as to be clearly visible at all times.
B. All multifamily dwelling building numbers and/or letters shall be placed
high on the building above any obstruction and visible from any drive by
roadway. Said numbers must be maintained as indicated above for
house numbers. [Amended 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1255]
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 88-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 92-3
1:112
§ 92-4. Violations and penalties.47
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
shall fail to comply therewith shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. This chapter shall
be enforced by the Police Department, Fire Marshal and Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
Chapter 100
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Solid waste utility — See Ch. 276.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 240.
§ 100-1. Burning of rubbish prohibited.
(1) Any and all exterior doors used for storage or HVAC must be
identified on the exterior of the door and marked HVAC or storage.
(2) Each unit in the multifamily dwelling must have numbers or letters
installed above or next to all exterior door or patio entrances, front,
back or side.
A. It shall be unlawful at any time for any person or persons or corporation
to burn brush, weeds, grass, leaves, wastepaper or other hazardous
materials.
B. No open fires or outdoor fires shall be conducted on any porch, deck,
balcony or other portion of a building; within any room or space within
a building; or under any building overhang; provided, however, that an
open fire or outdoor fire may be conducted on a concrete or stone patio
if and only if all other provisions of this chapter are met.
C. Fires shall be limited to a maximum four-foot diameter and two feet in
height and must be contained in a noncombustible chimenea, outdoor
fireplace, fire pit, or other method approved by the Fire Marshal.
D. All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire mesh
or other screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks and
embers.
E. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15,240 mm)
from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1
1:113
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is not in full compliance with this chapter or who otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and regulations issued
hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions:
(1) Fires in approved containers must be kept at least 15 feet from any
property line, combustible exterior wall, or other combustibles that
may ignite and permit the spread of a fire. Example: shrubs, trees,
fences, house, sheds, etc.
(2) The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet
(7,620 mm) where the pile size is three feet (914 mm) or less in
diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height.
F. Fires must be constantly attended until completely extinguished.
G. The Fire Marshal, Police Officer, or any Borough Official may order an
outdoor burning activity to cease if conditions are such or the activity is
so situated as to endanger the health or safety of persons or property
located in the general area of the activity. If the party responsible for
the outdoor burning activity does not immediately comply with an order
to cease given pursuant to this subsection, the party responsible shall
be subject to the penalties set forth below. Any open fire or use of a
chimenea, outdoor fireplace, or fire pit which creates a nuisance or is
deemed to be a hazard is to be extinguished.
H. Outdoor burning is not permitted when the wind exceeds 10 miles per
hour.
I. While outdoor burning is being conducted, it shall be attended by a
person of at least 18 years of age at all times.
J. Adequate fire-suppression equipment such as shovels, fire
extinguishers rated at 4A or larger, water hoses, or like equipment
sufficient to extinguish the fire shall be present on the property at all
times outdoor burning is conducted.
K. No person shall cause an open fire or outdoor fire to be used or
maintained in such a manner as to cause a nuisance to neighbors.
L. Fire pits are not permitted for multifamily properties, single-family only.
§ 100-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 100-2
1:114
Chapter 105
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:115

ARTICLE I
Dwelling Units
[Adopted 3-20-1978 by Ord. No. 482 (Ch. 81, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 105-1. Certificate of occupancy required.
No person, group of persons, association, partnership or corporation or any
combination thereof who owns, manages, conducts or operates a dwelling
unit shall rent, lease, let, sublet or permit the same to be occupied or
re-rented by another without first securing from the public officer of the
Borough a certificate of occupancy for said dwelling unit.
§ 105-2. Compliance with regulations and ordinances. [Amended
4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 1011]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a dwelling unit unless the
condition of same complies with Chapter 240, Property Maintenance Code,
and with all of the ordinances of the Borough now in existence or hereafter
enacted pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, health, safety,
fire and minimum housing standards and all departmental regulations
established pursuant to said ordinances or laws. Furthermore, no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued unless all electrical and gas appliances shall
be clean and in proper working order, all rugs shampooed, all glass surfaces
washed and all walls, floors and ceramic surfaces cleaned and sanitary.
Pursuant to and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, no certificate of
occupancy will be issued to a dwelling unit owner whereby the dwelling
unit owner has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least
three consecutive quarters. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or
assessments, the certificate of occupancy will be issued.
§ 105-3. What constitutes a dwelling unit.
A "dwelling unit" is a room or group of rooms which form a single unit to be
occupied by one or more persons for all or any combination of the following
uses: living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
§ 105-4. Designation of public officer. [Amended 4-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 1011]
The public officer, for the purposes of this article, shall be the Municipal
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 105-5. Furnishing of information concerning tenants.
Thirty days after the effective date of this article, the party responsible
for the dwelling units shall provide to the public officer a list, by unit,
containing the names and addresses of all tenants. Further, by the first day
of each succeeding month, a list of the changes in occupancies shall be
provided to said public officer.
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-6
1:117
§ 105-6. Fee for certificate.48
All applications for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule, § 150-17, made payable to the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 105-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any individual person, group of persons, association, partnership or
corporation or any combination thereof who leases or rents a dwelling unit
without a certificate of occupancy being issued by the public officer shall be
subject to a fine of $100 for each day each dwelling unit is occupied without
a certificate of occupancy.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 105-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 105-7
1:118
ARTICLE II
Change of Ownership
[Adopted 7-9-1997 by Ord. No. 1016 (Ch. 81, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 105-8. When required.
Occupancy certificates shall hereafter be required for human habitation
every time a residential dwelling unit changes ownership.
§ 105-9. Other requirements for certificates unaffected.
The occupancy certificate required herein does not repeal or amend
requirements for other occupancy certificates heretofore provided for by
ordinance of this Borough or statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 105-10. Application for certificate.
§ 105-11. Responsibility for obtaining certificate. [Amended
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
The owner of each dwelling unit subject to this article is hereby charged
with the responsibility for making written application to the Code
Enforcement Office for an occupancy certificate.
§ 105-12. Fee for certificate; inspection; issuance or denial,
reinspection; copies of regulations.
A. Application for an occupancy certificate for change in ownership shall
be made to the Code Enforcement Office of this Borough on a form
provided by said office.
B. The Code Enforcement Office shall thereupon cause an inspection to be
made of the subject dwelling unit to determine if such unit is fit for
human habitation and in compliance with all applicable Borough
ordinances and regulations of the International Code Council and the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012, or as updated.
[Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
A. The application to the Code Enforcement Office shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule, § 150-17. The inspection must be scheduled within 60 days of
the date of the application. [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 1149;
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his representative shall, within 10
working days of the receipt of a fully completed application for
occupancy certificate and the accompanying fee pursuant to this
article, make such inspections as are required hereinabove and, upon
determining that the requirements have been complied with, issue an
occupancy certificate.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-12
1:119
§ 105-13. Violation and penalties.
Any person charged with the responsibility for obtaining an occupancy
certificate pursuant to this article who violates the provisions hereof shall
be subject, upon conviction thereof, to penalties provided for in § 240-37.
C. If, upon the inspection or inspections aforesaid, the Code Enforcement
Officer or his representative finds the subject dwelling unit not in
compliance, said Officer or his representative shall thereupon, and
within the said 10 working days, notify the applicant, in writing, of such
noncompliance, specifically setting forth the violation or violations
which require correction.
D. Upon correction of the violations, the applicant shall notify the Code
Enforcement Office, in writing, and shall submit a reinspection fee as
provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-17, with
such notification, whereupon the Code Enforcement Officer or his
representative shall reinspect the subject dwelling upon receipt of such
notification and reinspection fee. This procedure shall be followed until
all violations have been corrected, at which time an occupancy
certificate shall be issued. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall furnish copies of all regulations
referred to herein to any person requiring the same for a reasonable fee
commensurate with the costs of reproducing such regulations.
§ 105-12 LINDENWOLD CODE § 105-13
1:120
ARTICLE IIA
Nonconforming Dwelling Units
[Adopted 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-221]
§ 105-13.1. Occupancy or rental for occupancy of nonconforming
dwelling unit; continued certification of occupancy or transfer of
title upon sale of premises.
A. No person shall occupy as owner/occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living
therein, which does not conform to the provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code, referred to in Chapter 240, established hereby as
the standard to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe,
sanitary, and fit for human habitation.
B. No person shall convey title to any residential property in the Borough
of Lindenwold consisting of 15 dwelling units or less without first
obtaining a continued certification of occupancy for each unit in the
manner herein provided, certifying that said premises conforms to the
provisions of this chapter; Chapter 240, § 240-17, Compliance with Fire
Code; Chapter 190, Borough of Lindenwold Land Use; and chapter 250,
Rental Property. This section shall not apply to a transfer of a legal
interest in the property to an existing owner of record or a transfer of a
legal interest in the property to an immediate family member of the
grantor or to a trust wherein the beneficiaries are immediate family
members. For purposes of this subsection, "immediate family members"
are grandparents, spouses, children and/or grandchildren.
(1) Issuance of certificates.
(a) Continued certification of occupancy (CCO). Prior to conveying
title to any premises described in the preceding subsection, an
owner or the legal representative of the owner, shall apply to
the Construction Department for a continued certification of
occupancy. Said application shall be on a form approved by the
Construction Official or designee, and shall be submitted not
less than 10 business days before scheduled closing, without
incurring additional costs as specified herein. The
Construction Official and/or designee shall inspect the
premises within five days of said application and, upon
determining that all provisions of the Code of the Borough of
Lindenwold have been complied with, shall issue a continued
certification of occupancy permitting occupancy of said
premises. Such continued certification of occupancy shall
indicate that compliance has been met. If, upon inspection, the
dwelling unit is not found to be in compliance, the Construction
Official and/or designee shall notify the owner in writing of
such noncompliance, specifically setting forth those violations
requiring correction. Upon correction of the violation(s), the
owner shall notify the Construction Official and/or designee
§ 105-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-13.1
1:121
who shall, within five days, re-inspect the required
correction(s). This procedure shall be followed until all
violations have been corrected, at which time a continued
certification of occupancy shall issue as above provided. Such
continued certification of occupancy shall be valid for a period
of 90 days from the date of its issuance, after which ninety-day
period it shall expire. Such expiration date shall be stated on
the certificate. The ninety-day period may be extended for up
to an additional period of 90 days provided the owner certifies
in writing on forms provided by the Construction Department
that no change in the condition of the unit(s) has occurred from
the time of the prior inspection.
(b) In the event the contract purchaser has engaged the services
of a New Jersey licensed and insured home inspection company
to provide a report of the condition of the residential unit and
structures located on the property upon which the unit is
located, the report is dated within 60 days of closing date and
contains all of the information necessary to determine if the
unit conforms to the provisions of the Property Maintenance
Code, the Construction Official shall accept the report in lieu of
an inspection as required in Subsection B(1)(a).
(c) Issuance of certificate of transfer of title (CTT).
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1)(a) of this
section, a contract purchaser of a residential unit(s) who, upon
acquisition of the premises, intends and does utilize the
premises for a residential use, may make application for a
certificate known as a "certificate of transfer of title," where
renovations to the residential premises are required to be
made so as to meet the standards for the issuance of a
certificate of continued occupancy. The application shall be
signed by the contract purchaser. The application for the
issuance of a certificate of transfer of title shall be made not
less than 10 days prior to the intended settlement date, as set
forth in the contract of sale. The contract purchaser shall
certify in writing on forms provided by the Construction
Department that they acknowledge the residential unit(s) are
not habitable and further that they will perform all necessary
repairs/remediations to meet the requirements set forth herein
for the issuance of a continued certificate of occupancy. Such
certificate of transfer of title shall be valid for a period of 120
days from the date of settlement on the property between
owner and contract purchaser. The purchaser/owner of the
premises may apply to extend the 120-day period to complete
the renovations, but such application shall be filed prior to the
expiration of the initial 120-day period. The Construction
Official may grant the extension; in his/her sole discretion, for
a period not to exceed 120 days provided the purchaser/owner
has commenced and is actively renovating the premises. Prior
§ 105-13.1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 105-13.1
1:122
to the expiration of the 120-day extension period, should the
repairs/remediation be substantially completed and upon
submitting proof necessary to the Construction Official that
unexpected/extraordinary circumstances occurred during the
renovations/remediation which prohibited the completion of
the same within the 120-day extension period, the
Construction Official may grant an additional thirty-day
extension in his/her sole discretion.
[1] Upon notification to the Construction Official and/or
designee that renovations have been completed, the
Construction Official and/or designee, shall inspect the
premises within 10 days of said notice. Upon finding that
all renovations have been completed and compliance with
this section has occurred, the Construction Official shall
then take appropriate action for the issuance of a
continued certification of occupancy in accordance with
Subsection B(1)(a) of this section. Provided no further
inspection is required and a continued certificate of
occupancy is issued, the fee for an inspection shall be
charged in accordance with Chapter 150, Fees.
(d) Should the property be deemed abandoned, vacant and/or a
nuisance as defined in Chapter 238, no certificate of transfer of
title shall be issued to any purchaser/owner unless the owner is
in compliance with Chapter 238 et seq. of the Code of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
(e) The owner or contract purchaser of any property subject to the
term hereof which is serviced by a private potable water well
shall submit to the Construction Official or designee copies of
the well test results required by N.J.S.A. 58:12A-26 prior to
closing of title.
C. The owner making application for a continued certification of
occupancy shall be charged a fee as set forth in Chapter 150 of the
Code of the Borough of Lindenwold per unit and an owner making
application for a certificate of transfer of title shall be charged a fee as
set forth. A fee for all reinspections by the Construction Official shall
also be set forth. The fee charged in accordance with this subsection for
a continued certification of occupancy shall include the fee set forth in
Chapter 150 for the certificate of smoke detector inspection by the
designated official. Should an application be made for the issuance of a
continued certification of occupancy or certificate of transfer of title
less than 10 days before closing, the fee for the continued certification
of occupancy shall apply.
D. Failure to comply with any portion hereof shall be punishable in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code of the Borough of
Lindenwold. Further, each day in which a violation hereof is determined
to exist shall be considered a separate and subsequent offence
§ 105-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-13.1
1:123
punishable in accordance with said article of the Code of the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 105-13.1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 105-13.1
1:124
ARTICLE III
Grading Plan and Inspection
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1194]
§ 105-14. Conditions for issuing certificates of occupancy.
Any development projects within the Borough which involve grading or
disturbing of surface dirt of more than 500 square feet shall require a
review of the proposed plan and an inspection prior to and as a condition of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 105-15. Designation of official to perform reviews and inspections.
Such reviews and inspections shall be performed by the Borough Engineer
or other such official as designated by Council.
§ 105-16. Posting of escrow amounts with Borough.
Prior to the review or scheduling of the inspections, the developer shall post
with the Borough an escrow amount to cover the costs of the inspection. The
escrow amounts shall be managed in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.49
§ 105-17. Escrow amounts for certain work.50
The following work will require the escrow amount as provided in Chapter
150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-3.
§ 105-18. Restriction.
No work shall be permitted on any activities covered by this article until
such time as a review of the plans is conducted and an approval of the plans
issued by the reviewing official.
§ 105-19. Checklist.
A checklist will be provided by the Borough Engineer.
A. Individual lot (not part of a subdivision) plan review.
B. Individual lot (part of a subdivision) plan review.
C. Grading and lot stabilization inspection.
D. Grading and lot stabilization sidewalk and driveway apron.
49.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 105-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-19
1:125
Chapter 109
CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOTHING DONATION BIN — Any receptacle or container made of metal,
steel, or any other material designed or intended for the collection and
temporary storage of donated clothing or other materials.
§ 109-2. Permit required. [Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-08]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use or employ a clothing donation bin, within the Borough of
Lindenwold, for solicitation purposes, unless he has obtained a permit for
a period of one year issued by the Borough Clerk or his designee. The
Borough of Lindenwold has designated a limit of 10 clothing bins permits
that will be issued or reissued in a calendar year.
§ 109-3. Permit fee. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
The permit fee shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule, § 150-39, and will be used to offset the costs involved in enforcing
P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.). Registered charitable
organizations located within the Borough of Lindenwold are exempt from
paying this annual permit fee but must still apply for and secure a permit.
§ 109-4. Application requirements.
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this chapter, an answering
§ 105-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 109-4
1:126
§ 109-5. Renewal application requirements. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
An expiring permit may be renewed the beginning of each calendar year
upon application and payment of a renewal fee as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-39. In addition to the above application
requirements, renewal applications must include:
§ 109-6. Placement of bins.
The Borough of Lindenwold shall not grant an application for a permit
to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall
include, but not be limited to, the placement of a clothing donation bin
within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel
or other flammable liquids or gases or the placement of a bin where it
interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. A charitable bin shall not
be placed within 100 yards of an alcohol or liquor retail store. The person
placing, using or employing a clothing donation bin shall maintain the bin
and the area surrounding the bin such that there shall be no accumulation
of clothing or other donations outside the bin.
§ 109-7. Exterior of bin.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the clothing donation bin:
machine or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona
fide office;
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property; and
E. A background check of the applicant and the person or entity
referenced in Subsection C of this section.
A. A statement of the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations have been allocated or spent,
and any changes the person anticipates he may make in these
processes during the period covered by the renewal;
B. The name and telephone of the bona fide office of any entity which
shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period by the
renewal; and
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible, and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-7
1:127
§ 109-8. Complaints. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
A. The permit number and its date of expiration stating that a copy of the
permit application is on file with Borough Clerk or his designee;
[Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office, and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
D. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity other
than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations; and
E. A statement indicating the manner in which the person anticipates any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations
would be allocated or spent.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or designee or other appropriate
individual shall receive and investigate, within 10 days, any complaints
from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears that a person has
engaged in or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this
chapter, the person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning,
stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the
appropriate municipal agency is not requested within 10 days, the bin
will be seized or removed at the expense of the person who placed the
bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be
sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other
means used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall
be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 10 days of the posting of the
warning, the Borough of Lindenwold may seize the bin, remove it, or
have it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donation collected via the bin shall be paid to the Administrator of the
Borough.
§ 109-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 109-9
1:128
§ 109-9. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) which results in
seizure of the clothing donation bin shall be:
Chapter 115
(RESERVED)
Chapter 119
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 105.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Housing standards — See Ch. 180.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 240.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 119-1. Enforcing agency established; officials; office location.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Borough
may bring this action in Municipal Court or the Superior Court of New
Jersey as a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty
monies collected shall be paid to the Borough; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a clothing donation bin by violating the provisions of P.L.
2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the Borough
Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The Borough may
elect to restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he has made a good faith effort to comply with
the provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq.), and all other application laws and regulations,
or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 109-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-1
1:129
§ 119-2. Board of Appeals.53
All appeals will be handled by the Camden County Board of Appeals.
§ 119-3. Fee schedule. [Amended 7-20-1981 by Ord. No. 578;
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587; 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 736; 1-18-1988
by Ord. No. 764; 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 85654]
Construction code fees are provided in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule.55
Chapter 123
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 123-1. Background checks required.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Lindenwold a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Department of Inspection," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection
Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such additional
subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.51
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filed by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,52 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at the Borough Hall, 15 North White Horse Pike, Lindenwold, New
Jersey, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
55.Editor's Note: Original § 85-4, Surcharge fee, and § 85-5, Fire limits, of the 1981 Code,
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 119-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 123-1
1:130
§ 123-2. Conditions disqualifying employee or volunteer from
service.
A person shall be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal history
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes and offenses:
A. Any nonprofit youth-serving organization, as defined by state law,
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1, which operates a youth sports program that receives
funding from the Borough of Lindenwold, or utilizes facilities owned or
maintained by the Borough of Lindenwold, shall require all employees
and volunteers of that organization who have regular, unsupervised
contact with minors to obtain a criminal history background check.
B. All such employees or volunteers shall file completed applications for
the background check, including fingerprints, prior to their first day of
service. No such employee or volunteer shall be permitted to serve the
organization unless that person consents in writing to the background
check. Until a background check is complete, employees and volunteers
shall not have regular, unsupervised contact with any minor.
C. The employee or nonprofit youth-serving organization shall bear the
costs associated with conducting the background check, in accordance
with fees established by the State Bureau of Identification and the
Division of State Police and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-2d.
D. Any person who has undergone a federal and state criminal history
record background check similar in nature to the requirements
contained herein, and who can provide proof of the results of such
background check, is exempt from the requirements hereunder until
three years have elapsed since the most current background check.
E. Thereafter, the Chief of Police of Borough of Lindenwold may, in his
discretion, with a showing of good cause, order an additional
background check of an employee or volunteer at any point, but in any
case not more than once every three months.
F. Any person who is employed as a full-time staff member with the
Borough of Lindenwold School District shall be exempt from the
requirements hereunder.
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as assault,
reckless endangerment, threats, and stalking; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et
seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq., such as sexual
assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as robbery.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:131
§ 123-3. Submission of application; exchange of background
information.
§ 123-4. Appeal procedure.
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.,
such as endangering the welfare of a child.
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes except N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10a(4).
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in this section.
A. Each employee or volunteer shall submit his or her application for a
criminal history background check, including fingerprints, to the
Borough of Lindenwold Police Department and the New Jersey State
Police, in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
B. If the background check disqualifies the individual from employment or
volunteering, he or she shall be so notified by the Borough of
Lindenwold Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, and such
information shall be kept confidential by the Borough of Lindenwold
Police Department.
C. Successful background checks shall be reported to the Borough of
Lindenwold, which shall maintain a list of all individuals who are
qualified to serve as employees or volunteers with nonprofit youthserving
organizations by virtue of their having successfully completed
the background check. The Borough of Lindenwold may share that list
with organizations who would like to know if a prospective employee or
volunteer has passed the background check.
D. A successful background check remains valid for three years.
E. Access to criminal history record information shall be limited in
accordance with law, including N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.1 et seq.
A. Any person whose criminal history background check disqualifies that
person from employment or from volunteering may appeal his or her
disqualification.
(1) A person may challenge the accuracy of the criminal history record.
(2) A person may claim to be rehabilitated.
§ 123-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 123-4
1:132
(3) No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of
rehabilitation if the person has been rejected because that person
has been convicted, adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by reason
of insanity of aggravated sexual assault; sexual assault; aggravated
criminal sexual contact; kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1c(2); endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in
sexual conduct which would impair or debauch the morals of the
child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4a; endangering the welfare of a
child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4b(4); luring or enticing pursuant
to Section 1 of P.L. 1993, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual
contact pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor;
kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the
offender is not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting
prostitution of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1b(3) or (4); or an
attempt to commit any of these enumerated offenses.
B. A challenge to the accuracy of the report shall be filed with the Borough
of Lindenwold Police Department Chief of Police, who shall coordinate
the challenge with the New Jersey State Police.
C. An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be made to an appeals
committee, which shall consist of the Borough of Lindenwold governing
body, the Borough of Lindenwold Chief of Police, and the Borough of
Lindenwold Administrator. Any such appeal must be made within 30
days of receipt of the notice of disqualification.
D. In determining whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated
rehabilitation, the appeals committee shall consider the following
factors:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling, successful participation in correctional work-release
programs, or the recommendation of those who have had the
person under their supervision.
§ 123-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-4
1:133
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-10-2013 by Ord. No.
1344]
Chapter 127
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 195. Peace and good order — See Ch. 229.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — The parent of the juvenile, or a person other than a parent to
whom legal custody of the juvenile has been given by court order or who is
acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for the care and welfare
of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
E. If the appeals committee determines that the disqualified person has
been successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter that person's name on the
list of qualified employees and volunteers maintained by the
Chairperson of Parks and Recreation.56
A. Failure to comply with this chapter may result in the Borough
withholding funding for the nonprofit youth-serving organization,
prohibiting the use of facilities, or withholding funding for facility
maintenance.
B. In the event that any employee and/or volunteer fails to appear at a
scheduled appointment for a criminal background check, and fails to
provide notice of cancellation within 48 hours of the scheduled
appointment, and a missed appointment fee is incurred by the Borough
of Lindenwold, as a result of the nonappearance, the volunteer and/or
employee shall be required to reimburse the Borough of Lindenwold the
sum of $45 per missed appointment. Such payment shall be due to the
Borough of Lindenwold within 30 days of it being incurred by the
Borough, and in the event it is not paid by the volunteer and/or
employee, the fee shall be referred to the Municipal Court for collection
and/or enforcement.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 123-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 127-1
1:134
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 127-2. Curfew established.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any juvenile to be in a public place
between the hours of 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, and 6:00 a.m., prevailing
time, unless accompanied by the juvenile's guardian or unless engaged in
or traveling to or from a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a juvenile to perform.
§ 127-3. Other exceptions.
§ 127-4. School-time curfew.57
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile to be in any public place during the
hours when the juvenile is required to be in attendance at either a public
or nonpublic school unless the juvenile is accompanied by a guardian or
is carrying written permission from the juvenile's educational authority
allowing the juvenile to be in a public place.
§ 127-5. Guardian responsibility.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a guardian of a juvenile to allow that
juvenile to be in a public place between 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, and
6:00 a.m., prevailing time subject to the exceptions of §§ 127-2 and 127-3.
§ 127-6. Violations and penalties.58
Any violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the Lindenwold
Municipal Court. Upon a finding of guilt, the Municipal Court shall impose
a sentence per the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. If
both a juvenile and that juvenile's guardian violate this chapter, they shall
be required to perform community service together.
Chapter 132
A. The foregoing curfew shall not apply to any juvenile who shall be a bona
fide student attending a school activity or a juvenile who shall be in
attendance at a function sponsored by a religious or school organization
or a juvenile who shall be in attendance at a properly supervised
recreational program during the time necessarily required to travel
between the juvenile's residence and the place of assembly.
B. The foregoing curfew shall not apply to emergency situations
necessitating the juvenile to be in a public place during the prohibited
hours.
57.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-6
1:135
DELIVERY PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296.
§ 132-1. Use of sidewalks and walkways to effect delivery.
All delivery personnel, including letter carriers, whether employed by a
private firm or government agency or government-supported corporation,
shall use sidewalks and accepted and approved walkways and shall refrain
from traversing lawns or other private property not normally used as a
walkway by the general public in order to effect delivery.
§ 132-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
58759]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 137
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS AND SHOPPING CENTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 195.
Noise — See Ch. 205.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 229.
§ 137-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, cold
drinks, beverages, ice cream or other food is served directly to or is
permitted to be consumed by patrons in automobiles, motorcycles or other
vehicles parked on the premises.
SHOPPING CENTER — Four or more retail establishments on a single
lot using common off-street parking space and arranged as an integral
shopping area.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 127-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 137-2
1:136
§ 137-2. Drive-in restaurants and shopping centers as public places.
For the purpose of preserving public peace, health and safety, the entire
premises occupied by a drive-in restaurant or shopping center, together
with means of ingress thereto and egress therefrom, is hereby declared to
be a public place.
§ 137-3. Responsibilities of owners, lessees or operators.
The owners, lessees or operators of any drive-in restaurant or stores located
in a shopping center shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises
and shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering thereon, nor
shall they permit any noise or nuisance on the parking area of the drivein
restaurant or shopping center whereby the quiet and good order of the
neighborhood are disturbed.
§ 137-4. Loud noises and nuisances prohibited.
No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant or shopping center shall
race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or
stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be
made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby
the quiet and good order of the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.
§ 137-5. Prohibited conduct.
The following acts or conduct of any persons or person entering any drive-in
restaurant or shopping center premises is hereby declared unlawful:
§ 137-6. Trash receptacles required. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 587]
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the owner or operator of a drivein
restaurant to provide not fewer than two receptacles for the receipt of
A. To enter the premises of any drive-in restaurant or shopping center in a
motor vehicle of any description, park said vehicle and leave the
premises without getting the consent of the owner or operator of said
restaurant or shopping center, in which event said vehicle may be
impounded subject to the usual impounding charges.
B. To enter said premises in a motor vehicle of any kind and use said
premises for cruising, racing, as a shortcut to another street or to annoy
or endanger any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully
on said premises.
C. For three or more persons to congregate on the premises and linger or
loiter at any location on the premises of any drive-in restaurant or
shopping center other than in the restaurant building or the stores or in
a legally parked motor vehicle.60
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 195, Loitering.
§ 137-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-6
1:137
trash, litter, paper, napkins, cups and remnants of food at each exit for
the use of patrons, and the failure of the owner or operator of a drive-in
restaurant to provide such receptacles shall be a violation of this chapter
and shall be punishable as such.
§ 137-7. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any patron or owner of a drive-in restaurant to throw
or deposit any of the litter mentioned in the preceding section anywhere on
the premises of any drive-in restaurant or shopping center.
§ 137-8. Posting of signs required.61
It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator or store operator to post
on the premises in conspicuous locations one or more signs bearing the
following legend:
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE OF A
MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES MAY
BE LEFT ON THE RESTAURANT OR SHOPPING CENTER PREMISES
WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OR SHOPPING
CENTER OPERATOR.
§ 137-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
587]
Any person or persons who permit, take part or assist in any violation of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a petty disorderly persons offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 141
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
§ 141-1. Drug-Free School Zone Map.62
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about August
2001 by Remington and Vernick, Engineers, Municipal Engineer, or most
current map available, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the municipality of property
which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 137-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 141-2
1:138
§ 141-2. Map to be official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 141-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time if any that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 141-3. Changes to location and property.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 141-4. Filing of map.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 141-1 of
this chapter and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided, without cost, to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 141-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 141-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
§ 141-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-5
1:139
Chapter 145
ENVIRONMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 240.
Resource extraction — See Ch. 253.
Soil removal — See Ch. 273.
Solid waste utility — See Ch. 276.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 287.
Stream buffer conservation zones — See Ch.
291.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 141-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 141-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 141-5
1:140
ARTICLE I
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 439; amended in its entirety
4-4-2012 by Ord. No. 131163 (Ch. 14 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 145-1. Purpose and creation.
An Environmental Commission shall be established in the Borough of
Lindenwold for the protection, development and use of natural resources,
including water resources located within the Borough of Lindenwold. The
Environmental Commission shall have the power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, poison control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 145-2. Membership and appointment of members. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members and one
alternate to serve without compensation. One member of the Environmental
Commission shall be a member of the Joint Land Use Board and all members
shall be residents of the Borough of Lindenwold. The initial appointments
shall be made by the Mayor within 30 days of the effective date of this
article; however, all subsequent appointments shall be made at the annual
reorganization meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable.
§ 145-3. Terms and vacancies.64
§ 145-4. Powers. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
An Environmental Commission organized under this article shall have
power to conduct research into the use of the open land areas of the
municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized
for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas publicly
or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas,
and may from time to time recommend to the Joint Land Use Board or,
A. All members shall serve three-year terms.
B. A vacancy occurring on the Commission, other than by the expiration of
a term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Art. II, Trees and Shrubs, of this
chapter, adopted 11-11-1992 by Ord. No. 917, as amended 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 13-07
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:141
if none, to the Mayor and governing body of the municipality, plans and
programs for inclusion in a Municipal Master Plan and the development and
use of such areas.
§ 145-5. Acquisitions of property.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the municipality, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 145-6. Records and annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the governing body of the
municipality.
§ 145-7. Appropriations; appointment of clerks and other
employees.
The governing body may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint such clerks and
other employees as it may from time to time require and as shall be within
the limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 145-8. Matters of study and recommendation.
The Environmental Commission shall have the power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 145-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 145-8
1:142
Chapter 150
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 65.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 69.
Animals — See Ch. 75.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 105.
Clothing bins — See Ch. 109.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Hazardous materials cleanup — See Ch. 175.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 199.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 224.
Precious metals, gems and secondhand
goods — See Ch. 234.
Rental registration — See Ch. 250.
Resource extraction — See Ch. 253.
Sewer use — See Ch. 260.
Solid waste utility — See Ch. 276.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 309.
Towing — See Ch. 317.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 386.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 398.
§ 145-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-8
1:143

ARTICLE I
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 856; amended 11-7-1990 by Ord.
No. 869; 6-12-1991 by Ord. No. 881; 8-14-1991 by Ord. No. 888 (Ch.
107 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 150-1. Fee schedule established.
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to copy
costs, licenses, permits, applications and activities required or regulated
under various ordinances and other regulations of the Borough of
Lindenwold. The issuance of such licenses and permits as well as the
regulation of the activities so licensed or permitted shall be subject to the
ordinances or regulations dealing with such subject matter.
§ 150-2. Documents, records and reports. [Amended 2-12-1992 by
Ord. No. 897; 8-11-1993 by Ord. No. 941; 7-12-2000 by Ord. No.
1075; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1279;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303; 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1319; 2-6-2013
by Ord. No. 1332; 5-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1359; 3-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03; 8-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-1]
Service, License or Permit Provided Fee
Borough Clerk:
Notary fee $2
OPRA Copies
Letter size or smaller $0.05 per page
Legal size or larger $0.07 per page
Larger Actual cost
CD $0.75 or actual cost
Special service charge may apply
as per N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5c
CD recordings $0.25 each
Ceremony fee (marriage/civil union) $150 per event (one
complimentary certified copy)
Certified copies of marriage, death,
birth and domestic partnerships
$10 each
Bid specifications $50
Police Department:
Copies of police report (mailed) $5 (up to 3 pages)
$1 (each additional page)
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:145
Service, License or Permit Provided Fee
Copies of police report (picked up) $1 (per page up to 3 pages)
$0.50 (each additional page)
Permit to purchase handgun $5
Firearm purchaser's identification
card
$5
Tax Assessor:
Copy of deed $5 (up to 3 pages)
$1 (each additional page)
Copy of apartment list $10
Copy of property record card $5
Certified copy of property owners $0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is greater
Tax Collector:
Duplicate tax bill $5
Tax search $10
Any party entitled to redeem a
certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54
Two calculations within a calendar
year
No cost
After second request $50 per lien redemption
request
Lien holder request for redemption
calculation pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-97.1
$50 per lien retention
request; neither the Tax
Collector nor the municipality
shall be liable for any
incorrect calculation
History book $15
§ 150-3. Land use procedures. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No.
1120; 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164; 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1252;
4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1256; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01;
5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04; 3-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03;
8-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
Service, License or Permit Provided Fee
Application:
Minor site plan waiver $200
Sidewalk/curb waiver $100
Minor site plan $200
§ 150-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-3
1:146
Service, License or Permit Provided Fee
Change in use $200
Major site plan (preliminary) $300
Major site plan (final) $300
Amending approved site plan (minor) $150
Amending approved site plan (major) $250
Minor subdivision $200
Major subdivision (preliminary) $300
Major subdivision (final) $300
Request for extension $50
Variance $200
Use variance $200
Appeal $100
Sign application $150
List of property owners $10
Zoning Ordinance book $20
Zoning Map $1
Interpretation of zoning $25
Zoning Officer review application $25
Engineer escrow:
Site plan waiver $600
Change in use $600
Sidewalk/curb waiver $250
Minor site plan $1,500
Major site plan (preliminary) $1,900
Major site plan (final) $600
Minor subdivision $1,500
Major subdivision (preliminary) $1,900
Major subdivision (final) $600
Amended minor site plan $500
Amended major site plan $1,000
Performance bond and construction inspection fee (estimate by
Borough Engineer) is 5% of construction value of improvements to be
bonded.
Grading plan and inspection escrow fees:
Individual lot (not part of a subdivision)
plan review:
$500 per lot
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:147
Service, License or Permit Provided Fee
Individual lot (part of a subdivision)
plan review
$300 per lot
Grading and lot stabilization
inspection:
$300
Grading and lot stabilization sidewalk
and driveway apron:
$500
§ 150-4. Mercantile licenses. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 971;
5-24-2002 by Ord. No. 1114; 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1130; 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 1352; 5-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1359; 5-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-09; 8-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14]
A. The license fees to be paid annually, unless otherwise specified, for
conducting the business or businesses herein named at the premises or
premises to be designated in the license or licenses issued hereunder,
shall be as follows: [Amended 3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
Business License Fee
Advertising agency $75
Advertising and demonstrating
buses, wagons or vehicles, per
person
$50 per day
Advertising bill, circular and sample
distributors, per person
$50 per day
Advertising or demonstration store $75
Alcohol retail store (liquor, beer,
wine)
$120
Amusement rides $70 each ride/amusement
Antique shop $50
Art and needlework or yarn shop $50
Auction house or store $140
Auctions $50
Automatic filling or dispensing
machines
$15 each
Automatic slot amusement machines $15
Automatic weighing machines $15 each
Automobile accessory and parts $50
Automobile agency or showroom for
sale of new cars
$140 each place
Automobile agency or showroom for
sale of used cars
$140 each place
Automobile garage with accessories $50
§ 150-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-4
1:148
Business License Fee
Automobile paint and/or body shop $50
Automobile service stations $50
Automobile service stations with
food mart
$85
Bakery or pastry shop
Retail $50
Wholesale $120
Barber/beauty $50
Bicycle and tricycle dealers,
supplies, sundries, repairs and sale
or hire
$50
Billiard parlor $50 plus $15 per table
Boat agency or salesroom and
accessories
$50
Book and soliciting agents, selling
books for subscription
$50 per day
Bookstore, lending library and card
store
$50
Bottler or distributors of beverages,
or agents or representatives
$120
Bowling alley $20 per alley
Bus terminal $140
Canvassers $50 each per day
Cash for gold $50
Car wash $50
Carpets, furniture, furnishings $50
Child/day care $50
Check cashing $50
Cigarette vending machines $15 each
Cigars and tobacco, retail $50
Cigars, cigarettes and tobacco,
candy and sundries, wholesale
$120
Circus $1,010
Cleaning, pressing, dying/dry
cleaning, retail or wholesale
$50
Clothing haberdashery $50
Cold storage plant with public
service or not
$75
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:149
Business License Fee
Commercial handbill distributors $50 per day
Commercial sign makers $50
Confectioner, retail $50
Confectioner, wholesale, retail and
manufacturing
$120
Contractors, all kinds $50
Dairy products store $50
Dance hall $220
Dancing academy and/or studio $50
Delicatessen without luncheonette
or restaurant
$50
Department stores
Up to 5,000 square feet of sales
area
$50
5,000 to 7,500 square feet of
sales area
$80
Over 7,500 square feet of sales
area
$145
Distribution terminal $120
Dollar/variety store
Up to 5,000 square feet of sales
area
$50
5,000 to 7,500 square feet of
sales area.
$80
Over 7,500 square feet of sales
area
$120
Driving school $50
Drugstores either with or without
candy, ice cream, cigars, notions,
soda fountain, books and magazines,
but without luncheonette or lunch
counter
$50
Drugstores with luncheonette or
lunch counter
$75
Dry goods store $50
Electrical appliances and supplies
Retail $50
Wholesale $120
Farm markets $50
§ 150-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-4
1:150
Business License Fee
Financial institutions, banks,
building and loan companies,
building and loan associations,
mortgage companies, title
companies, etc.
$50
Fire-and-other-altered-goods sales $15 per day, each sale
Flower and plant stores $50
Food stores and markets
Up to 3,000 square feet of sales
area
$45
3,001 to 4,000 square feet of
sales area
$80
4,001 to 5,000 square feet of
sales area
$145
5,001 to 7,000 square feet of
sales area
$245
Over 7,000 square feet of sales
area
$420
Freight terminals $120
Furniture stores
Up to 3,000 square feet of sales
area
$50
3,001 to 5,000 square feet of
sales area
$80
5,001 to 7,500 square feet of
sales area
$95
Over 7,500 square feet of sales
area
$145
Funeral home $50
Furs and fur storage $50
Going-out-of-business sale $30 per day, each sale
Golf course, miniature $50
Golf course, regular $80
Groceries, wholesale $80
Hardware, china, glassware,
electrical goods or television stores
$50
Health clubs $145
Home offices $50
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:151
Business License Fee
Hothouse, greenhouse, flowers/
plants
$50
Hucksters $120
Ice business $50
Ice cream manufacturers and
distributors, retail
$50
Ice cream manufacturers and
distributors, wholesale
$120
Ice cream parlor/stand $50, plus $1 per seat
Ice cream/food trucks $120 per truck
Insurance company $50
Ice machines $15 each
Itinerant merchants $50 each per day
Itinerant vendors $50 each per day
Jewelry and jewelry novelties $50
Jukeboxes $15 each
Landscaping business, headquarters
in Lindenwold
$50*
Laundry collecting or distributing
agency
$50 each place/vehicle
Laundry machine operated, other
than self-service
$70
Laundry plants $50
Laundry, self-service type $50, plus $15 for each machine
Law office $50
Linen and towel supply service $50
Locker storage, including food
lockers
$50, plus $1 per locker
Lumberyard and supply yard $120
Manufacturing place or device $120
Meats and poultry, wholesale $120
Mechanical amusement devices $15 each
Medical profession $50
Millinery/hat store $50
Motorcycle agency, sale or rental $50
Musical instruments, music/records $50
Nail salons $50
§ 150-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-4
1:152
Business License Fee
Name change $15
Newspaper publishers $50
Newsstands not connected with
other business hereunder licensed
$30
Optical goods $50
Paints and painting supplies not
connected with hardware stores
$50
Peddlers, hawkers $120
Photograph galleries/photograph
accessories/videography
$50
Pinball or similar machines $15 each
Ping-pong (table tennis) and all
table games
$50, plus $15 per table
Pizzeria $70, plus $1 for each seat
Plumbing, steam fitting, gas fitting
supplies, wholesale
$120
Printing shops/stores $50
Private lakes* $70
Private lakes with restaurant, snack
bars, etc.*
$95, plus $1 for each seat
Radio, television and supplies $50
Real estate $50
Restaurants, luncheonettes and
diners*
$70, plus $1 for each seat
Sand and gravel companies $520
Seafood stores $50
Sewing machine stores $50
Shoes and shoe repairing $50
Shooting gallery $270
Shows and amusements, open-air $270
Skating rink (ice or roller) $95
Stationery, books, magazines,
novelties
$50
Storage facility $120
Store order or catalog store $50
Stores and businesses not classified $50
Tailoring merchants $50
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:153
Business License Fee
Tanning salon $50 (plus $15 each booth or
device)
Tattoo studio $50
Tavern $70 (w/food), $1 per seat; $50
(w/o food), $1 per seat
Tennis courts* $95 plus $10 for each court
Theaters/moving-picture houses $120
Trampolines* $50, plus $5 for each
Transient merchants/itinerant
vendors
$50 each per day
Upholsterer $50
Vehicles, each vehicle being used for
the following purposes, except
where the owner thereof is paying a
license fee under this chapter for
the purpose for which the vehicle is
being used:
Sale and/or delivery of milk, ice,
bread or bakery products
$50
Sale, solicitation or delivery of
material in connection with
fumigation or extermination of
rodents or pests
$50
Selling, soliciting, delivering
merchandise or performing
services not otherwise classified
$50
Vending machines, $0.01 to $0.25 $15 each
Video game machines $35 each
Yard sale (after 2) $25 per sale per day
All business not classified or
enumerated
$50
* NOTE: In any instance where a business which would otherwise be
licensed separately hereunder is conducted in conjunction with and
as accessory to a principal business, a mercantile license fee shall
be charged only for the principal business, except for coin-operated
vending machines or slot machines. The following businesses are
examples of a business coming within the definition of "principal
business": coliseum club, tennis courts, swimming pool, ice skating
rink, restaurant.
B. Inspection fee new business/change of ownership: [Amended
12-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
§ 150-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-4
1:154
§ 150-5. Trash, refuse and garbage collection.
(Editor's Note: See now § 150-35, Charges for Solid Waste Utility.)
§ 150-6. Taxicabs. [Amended 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 1306; 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
Type Fee
Applications, fees and licenses
Application owner's license fee $250 (per taxicab)
Application taxicab driver's license,
initial
$50
Taxicab driver's license, renewal $50 (nontransferable, per
year)
Owner's license transfer to another
vehicle
$100
§ 150-7. Dogs and other animals. [Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No.
1222]
The fees for dogs and cats are:
(1) Initial inspection fee: $125.
(2) First reinspection: No fee.
(3) Second reinspection and thereafter: $75.
C. Late fee: $50.
D. License transfer fee: $35.
A. Spayed and neutered: $15.
B. Nonspayed and nonneutered: $20.
C. Duplicate certificate or tag: $1. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
D. Pilot Clinic Fund: $0.20. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
E. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeingeye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
[Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
F. Annual license fee for kennels: [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:155
§ 150-8. Private swimming pools. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No.
971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Type Fee
Aboveground pools:
Construct, install, enlarge or establish $100
In-ground pools:
Construct, install, enlarge or establish $100
§ 150-9. Swimming pools for multifamily dwellings. [Added
6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 1048]
§ 150-10. Excavation of streets and sidewalks. [Amended 5-7-2014
by Ord. No. 1359; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01; 8-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-14; 12-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
Type Fee
Cash Escrow (prior to permit being
issued)
$700 minimum for first 10 square
feet; $20 per additional square foot
Permit fee (nonrefundable)
(one street per permit)
$250 single opening; $75 for each
additional opening
Utility pole (electric, telephone,
traffic, light)
$50 each
Monitoring wells (each opening) $200
Soil borings:
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $200
(1) Ten or less dogs: $25.
(2) More than 10 dogs: $50.
G. Dogs and cats not registered by March 31 subject to a late fee of $25.
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09; amended 2-27-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-1]
A. Every swimming pool, spa and hot tub on any property other than a oneor
two-family residential property shall be inspected annually by the
construction official of the Borough of Lindenwold or his designee to
ensure the safety of the users.
B. The fee for the annual inspection shall be $50.
C. The five-year inspection, pursuant to P.L. 1998, c. 137,65 shall have a fee
of $50 per inspection.
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133.2.
§ 150-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-10
1:156
Type Fee
Each additional over 10 $25
Test pit under 16 square feet $125
Test pit over 16 square feet $200
Direct burial cable
Under 1,500 feet $250
From 1,501 feet to 2,000 feet $325
For every 1,000 feet thereafter $60
Jack/boring up to 100 feet $200
Each additional 50 feet $50
Performance surety (prior to permit
being issued)
$700 minimum for first 25 square
feet; $20 per additional square foot
§ 150-11. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 12-28-2011 by Ord. No.
1303; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1332; 5-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1359;
3-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01;
3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
Type Fee
Alcoholic beverages licenses and
fees (per year):
Plenary retail consumption
license
$2,000
Plenary retail distribution
license
$2,000
Seasonal retail consumption
license
$2,000
Club license $188
§ 150-12. Alarm systems.
Type Fee
Charges, registration fees, local
alarm
$15 (initial)
§ 150-13. Fences. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 971; 2-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Type Fee
Cost to include materials and
labor
$30 (plus $30 for each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof)
Minimum fee $60
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-14
1:157
§ 150-14. Tower inspections.
Tower inspections (not to include dish antennas):
Height
(feet) Fee
0 to 100 $70
101 to 200 $125
201 and above $125 (plus) $25 (for each additional
100 feet or fraction thereof in height)
§ 150-15. Dish-type antennas. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No.
971]
Type Fee
Cost to include materials and
labor
$24 (plus $24 for each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof)
Minimum fee $46
§ 150-16. Fuel tank installation. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No.
971; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Type Fee
Fuel tank installation $75 per tank
§ 150-17. Certificate of occupancy under UCC regulations.
[Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01;
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-222]
Type Fee
Certificate of occupancy for use
group R-5
$70
Certificate of occupancy all other
use groups
$120
Change of use group $174
Continued occupancy $151
Temporary certificate of approval $35
Occupancy certificate for change
in ownership
$40
Reinspection fee $35
NOTE: A certificate fee for shopping centers with several stores shall be
charged for each individual store at the rate set forth for that particular
group.
§ 150-14 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-18
1:158
§ 150-18. Annual construction permit. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be charged
annually. The fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number of maintenance
workers employed by the facility and who are primarily engaged in work
that is governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers and clericals shall
not be considered maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the
annual construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/
fire protection, electrical and plumbing.
Type Fee
1 to 25 workers (including
foreman)
$667 (per worker)
Each additional worker over 25 $232 (per worker)
Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training registration fee of
$140 per subcode shall be submitted by the applicant to the Borough of
Lindenwold
§ 150-19. Construction code fee schedule. [Amended 4-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 971; 5-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1013; 3-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1044; 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 1065; 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 1179;
9-23-2011 by Ord. No. 1292; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
A. Surcharge fee. In order to provide for the training and certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., an enforcing agency, including the
Department when acting as the local agency, shall collect a surcharge
fee to be based upon the volume of new construction and the dollar
amount of construction in alterations and renovations within the
municipality. Said fee shall be accounted for and forwarded to the
Department of Community Affairs in the manner herein provided. This
shall be in the amount set forth by the Department of Community
Affairs in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
B. Plan review fee.
(1) The plan review fee shall be 20% of the amount charged for a new
construction permit.
(2) Plan review fee for plans that have already been released. There
shall be an additional fee of $75 per hour for review of an
amendment, meetings or change to a plan that has already been
released per subcode having assigned plan review responsibility to
perform such a review in conjunction with the regulations and
actual submittal. This fee may be waived at the discretion of the
Construction Official in the event the work and review are of a
minor nature. [Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1319]
§ 150-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:159
C. Basic construction fee. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of
the parts computed on the basis of the volume or costs of construction,
the mechanical systems and equipment, the number of plumbing
fixtures and stacks, the number of electrical fixtures and devices and
the number of sprinklers and standpipes at the unit rates provided
herein, plus any special fees. In each case, the minimum fee for basic
construction work shall be $60. [Amended 2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
1306]
D. Volume or cost. The fees for new construction or alteration are as
follows:
(1) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28.
Type Fee
Groups and buildings classified
and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of
the building subcode or A-1, A-2,
A-3, B, H, I-1, I-3, M, E, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5 and U
$0.040 x cubic foot of volume
Groups A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2 $0.030 x cubic feet of volume
Farm use buildings, including
commercial farm buildings under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) exclusively
used for storage of food or grain
or the sheltering of livestock
$0.030 x cubic foot of volume
Maximum fee for farm use
buildings
$1,145
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be based upon
the estimated cost of the work.
Estimated Costs Fee
Up to $50,000 $35, plus $35 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof
$50,001 to 100,000 $32 per $1,000, plus $32 for
each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof
$100,001 or more $29 per $1,000, plus $29 for
each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof
Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction for the added portion.
§ 150-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-19
1:160
Estimated Costs Fee
Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees and computed separately in
accordance with the above subsections.
(3) Plumbing fixtures and stacks. The fees shall be as follows:
[Amended 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
Type Fee
Per fixture or stack $15
For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures and stacks shall
include but shall not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop
sinks, sinks, urinals, bidet, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls,
laundry tubs, floor drains, drinking fountains, water cooler,
dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers, hose bibs, gas
piping, or similar devices.
Type Fee
Plumbing, special devices as listed: hot-water
heaters, grease traps, oil separators, watercooled
air conditioners, refrigeration units,
water utility connection, sewer utility
connections, backflow preventers, steam
boilers, hot-water boilers, active solar
systems, sewer pumps, interceptors or fueloil
piping. For cross-connections and
backflow preventers that are subject to
testing requiring reinspection annually, the
fee shall be for each device when they are
tested.
$85
(4) Electrical fixtures and devices [Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-09]
Type Fee
Electrical fixtures and devices.
Receptacles or fixtures, including
smoke detectors, exhaust fans,
etc.
1 to 50 $45
Each 25 or additional $10
For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures
shall include lighting outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures,
convenience receptacles or similar devices and motors or devices
of less than 1 horsepower or 1 kilowatt.
§ 150-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:161
Type Fee
Residential electrical devices,
generators or transformers
Up to 10 kilowatts $300
Over 10 kilowatts $300 for the first 10
kilowatts plus $15 for each
additional kilowatt
Commercial
Up to 50 kilowatts $750
Over 50 kilowatts $750 for the first 50
kilowatts plus $50 for each
additional 10 kilowatts
Motors:
Over 1 horsepower to 10
horsepower
$20
Over 10 horsepower to 50
horsepower
$60
Over 50 horsepower to 100
horsepower
$120
Over 100 horsepower $576
Service panels, service entrance or
subpanels:
0 to 200 amperes $58
201 to 1,000 amperes $116
Over 1,000 amperes $576 (each)
For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those
plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other device
consuming or generating electrical current, also water heater,
range/oven, dryer, dishwasher or HVAC.
Minimum fee $60
(5) Smoke detectors and fire suppression. [Amended 5-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-09]
Type Fee
Smoke detector fees:
1 to 20 heat/smoke detectors $75
21 to 100 heat/smoke detectors $130
101 to 200 heat/smoke
detectors
$240
§ 150-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-19
1:162
Type Fee
201 to 400 heat/smoke
detectors
$610
401 to 1,000 heat/smoke
detectors
$835
Over 1,000 heat/smoke
detectors
$1,060
Sprinkler heads:
1 to 20 $82
21 to 100 $151
101 to 200 $289
201 to 400 $748
401 to 1,000 $1036
Over 1,000 $1323
Standpipes $289 (each)
Each independent pre-engineered
system
$116
Each gas- or oil-fired appliance
which is not connected to the
plumbing system
$58
Each kitchen exhaust system $65
Each incinerator/crematorium $460
Chimney Liners $58
Minimum fee $60
(6) Construction of a sign. For the purpose of computing this fee, the
fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount of $3 per
square foot of surface area of the sign, computed on one side only
for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall be $60.
(7) Roofing and siding.
Type Fee
Roofing:
Use group R-5 $60
Use group E $60
All other use groups By cost
Siding:
Use group R-5 $60
Use group E $60
All other use groups By cost
§ 150-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:163
§ 150-20. Demolition permits. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord. No.
971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant shall
submit to the Department, if available, cost data produced by the
architect or engineer of record or by a recognized estimating firm
or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall
be submitted. The Construction Department will make the final
decision regarding estimated cost.
E. Lead hazard abatement. The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement
work shall be $176. The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate
shall be $35.
F. Asbestos hazard abatement.
(1) The enforcing agency that issues the construction permit and the
certificate of occupancy for an asbestos hazard abatement project
shall establish by regulation/ordinance the following flat fee
schedule:
(a) An administrative fee of $106 for each construction permit
issued for an asbestos hazard abatement project.
(b) An administrative fee of $21 for each certificate of occupancy
issued following the successful completion of an asbestos
hazard abatement project.
(2) The authorization and reauthorization fees for the asbestos safety
control monitor are delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.11.
(3) The application fee for certification as an asbestos safety
technician is delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.10.
(4) All fees shall be paid by check or money order, payable to
Treasurer, State of New Jersey.
G. Mechanic inspection, replacement only, in a structure of Group R-3, R-4
or R-5, by a mechanical inspector, the minimum fee shall be $65.
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
(1) The fee for LPG, NG and oil-fired hot water boilers, warm air
furnace; water heaters, etc., shall be $85.
(2) The fee for generators, LPG, shall be $65.
(3) The fee for tanks, oil and LPG, shall be $65.
(4) The fee for piping connections, LPG, NG and oil shall be $65.
(5) The fee for any item not listed above shall be determined by the
Construction Official and the Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 150-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-20
1:164
§ 150-21. Installation of elevator. [Amended 2-8-2006 by Ord. No.
1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Type Fee
Permit $260
§ 150-22. Plan review of building for compliance. [Amended
4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011
by Ord. No. 1303]
The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the alternate
systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of the energy subcode
is as follows:
Type Fee
One- and two-family home $274
Light commercial structures having indoor
temperature controlled from a single point
$254
Other structures $1,369
§ 150-23. Application for variation. [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Application for variation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10:
Type Fee
Class I $748
Class II and Class III $151
Resubmission, Class I $289
Resubmission, Class II and Class III $82
A. Structures less than 5,000 square feet in area and 30 feet in height,
one- to two-family residence (use group R-3 of the building subcode)
and structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) used exclusively for storage of food or grain or
sheltering of livestock: $82.
B. All other uses and purposes: $151.
C. Removal of one building from one lot to another or to another location
on the same lot: $5 per $1,000 of estimated cost of moving (plus
estimated cost of new foundation and all work necessary to place
building in completed condition in new location).
§ 150-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-24
1:165
§ 150-24. Reinspection of equipment and facilities. [Amended
4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 971; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 12-28-2011
by Ord. No. 1303]
For periodic departmental reinspection of equipment and facilities granted
a certificate of approval for specified duration in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23:
Type Fee
Requiring reinspection every 3 months:
Hazardous uses and places of assembly:
Up to 12,000 square feet of
occupancy
$10
Each additional 10,000 square feet $5
Cross-connections and backflow
preventers
$85 (each, each test)
Cross-connections and backflow
preventers broken down and tested
$120 (each, test annually)
Requiring reinspection every 6 months:
Elevators:
Traction or winding drum
1 to 10 floors $306
Over 10 floors $510
Hydraulic elevator $272
Roped hydraulic elevator $306
Other devices:
Escalator/moving walk $272
Dumbwaiter $68
Stairway chairlift/other $68
Residential devices:
Elevator/other R-3/R-4 $204
Oil buffers $54
Counterweight governor and safeties $136
Auxiliary power generator $102
Alterations $68
Plan review $260
Plan review R-3/R-4 $50
Minimum fee $60
§ 150-24 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-24
1:166
Type Fee
The fees established in this section shall be automatically adjusted to be
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4:20 as mandated by the Uniform
Construction Code and the Department of Community Affairs as amended
from time to time.
§ 150-25. Handicap ramps. [Added 6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 1049;
amended 8-11-1999 by Ord. No. 1053; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Fees are waived for the installation of handicap ramps only on single-family
dwellings.
§ 150-26. Senior citizen center. [Added 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1001;
amended 6-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1031; 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 1064;
11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 1140; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303]
Current use by Lindenwold senior citizens and existing nonprofit
organizations. All requests must be approved by Mayor and Council.
§ 150-27. Sewer Utility services. [Added 10-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1005; amended 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
§ 150-28. Inspections for smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide
alarms, and sale of property. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1130;
amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 1149; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 1240;
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01;
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-222]
A. During regular hours of operation (Monday to Friday, 6:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m.):
(1) Jetting service: $80 per hour (two-man minimum).*
(2) Root cutting: $80 per hour (two-man minimum).*
(3) TV of sewers with jet: $100 per hour (three-man minimum).*
B. After hours, weekends and holidays (after hours is 3:00 p.m. to 6:30
a.m.):
(1) Jetting service: $120 per hour (two-man minimum).*
(2) Root cutting: $120 per hour (two-man minimum).*
(3) TV of sewers with jet: $150 per hour (three-man minimum).*
NOTE: Minimum of four hours for months of November through
April; minimum of two hours for months of May through October.
A. Change in occupancy:
§ 150-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-28
1:167
§ 150-29. Charges for sewer service. [Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord.
No. 1145; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1250;
12-29-2010 by Ord. No. 1281; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303;
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04;
3-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) Inspection of property: $50.
(2) Reinspection: $50.
(3) Administration fee to be assessed for any change of inspection date
or unit number more than once and that fees must be paid before a
change is made: $20.
B. Change in ownership of multiple dwellings containing three or more
dwelling units:
(1) Inspection of property: $40 per unit.
(2) Administration fee to be assessed for any change of inspection date
or unit number more than once and that fees must be paid before a
change is made: $20.
C. Change of ownership, three dwellings units or less:
(1) Inspection of property scheduled over 10 days: $75.
Inspection of property scheduled less than 10 days: $100.
(2) Reinspection over 10 days: $25.
Reinspection under 10 days: $50.
(3) Administration fee to be assessed for any change of inspection date
or unit number more than once and that fees must be paid before a
change is made: $20.
(4) Submission of home inspector report: $60.
(5) Property title transfer over 10 days (vacancy): $100 (includes
reinspection fee).
Property title transfer under 10 days (vacancy): $125 (includes
reinspection fee).
D. Application fee for residential structures: $50.
E. All fees in this section are nonrefundable.
A. Annual rate.
(1) One hundred thirty-five dollars per domestic consumer unit when
paid in total on July 1.
§ 150-28 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-29
1:168
§ 150-30. Tents. [Added 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1119]
Type Fee
Over 900 square feet in area and over 30 feet
in any dimension
$92
§ 150-31. Parks and recreation use fees. [Amended 3-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 1227; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1332; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
(2) One hundred thirty-nine dollars per domestic consumer unit when
not paid in total on July 1.
(3) Ninety-nine dollars per year: Lindenwold residents who receive
$250 deduction for senior/disabled and surviving spouse.
B. Additional fee of $14 per year for garbage disposal.
C. Interest/penalties. Payment is due by the due date or a penalty will be
assessed in accordance with state statute N.J.S.A. 40:14A-21 at the rate
of 1 1/2% per month (18% per annum).
A. Fee schedule for tournament use.
(1) For the use of the baseball fields at Lindenwold Park the fees shall
be:
(a) One-day tournament: $700.
(b) Two-day tournament: $1,200.
(c) Each additional day: $400 or $80 per game.
(2) A security deposit of $650 per day shall be posted.
(3) Trash removal for tournaments: $80 per day.
B. Fee schedule. If the participants in the event consist of 50% Lindenwold
residents there is no fee. If 50% are not Lindenwold residents a fee will
be assessed per the following fee schedule. All permits are final, no
refunds.* [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
(1) Ball fields:
(a) Two hours for one ball field:
[1] Daylight hours:
[a] Monday to Friday*: $75.
[b] Saturday and Sunday *: $100.
[2] With lights:
[a] Monday to Friday*: $100.
§ 150-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-31
1:169
[b] Saturday and Sunday*: $125.
(b) All day for one ball field:
[1] Daylight hours:
[a] Monday to Friday*:$150.
[b] Saturday and Sunday*: $200.
[2] With lights:
[a] Monday to Friday*: $200.
[b] Saturday and Sunday*: $250.
(c) Security deposit: $200.
(d) Security fee for bases: $350.
(e) Security fee for key (bathroom garage, etc.): $25 per key.
(2) Tournament fee (four-day maximum): $1,500.
(a) Security fee: $500.
(3) All other recreational activities (birthday parties, etc. –
nonresidents)*:
(a) Two hours:
[1] Daylight: $25.
(b) All day:
[1] Daylight: $55.
(c) Security deposit: $75.
(4) Non-Recreational Activities – e.g. flea market, car show, auction:
(a) Four hours:
[1] Daylight: $150.
[2] With lights: $225.
(b) All day:
[1] Daylight: $250.
[2] With lights: $300.
(c) Security deposit: $400.
(d) *Security fee for key (bathroom garage, etc.): $25 per key.
§ 150-31 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-31
1:170
§ 150-32. Municipal Court discovery fees. [Added 11-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 1154; amended 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323]
(5) Stage – e.g., musical shows, theater acts, concerts, fashion show,
awards or recognition presentation *(sound equipment and
speakers not available):
(a) One hour:
[1] Daylight: $100.
[2] With lights: $250.
(b) Four hours:
[1] Daylight: $350.
[2] With lights: $450.
(c) Security deposit: $300.
(6) *Basketball courts:
(a) Two hours per court: $30.
(b) Two hours all courts: $150.
(7) Police protection (per officer):
(a) First hour: $100.
(b) Each additional hour (per officer): $65.
(c) Plus overtime expense if necessary.
(8) Public works assistance:
(a) Per hour per employee: $50.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of
Lindenwold Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal
Prosecutor.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of
Lindenwold for the discovery provided:
(1) Five cents per page.
(2) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(3) One dollar for CDs for photographs or videos.
(4) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
§ 150-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-32
1:171
§ 150-33. Sewer connection. [Added 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179;
amended 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303; 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323;
5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
A certified check or money order in the amount of $2,600 is required for the
connection fee and shall accompany the application. Personal or company
checks are not acceptable.
§ 150-34. Compensation for off-duty enforcement officers. [Added
4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 1230; amended 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323;
12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-117]
Type Detail
Rate per
Hour
Minimum
Number of Hours Fees
Road construction
traffic control
$75 4 $10 per hour
All other off duty $55 4 $10 per hour
§ 150-35. Charges for Solid Waste Utility. [Added 2-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 1306; amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1319; 9-5-2012 by Ord. No.
1323; 8-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 150-36. Returned check charge. [Added 5-14-2008 by Ord. No.
1233; amended 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323]
An additional fee for any returned check received by the Borough: $20.
§ 150-37. Security and maintenance of property. [Added 9-5-2012
by Ord. No. 1323]
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Lindenwold, e.g., another police department, the actual
costs paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
A. Additional solid waste removal. [Amended 12-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-22; 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-117]
(1) An additional fee for a domestic consumer unit and per apartment/
condominium unit shall be paid in a lump sum annually at the
beginning of each year for an additional solid waste removal to be
calculated at $7 per unit per month.
B. Additional solid waste and recycling cart containers: $65
A. Mobilizing fee of $150.
B. Labor rate per hour as per salary ordinance.
C. Trash disposal fee to be calculated as per collection with a minimum
charge of $25.
§ 150-32 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-37
1:172
§ 150-38. Library. [Added 9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323]
§ 150-39. Clothing donation bins and temporary dumpsters or
storage containers. [Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1319; amended
9-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1323]
§ 150-40. Uniform Fire Safety Code.66
D. Securing property: minimum charge of $25 per window or door based
on material required.
E. Additional charges for special equipment required or additional
material.
A. Computer printouts: $0.25 per page.
B. Photocopier (black and white): $0.15 per copy.
C. Photocopier (color): $0.30 per copy.
D. Notary service: $2 per document.
E. Faxing (outgoing only): $1.50 for first page; $0.50 each additional page.
F. Exam proctoring: $10 per exam proctored.
G. Replacement library card: $2.
H. Overdue rates:
(1) Books, all adult and children (hardcover and paperback): $0.20 per
day, per book, maximum fine $10 per book.
(2) DVDs (all ratings): $0.25 per day, per DVD, maximum fine $10 per
DVD.
(3) Magazines: $0.25 per day, per magazine, maximum fine $6 per
magazine.
I. Fees for damaged or lost book covers and media cases: $2.50.
J. Fees for damaged or lost materials will be assessed at the list price and
processing fee of $2.50 per item.
A. Clothing donation bin permit fee: $50 per bin.
B. Renewal permit fee: $25 per bin.
A. Non-life-hazard uses.
66.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 150-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-40
1:173
§ 150-41. Hazardous materials cleanup.67
Local Use Code Fee Description
R-1 $42 Residential, multifamily, 1 to 3 units
R-2 $90 Residential, multifamily, 4 to 10 units
R-3 $120 Residential, multifamily, 11 to 20 units
R-4 $150 Residential, multifamily, 21 to 40 units
R-5 $180 Residential, multifamily, 41 to 60 units
R-6 $210 Residential, multifamily, 61 to 80 units
R-7 $240 Residential, multifamily, 81 to 100
units
R-8 $340 Residential, multifamily, 101 units and
above
C-1 $42 Commercial/industrial, less than 3,000
square feet
C-2 $77.50 Commercial/industrial, 3001 to 9000
square feet
C-3 $155 Commercial/industrial, 9001 to 15,000
square feet
C-4 $193.75 Commercial/industrial, 15,001 to
25,000 square feet
C-5 $232.50 Commercial/industrial, 25,001 to
50,000 square feet
C-6 $271.25 Commercial/industrial, 50,001 to
100,000 square feet
C-7 $310 Commercial/industrial, 100,001 to
200,000 square feet
C-8 $348.75 Commercial/industrial, 200,001 to
300,000 square feet
C-9 $400 Commercial/industrial, 300,001 to
400,000 square feet
C-10 $450 Commercial/industrial, 400,001 to
500,000 square feet
O-1 $42 Other use group requiring inspection
A. Oil dry: $20 per bag.
B. Flares: $4 per flare.
C. Fifty-gallon plastic drum: $8 per drum.
D. Absorbent pads: $4.50 per pad.
67.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 150-40 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-41
1:174
§ 150-42. Rental inspection. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
§ 150-43. Resource extraction. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
§ 150-44. Towing. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
E. Pigs: $12 per unit.
F. Twelve-yard dumpster: $500.
G. The actual cost of any waste disposal.
H. In the event that the incident continues beyond one hour of operation,
the Board shall collect the actual costs of vehicular fuel and the actual
expenses, including wages, incurred by the Board.
A. Annual inspection fee. [Amended 3-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) Rental Unit: $60 per each.
(2) Rental facility: $135 per each.
B. Reinspection fee if the owner fails to abate a cited violation after the
initial reinspection:
(1) Unit: $50 per.
(2) Rental facility: $150 per.
C. Late charges. For any fee paid more than 30 days after its due date
there shall be a late fee imposed of 5% per month, each month, of all
fees due.
D. Registration fee includes up to two inspections of the dwelling.
Thereafter, an inspection fee of $50 shall apply to subsequent
inspections during the year.
A. Mining license: $200 per acre per year for each acre of land to be
covered by the mining license as set forth in the applicant's/licensee's
site plan.
A. Regular police impound:
(1) Tow: $85.
(2) Storage: $25 daily storage fee.
(3) No keys: $35.
B. Motor vehicle accident tow and cleanup fees:
(1) Yard removal: $45 (applies when vehicle is not drivable and needs
to be towed to body shop or other location).
§ 150-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-44
1:175
§ 150-45. Outdoor storage shed or storage facility. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Type Fee
Outdoor shed or storage facility $25
§ 150-46. Small wind energy system. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-01]
Type Fee
Permit fee $25
§ 150-47. Sanitary license. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Business or Privilege Licensed Fee
Boarding, nursing or rooming homes
Private dwelling apartments $10 per apartment
Private dwelling rooms $5 per room
Nursing home for 10 people or fewer $25
Nursing home for 11 people or more $50
Children day-care establishment
1 to 10 children $10
11 or more children $20
Food markets or stores
1 to 5 employees $25
5 to 12 employees $50
Over 12 employees $100
Food or drink peddlers $25
Garbage or trash trucks $50
Ice plants
Ice trucks $5
Coin-operated ice machines $5
Portable toilets $5 per unit
(2) Debris removal: $35.
(3) Oil dry: $35.
(4) Administrative fee: $35.
C. Fee for filing appeal: $300.
§ 150-44 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-47
1:176
Business or Privilege Licensed Fee
Public swimming pool or public bathing
areas
$50
Restaurants, diners, luncheonettes, soda
fountains
20 seats or fewer $25
Over 20 seats $50
Bakery shop on premises $25
§ 150-48. Public swimming pools. [Added 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
§ 150-49. Foreclosed and vacant property registration. [Added
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; amended 5-13-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04; 8-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
Registration fee for each building:
A. Application to locate, construct or alter swimming pool: $100.
(1) First reapplication: no additional fee.
(2) Subsequent reapplications: additional fee of $100.
B. Annual license to operate swimming pool: $35.
A. First year: $500.
B. Second year: $1,250.
C. Third year: $3,000.
D. Fourth year and each year thereafter: $5,000.
§ 150-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-49
1:177

ARTICLE II
Development Fees
[Adopted 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1269; amended in its entirety
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 150-50. Purpose.
§ 150-51. Department approval.
§ 150-52. Definitions.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. Pursuant to the Executive Reorganization Act of 1969, P.L. 1969, c. 203
(N.J.S.A. 52:14C-1 et seq.), the Governor abolished COAH and
transferred all functions, powers, and duties to the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, effective August 29, 2011. Any and
all references to COAH shall mean the Department of Community
Affairs (the Department).
D. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to the Department's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 through 38.
Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be
interpreted within the framework of the Department's rules on
development fees codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the Department
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. Borough of Lindenwold shall not spend development fees until the
Department has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance
with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
A. The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
§ 150-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-52
1:179
§ 150-53. Residential development fees.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Fair Housing Act which previously had
primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the state.
Pursuant to the Executive Reorganization Act of 1969, P.L. 1969, c.
203 (N.J.S.A. 52:14C-1 et seq.), the Governor abolished the Council and
transferred all functions, powers, and duties to the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, effective August 29, 2011. As such,
any and all references to COAH shall mean the Department.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with §§ 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a
through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all districts, residential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided no increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
§ 150-52 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-53
1:180
§ 150-54. Nonresidential development fees.68
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2%
of the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the
specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed
value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has
not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as
a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
(4) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
68.Note: It should be noted that pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90, and P.L. 2011, c. 122, the
nonresidential statewide development fee of 2.5% for nonresidential development is
suspended for all nonresidential projects that received preliminary or final site plan
approval subsequent to July 17, 2008, until July 1, 2013, provided that a permit for the
construction of the building has been issued prior to January 1, 2015.
§ 150-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-54
1:181
and improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Lindenwold Borough as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
§ 150-54 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-55
1:182
§ 150-55. Lindenwold Borough collection procedures.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should Lindenwold Borough fail to determine or notify the developer of
the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
§ 150-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-55
1:183
§ 150-56. Affordable housing trust fund.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Lindenwold
Borough. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Lindenwold Borough. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Lindenwold Borough's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account
Lindenwold Borough shall provide the Department with written
§ 150-55 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-56
1:184
§ 150-57. Use of funds.
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between
the municipality, the designated bank, and the Department, to permit
the Department to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for
in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Department.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Department. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be
used for any activity approved by the Department to address the
Lindenwold Borough's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not
limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new
construction of affordable housing units and related costs, accessory
apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing partnership
programs, conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new
affordable units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving
and in accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase
of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for
affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed
to increase affordability, administration necessary for implementation
of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Lindenwold Borough for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
§ 150-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-57
1:185
§ 150-58. Monitoring.
Lindenwold Borough shall complete and return to the Department all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any
other funds collected in connection with Lindenwold Borough's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation
of the plan certified by the Department. All monitoring reports shall be
completed on forms designed by the Department.
§ 150-59. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for Lindenwold Borough to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless
Lindenwold Borough has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with the Department, has petitioned for substantive certification, and
has received the Department's approval of its development fee ordinance.
If Lindenwold Borough fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may
be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal
trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985,
c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Lindenwold Borough shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Lindenwold Borough may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including but not limited to salaries and
benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with the Department's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 150-57 LINDENWOLD CODE § 150-59
1:186
final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification
or judgment of compliance, nor shall Lindenwold Borough retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Lindenwold Borough
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 150-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-59
1:187
Chapter 156
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
§ 156-1. Payment of tax liens and other charges.
Any payment to a claimant by any insurance company of any claim in excess
of $2,500 for fire damage on any real property located within the Borough
of Lindenwold pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or reviewed after
the effective date of this chapter is prohibited until such time as all taxes
and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid by either
the owner of the real property or by the insurance company.
§ 156-2. Installment payments.
In the event that the Borough Council is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property,
Borough Council may, by resolution, enter into an agreement with the
property owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent
taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment
payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq.
§ 156-3. Copy to be filed with state.
Upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a certified copy
of this chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance.
Chapter 160
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire District — See Ch. 22.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 65.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 150, Art. I.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 240.
§ 150-59 LINDENWOLD CODE § 156-3
1:188
ARTICLE I
State Fire Code
[For provisions of the State Fire Code see N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-3
1:189

ARTICLE II
Investigation by Fire Marshal
[Adopted 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 458 (Ch. 113, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes person, persons, firm or corporation.
§ 160-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention; Fire Marshal.
§ 160-3. Duties of Fire Marshal.
A. A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the Borough of
Lindenwold is hereby established, which shall be operated under the
supervision of the Fire Marshal/Fire Official as per N.J.A.C. 5:71-3.2.
[Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
B. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of Borough Council. The Fire Marshal shall receive as salary
the sum provided for in the Salary Ordinance. [Amended 10-19-1981
by Ord. No. 587]
C. The Fire Marshal may detail such other members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to enforce all laws and
ordinances covering the following:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
(3) The installation and maintenance of fire alarm systems and fire
extinguishing equipment.
(4) The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
(5) The elimination of hazards in buildings and structures, including
those under construction.
(6) The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories,
schools, lodging houses, churches and all other places in which
numbers of persons work, live or congregate from time to time for
any purpose.
(7) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:191
§ 160-4. Right of entry.
The Fire Marshal and/or his appointed inspectors may, at all reasonable
hours, enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose
of making an inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this
article, he or they may deem necessary.
§ 160-5. Inspections; hazards and violations.
§ 160-6. Inspection of places of assembly.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal and/or his inspectors to inspect
all places of assembly at least once yearly so as to ensure compliance
with all laws, regulations and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of
decorations, maintenance of exitways and maintenance of fire appliances in
such places. Where conditions are found to be unsatisfactory, written orders
for immediate correction shall be given.
§ 160-7. Orders to remove or remedy dangerous conditions.
Whenever the Fire Marshal and/or his inspectors shall find any building or
other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or
fire extinguishing equipment or by reason of dilapidated condition, or for
any cause, is especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to endanger
other property, and whenever such officer shall find in any building
combustible or explosive matter dangerous to the safety of such building, he
shall order such dangerous conditions to be removed or remedied in such
manner as may be specified by the Fire Marshal.
§ 160-8. Service of orders.
B. He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are
set forth in other sections of this article and other ordinances and as
may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law.
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal and/or his inspectors to inspect
as often as necessary all buildings and premises, except the interior of
private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the
provisions or intent of any ordinance of the Borough affecting the fire
hazard.
B. Whenever any inspector, as defined above, shall find in any building or
upon any premises combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of wastepaper,
boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials and which are so
situated as to endanger life or property or shall find obstructions to or
on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of
occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or
remedied.
§ 160-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-8
1:192
§ 160-9. Investigation of fires.
The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of
every fire occurring in the Borough involving loss of life, injury to person or
by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and so far as possible,
shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design.
Such investigations shall be begun immediately upon the occurrence of a
fire by the Fire Marshal and/or his inspectors, and if it appears that such a
fire is of suspicious origin, he shall take charge of the physical evidence and
notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation
of such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the
collection of evidence and prosecution of the case.
§ 160-10. Nonapplicability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the transportation
of any article shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the
Interstate Commerce Commission, nor as applying to the military or naval
forces of the United States.
§ 160-11. Intent; compliance with standards.69
The intent of this article, in addition to matters hereinbefore enumerated,
is to safeguard and restrict the storage, handling and use of dangerous
and hazardous materials to a reasonable degree with respect to injury
A. The service of such orders as mentioned in §§ 160-5, 160-6 and 160-7
may be made upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible for
the conditions either by delivering a copy of same personally or by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the
entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such
an order upon the owner of a premises who is absent from the
jurisdiction of the officer making the order, such order may be mailed to
the owner's last known post office address.
B. If buildings are owned by one person and occupied by another under
lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with enforcing of
this article shall apply to the occupant above, except where the rules or
orders require the making of additions to or changes in the premises
themselves, such as would immediately become real estate and be the
property of the owner of the premises; in such cases the orders shall
affect the owner.
C. Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or
occupant of such premises or building. If such order is made by the Fire
Marshal and/or his inspectors, such owner or occupant may within five
days ask the Council of the Borough of Lindenwold for a review of the
order.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-11
1:193
to persons and destruction of property. Installation, construction and
safeguards shall be provided in a standard modern and approved manner.
Compliance with standards of the State Fire Code shall be prima facie
evidence of such approved manner.
§ 160-12. Liability.
This article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any party
owning, operating or installing any equipment for damage to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Borough be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection
authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein.
§ 160-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 587]
A. Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with any order or
regulation thereunder, shall severally, for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, respectively, forfeit and pay a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation of this article shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not
otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.70
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
removal of prohibited conditions.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 160-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-13
1:194
ARTICLE III
Smoke Alarms in Hotels and Multiple Dwellings
[Adopted 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 575 (Ch. 176, Art. I, of the 1981
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 160-14. Requirements.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-7.1, every hotel and multiple dwelling shall be
equipped with smoke detectors or smoke alarms, or both, in conformance
with the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs.
§ 160-15. Enforcement.
The enforcement of such installations shall come under the jurisdiction
of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold and the
Uniform Construction Code Act of the State of New Jersey.71
§ 160-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code.
71.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 160-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-16
1:195

ARTICLE IV
Uniform Fire Safety Code
[Adopted 8-19-1985 by Ord. No. 689 (Ch. 113, Art. IV, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 160-17. Local enforcement of code.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),72
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code shall be enforced locally within
the established limits of Lindenwold Fire District No. 1.
§ 160-18. Agency designation. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
1163]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Lindenwold Fire District No. 1
through its Bureau of Fire Prevention which is created herein. The Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall therefore be known as "the local enforcing agency."
§ 160-19. Duties. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163]
§ 160-20. Life-hazard uses. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 1185]
The local enforcing agency established by § 160-18 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs. The life-hazarduse
fees will follow the annual schedule listed by the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code.
§ 160-21. Organization. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 160-18 of this article shall
be a part of the Lindenwold Fire District No. 1 and shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Official, who shall report to the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 1. Such funds as may be necessary to
support the operations of this agency shall be appropriated to the Fire
District each year or shall be raised by the District in the manner provided
by law.
A. The local enforcing agency (LEA) shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the code and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of Fire
District No. 1, Borough of Lindenwold, other than owner-occupied oneand
two-family dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures and premises owned or operated by the federal
government, interstate agencies or the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 160-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-22
1:197
§ 160-22. Appointments, term of office and removal. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163]
§ 160-23. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,73 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Camden County.
§ 160-24. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163; 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 1185]
§ 160-25. Permit fees. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163;
7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 1185]
A. The Fire Official shall be certified by the State of New Jersey and
appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners, upon the
recommendation of the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District
No. 1, Lindenwold.
B. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners. All life-hazard-use
inspectors shall be certified by the State of New Jersey.
C. The Fire Official shall serve a term of one year. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term. Certified Fire Inspectors shall be
appointed for a term of one year. Any vacancy may be filled for the
unexpired term.
D. The Fire Official, inspectors and or other employees of the enforcing
agencies shall be subject to removal by the Board of Fire
Commissioners, Fire District No. 1, Lindenwold, for inefficiency or
misconduct. Each inspector or employee to be removed shall be
afforded the opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a
designated hearing officer. The Board of Fire Commissioners reserves
the right to not appoint any fire official or fire inspector at the close of
any one-year term without prejudice.
A. In addition to the inspections and fees pursuant to the Act and the
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, all other
structures and buildings not defined as "life-hazard uses" shall be
inspected not less than once every two years.
B. Non-life-hazard-use fees shall be as provided in Chapter 150, Fees,
Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-40. [Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No.
121874]
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 160-22 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-25
1:198
§ 160-26. Technical amendments. [Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No.
898]
The following provisions are new and supplemental provisions and are not
otherwise changes of existing provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Code:
A. The permit fee established by the Uniform Fire Code will change as the
Uniform Fire Code changes.75
(1) Type I: $42.
(2) Type II: $166.
(3) Type III: $331.
(4) Type IV: $497.
(5) Type V: Reserved.
B. Fees for Borough of Lindenwold sponsored events will be waived.
A. Storage or parking of internal-combustion engine vehicles. No person
shall store or park or cause to store or park any internal combustion
engine vehicle (including but not limited to those commonly known as a
"motorcycle," "moped," "dirt bike," "lawn mower," "snowblower," etc.)
in or on any apartment or multifamily dwelling unit, porch, balcony,
covered patio area, entrance, exit or any other private area of an
apartment or multifamily dwelling unit.
B. Outdoor fires. The use, operation or maintenance of any open fire or
device commonly known as a "barbecue" is prohibited in or on any
apartment or multifamily dwelling unit porch, balcony, covered patio
area, entrance, exit or any other private area of an apartment or
multifamily dwelling unit. These devices are to be at least 10 feet from
all buildings.
C. Public water supply, location or relocation and use. The Fire Official
shall recommend to the Board of Fire Commissioners, who in turn shall
recommend to the Joint Land Use Board of the Borough of Lindenwold,
the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the
placement or replacement of adequate water mains located on public
property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed
from service until approved by the Board of Fire Commissioners of
Lindenwold Fire District No. 1. No person shall use or operate any fire
hydrant available for the use of the Fire Department for fire
suppression purposes unless such person or persons first secure
approval for such use from the Fire Official, the Board of Fire
Commissioners and the New Jersey Water Company. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 160-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-26
1:199
(1) Adaptors on the steamer connection to enable fire hydrant
connections. All fire hydrants located in the Borough of Lindenwold
shall have a five-inch Storz connector on the steamer connection of
the hydrant. This subsection shall apply to all fire hydrants on
private or public property, and the costs associated with having the
five-inch Storz connection on the hydrant shall be borne by the
owner of the hydrant and/or owner of the property upon which the
hydrant is located. All fire hydrants located in the Borough of
Lindenwold shall be fit with a five-inch Storz connection on or
before January 1, 2014. [Added 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 1340]
D. Yard system water supply, location or relocation. All new shopping
centers, apartment complexes, industrial parks, educational or
institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high
fire or life hazards and which are located more than 900 feet from a
public street or which require quantities of water beyond the
capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided
with properly placed fire hydrants. Such hydrants shall be capable of
supplying fire flows as required by the Insurance Service Office and
shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Official and the Board of Fire
Commissioners shall designate and approve the number and location of
fire hydrants. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Board of Fire Commissioners of
Lindenwold Fire District No. 1.
E. Fire alarm systems.76
(1) It shall be the responsibility of all persons who have had installed,
operated or maintained any fire alarm system within the Borough
of Lindenwold to prevent the activation and/or transmission of
alarms through a program of training, periodic inspection and
maintenance of the system.
(2) Excessive false alarms (excessive is described as four or more false
alarms in any calendar month), causing the response of fire
personnel when an emergency does not exist, shall be a violation of
this article and shall be subject to a penalty, the cost of which shall
be payable to the Fire District. The penalty for a first offense is $25;
for a second offense, $50; for a third offense, $100. An alarm signal
or message activated by an external source or cause reasonably
beyond the control of the alarm system owner or operator or its
agents, such as a storm, electrical failure, telephone circuit repair,
etc., shall not be deemed a false alarm.
F. Street obstruction or closings. Any person who constructs, places or
maintains any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal
horses or any type of obstruction in or on any street within the Borough
of Lindenwold which would effectively close the street to emergency
76.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 65, Alarm Systems.
§ 160-26 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-26
1:200
and nonemergency vehicles necessary for fire suppression shall notify
the Fire Official, the Chief of Police and the Board of Fire
Commissioners of the closing. This will allow the planning of an
alternate route in the event of an emergency.
G. Violations and penalties. Except where otherwise provided herein, any
person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.77
H. Rapid-entry boxes (Knox system). [Added 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
1163]
(1) All buildings with an automatic fire alarm or sprinkler system are
required to have a rapid-access key box installed at the expense of
the owner or occupant of the structure in an accessible location to
be approved by the Fire Official. The key box shall be of a type
approved by the Fire Official and shall be installed in a manner
approved by the Fire Official. The key box needs to be of a size
necessary to meet the needs of the building or complex and shall
contain the following pertinent items:
(a) Updated keys necessary for access to all portions of the
premises.
(b) Keys to fire alarm control panels, keys necessary to operate or
service fire alarm control panels and keys necessary to operate
or service fire protection systems.
(c) The name, address and phone numbers for the company or
contractor for servicing the alarm or fire suppression systems.
(d) Electronic entry cards.
(e) Elevator or emergency information.
(f) Floor plans.
(g) Any other information which may be needed in an emergency
or as required by the Fire Official.78
(2) Access to key boxes shall only be available to authorized
emergency personnel and only by master key. A key inventory will
be conducted by the Lindenwold Fire Department every six months
and shall be recorded in the office of the Board of Fire
Commissioners.
(3) Any building owner or occupant who fails to install a key box,
thereby violating this subsection, after receiving due notice from
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 160-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-26
1:201
the Fire Official will be issued a minimum penalty of $100. After
the penalty is issued if the violation is still unabated after 30 days
a daily penalty of $100 for each day the violation remains unabated
will be imposed.
I. Emergency contacts. All businesses and multiple-family dwelling
buildings and complexes must post in a prominent, visible location a list
of emergency contacts and service companies for the use of emergency
service personnel. [Added 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163]
J. Snow removal. It is the responsibility of the owner or occupant to have
snow removed from his property in a manner which will not delay the
response of emergency personnel. Removal of snow shall not obstruct
the following: [Added 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1163]
(1) Access to the parking lot, to the perimeter of any building, and any
fire lanes or designated no-parking area.
(2) All fire hydrants.
(3) All means of egress and exit doors.
(4) All fire protection systems and Fire Department water supply
connections.
§ 160-26 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-26
1:202
ARTICLE V
Smoke Alarms in Residential Structures
[Adopted 5-13-1992 by Ord. No. 903 (Ch. 176, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 160-27. Smoke-sensitive alarm devices required; standards;
installation. [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 1149; 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 160-28. Applicability.
In the case where a change of use inspection or a certificate of occupancy
inspection is regulated by another ordinance or regulation, this article shall
not apply.
§ 160-29. Certification of inspection required. [Amended 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01]
No structure sold for use for residential purposes by not more than two
households shall be occupied without a certification of inspection for
compliance with this article. The application fee as set forth in Chapter
150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-28D, is nonrefundable, and the
inspection must be scheduled within 60 days of the date of the application.
§ 160-30. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Municipal Compliance Officer or his
designee.
A. A structure used or intended for use for residential purposes by not
more than two households shall have a smoke-sensitive alarm device on
each level of the structure and outside each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and located on or near the
ceiling in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association
Standard No. 74-1984 for installation, maintenance and use of
household warning equipment. The installation of battery-operated
smoke-sensitive alarm devices shall be accepted as meeting the
requirements of this section. The smoke-sensitive device shall be tested
and listed by a product certification agency recognized by the New
Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety.
B. Each structure, other than a seasonal rental unit, shall also be equipped
with at least one portable fire extinguisher in conformance with rules
and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Community
Affairs pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410
(N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.). For the purpose of this subsection, "portable
fire extinguisher" and "seasonal rental unit" shall be defined as
provided in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1.
§ 160-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-31
1:203
§ 160-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Failure to comply with this article shall result in a penalty of not more than
$500 in the case of a violation for an alarm device or a fine of not more than
$100 in the case of a violation for a portable fire extinguisher.
§ 160-32. Time period for occupancy after inspection.
This inspection shall be good for a period of 60 days. Failure to occupy
the residence within this period will necessitate a reinspection and the
repayment of the inspection fee in accordance with the Borough Fee
Schedule.
§ 160-31 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-32
1:204
ARTICLE VI
Security of Fire-Damaged Buildings and Structures
[Adopted 9-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
§ 160-33. Registration certificates.
Any business or individual that offers services to a residential or commercial
property owner, for the purpose of securing a fire damaged building or
structure, shall be deemed a peddler as recognized under § 150-4 of the
Borough Code and shall further be required to comply with the licensing
requirements set forth under Chapter 199 of the Code. Registration
certificates shall be valid for one year.
§ 160-34. Proof of insurance and fees.
In addition to the registration certificates requirements as set forth in
Chapter 199 of the Code, businesses or individuals governed by this section
shall also provide the designated representative of the Fire Commission, at
the time of registration, with proof of commercial general liability insurance
providing for a minimum of $1,000,000 of insurance coverage. The
applicant shall also be responsible for payment of an annual fee as set forth
in § 150-4 of the Code deemed a peddler.
§ 160-35. Issuance of registration certificates.
Each business or individual, upon being so registered, shall be issued
a registration certificate by the designated representative of the Fire
Commission.
§ 160-36. Possession of license required.
Each representative of a business or individual governed by this section
shall carry the original registration certificates at all times when providing
services within the Borough and shall exhibit same to any fire or police
officer upon request.
§ 160-37. Rules and regulations.
Every business or individual to whom a registration certificate is issued
under the terms of this section shall be governed by the following rules and
regulations:
A. No person subject to the terms of this section shall enter or attempt to
enter the building or structure of any resident or commercial property
owner, or approach any such property owners, without the registration
certificates in his possession.
B. No person subject to the terms of this article shall conduct himself in
such a manner as to harass or annoy any person while soliciting within
the Borough limits.
§ 160-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-37
1:205
§ 160-38. Violations and penalties.
Any persons violating the terms of this, section, whether as an individual,
principal, or agent, or employee of another shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold, be subject to penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I of the Code. Any violation of this section shall
further result in the revocation of a Registration Certificates for the period
of one year, whereupon the issuance of a new Registration Certificates
shall be governed by the procedures and requirements set forth within this
Section.
C. No person subject to the terms of this section shall interfere with,
hinder, or obstruct any member of the Borough Fire Department,
Borough Police Department, or any other emergency service personnel
from performing their duties in accordance with the general protection,
health, welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 160-37 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-38
1:206
ARTICLE VII
Dangerous, Damaged and Unfit Structures
[Adopted 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-16]
§ 160-39. Statutory authority.
§ 160-40. Findings and purpose.
A. N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(15) authorizes the governing body of every
municipality to make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to provide
for the removal or destruction of any building, wall or structure which is
or may become dangerous to life or health, or might tend to extend a
conflagration; and to assess the cost thereof as a municipal lien against
the premises.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.1 provides, in relevant part, that a municipality may
enforce the payment of an assessment for demolition costs, together
with interest, as a debt of the owner of the premises and may authorize
the institution of an action at law for the collection thereof.
C. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides, in relevant part, that a municipality may
make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. This statute is an express delegation of
police power to a municipality.
D. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 provides, in relevant part, that a municipality is
authorized to exercise police power relating to the repair, closing and
demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.
E. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3a provides, in relevant part, that a municipality is
authorized to exercise police power to repair or demolish a building or
part of a building that has been damaged to such an extent that nothing
remains but the walls and other supports, even though the remaining
walls or parts thereof are themselves safe and sturdy and not a danger
to health or safety.
F. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 preserves the power of municipalities to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal and abatement by
summary proceedings in accordance with the due process
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are dangerous, damaged and unfit structures within the community
that constitute a nuisance which require abatement or removal by
summary proceedings.
B. These nuisance properties adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare in a variety of ways, including the following:
(1) They represent an attractive nuisance to children who can be
injured or killed when playing in them;
§ 160-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-40
1:207
§ 160-41. Designation of public officer.
The Construction Official is hereby designated as the public officer
authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by these regulations and
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. The Borough Attorney is hereby designated as the
public officer authorized to prepare the complaint, notice of hearing and
other pleadings. The governing body of the Borough is hereby designated
as the public officer authorized to conduct the hearings.
§ 160-42. Definitions and standards.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DAMAGED STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part thereof, which
has been damaged to such an extent that nothing remains but the walls,
or parts of the walls, and other supports, shall, regardless of the safety
and sturdiness of the remaining walls, or parts thereof, be deemed inimical
to the welfare of the Borough and shall be repaired or demolished in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part thereof,
which is dangerous to human life or the public welfare or which constitutes
a fire hazard shall be removed or demolished in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer, officers, board or body who is or are
authorized by these regulations to exercise the powers prescribed by these
regulations and by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of law to the contrary, nothing shall prevent a municipality from
(2) They are a haven for criminal activities which increase crime in the
neighborhood where these structures exist;
(3) They adversely affect the quality of life of the residents living in the
neighborhood where they exist and undermine property values of
other structures in the neighborhood; and
(4) They represent a fire hazard.
C. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to identify these
structures and provide for the timely demolition or rehabilitation of
these structures through summary proceedings.
§ 160-40 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-42
1:208
designating more than one public officer for different purposes as provided
by law.
REPRESENTATIVE — The individual registered with the Borough as the
representative of the property owner. If the property owner is an LLC or a
corporation, the registered agent, president or managing partner of same
are also representatives of the owner upon whom service may be made.
STRUCTURE — Any construction artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner. A building or edifice of any kind.
UNFIT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part thereof, which
is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use due to the conditions set
forth herein shall be deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
Borough and shall be closed, repaired or demolished in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
Standards for unfit structures. A public officer may determine that a
building is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use if he finds that
conditions exist in the building which are dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of the building, the occupants of
neighboring buildings, or other residents of the Borough. Such conditions
shall include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
§ 160-43. Complaint and notice of hearing.
Whenever the Construction Official or his designee shall determine that any
building is a dangerous, damaged or unfit structure, he shall file a report
with the Borough Attorney which identifies the structure and its condition.
Upon receipt of the report, the Borough Attorney shall prepare a complaint
setting forth the location and condition of the building and the remedy
sought and a notice of hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the
hearing.
Defects therein increasing the hazards of accident, fire or other
calamities;
A.
B. Dilapidation;
C. Disrepair or structural defects;
D. Lack of adequate light, sanitary facilities or ventilation;
E. Uncleanliness;
F. Failure to comply with the Property Maintenance Code; or
Failure to comply with the applicable health ordinances, rules and
regulations.
G.
A. The complaint and notice of hearing shall be served upon the property
owner or the property owner's representative and all parties in interest.
Service shall be made personally or by regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested, by mailing the complaint and notice of
hearing to their last known addresses. Service on either the property
§ 160-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-43
1:209
§ 160-44. Hearing and order.
§ 160-45. Failure to comply with order.
In the event that the property owner and all parties in interest fail to comply
with the order of the governing body of the Borough, the Construction
owner or the property owner's representative shall be sufficient
service; service on both shall not be required.
B. If the whereabouts of both the property owner and the property owner's
representative are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, or if the whereabouts of a party in interest
cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then
service of the pleadings shall be made on such person as follows: by
publishing the complaint and notice of hearing once in the official
newspaper of the Borough; by posting the complaint and notice of
hearing in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
complaint; and by recording the complaint and notice of hearing in the
Camden County Clerk's office.
A. The Construction Official or his designee shall testify at the hearing in
connection with the complaint that was issued. The property owner and
any party in interest shall have the right to appear at the hearing and
testify, produce witnesses, and be represented by an attorney.
B. If after the hearing the governing body of the Borough determines that
the building in question is a dangerous, damaged or unfit structure, the
governing body shall adopt a resolution stating its findings and entering
an order as follows:
(1) The governing body may require the immediate closing of an unfit
structure; or
(2) The governing body may require the repair of the structure within a
reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order; or
(3) The governing body may require the demolition of the structure if it
is not economically feasible to repair the structure.
C. A copy of the order shall be served on the property owner and all
parties in interest personally or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, by mailing it to their last known addresses.
D. If the whereabouts of both the property owner and the property owner's
representative are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, or if any party in interest is unknown and
cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then
service of the order shall be made on such person as follows: by
publishing the order once in the official newspaper of the Borough; by
posting the order in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
order; and by recording the order in the Camden County Clerk's office.
§ 160-43 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-45
1:210
Official may proceed without further notice to enforce the provisions of the
order by such means as is necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of
the resolution, including, but not limited to, the closing of the structure, the
repair of the structure, or the demolition of the structure at the expense of
the Borough.
§ 160-46. Transfer of property prohibited.
§ 160-47. Other laws not affected.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor
is anything in this article intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code
Act or any rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 160-48. (Reserved)
A. The cost of closing, repairing or demolishing and removing the
structure shall constitute a municipal lien against the real property.
B. The cost of legal services, expert witness fees, search fees and
advertising expenses incurred in the course of any proceeding shall
constitute a municipal lien against the real property.
C. The public officer shall prepare a detailed statement of the costs
incurred, less any credits due, and file it with the Borough Clerk.
Thereafter, the governing body of the Borough shall adopt a resolution
certifying the total amount of the municipal lien. This resolution shall
be filed with the Tax Assessor and the Tax Collector, and a copy of the
resolution shall be mailed forthwith to the property owner by regular
mail and certified mail, return receipt requested.
D. The owner or any party in interest may, within 30 days of the filing date
of the municipal lien certificate, institute a summary proceeding in the
Superior Court, Law Division, to contest the accuracy or
reasonableness of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
A. When a complaint and notice of hearing have been served on the
property owner in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
article, the property owner is prohibited from transferring the property
until the final disposition of the legal proceedings and compliance with
any order issued by the governing body of the Borough.
B. When a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or order has been
duly recorded in the Camden County Clerk's Office, this filing shall have
the same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens.
§ 160-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-48
1:211

ARTICLE VIII
Nuisance Properties
[Adopted 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-16]
§ 160-49. Statutory authority.
§ 160-50. Findings and purpose.
A. N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 sets forth the criteria for determining a property to be
a nuisance. A public officer who determines a property to be a nuisance
pursuant to this statute shall follow the due process requirements set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. which are also set forth in detail in this
article.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides, in relevant part, that a municipality may
make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. This statute is an express delegation of
police power to a municipality.
C. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 preserves the power of municipalities to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their abatement or removal by summary
proceedings in accordance with the due process requirements set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12. The right of summary action to
abate or remove public nuisances also exists at common law.
D. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12a provides, in relevant part, that a governing body of
a municipality may make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to
regulate buildings and structures and their use and occupation to
prevent and abate conditions therein harmful to the health and safety of
the occupants of said buildings and structures and the general public in
the municipality.
E. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n acknowledges a growing problem with rental
properties in many municipalities in the state. The Legislature found
and declared that municipal residents have experienced disturbances,
damage and public expense resulting from carelessly granted and
inadequately supervised rentals to irresponsible tenants by inept or
indifferent landlords.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are properties located within the community that constitute a nuisance
which require the abatement or removal of the nuisance by summary
proceedings.
B. Nuisance properties create a wide range of problems for a municipality
in which they are located. These properties foster criminal activity,
create public health problems and otherwise diminish the quality of life
for residents and business operators in those areas where the nuisance
properties are located.
§ 160-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-50
1:213
C. Nuisance properties also diminish the property values of neighboring
properties, increase the risk of property damage through arson and
vandalism and discourage neighborhood stability and revitalization.
D. The continued presence of nuisance properties in the municipality acts
as a significant barrier to community revitalization and to the
regeneration of the urban centers.
E. The responsibility of a property owner to supervise his or her property
and monitor the activities of tenants to prevent it from becoming a
nuisance to others extends to properties which are in use. The failure of
an owner to comply with legitimate orders to abate or remove the
nuisance creates a presumption that the owner has abandoned his or
her responsibility to maintain the property free and clear of public
nuisances.
F. The responsibility of a property owner to maintain a property in sound
condition to prevent it from becoming a nuisance to others also extends
to properties which are not in use and in a state of deterioration by
neglect. The failure of an owner to comply with legitimate orders to
demolish, repair or otherwise stabilize his or her property creates a
presumption that the owner has abandoned his or her responsibility to
maintain the property free and clear of public nuisances.
G. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to identify these
nuisance properties and provide for the timely abatement or removal of
the nuisance through summary proceedings.
§ 160-50 LINDENWOLD CODE § 160-50
1:214
Chapter 164
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Soil removal — See Ch. 273.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Stream buffer conservation zones — See Ch.
291.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 160-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-50
1:215

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 164-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 164-2. Findings of fact.
§ 164-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Lindenwold are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-3
1:217
§ 164-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 164-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-4
1:218
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 164-5. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 164-6. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
§ 164-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:219
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 164-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-6
1:220
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348), includes substantial
improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
A.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:221
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 164-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-6
1:222
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 164-7. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Lindenwold, Camden County, New Jersey.
§ 164-8. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 1260]
§ 164-9. Violations and penalties.79
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Lindenwold from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 164-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Lindenwold,
Community No. 340137, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report titled "Flood Insurance Study,
Camden County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 16,
2009.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Camden County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index Map and Digital Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (DFIRMS) 34007C0109F, 34007C0117F, 34007C0128F,
34007C0129E, 34007C0136F, 34007C0137E, whose effective date
is June 16, 2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 2001
Egg Harbor Road, Lindenwold, New Jersey 08021.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 164-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-11
1:223
§ 164-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 164-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Borough of
Lindenwold, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 164-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-12
1:224
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 164-13. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 164-8.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Code Official and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 164-14. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 164-15. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures.
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 164-18B.80
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 164-19A are met.
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 164-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-15
1:225
§ 164-16. Variance procedure.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 164-8,
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the
Construction Code Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source in order to administer § 164-18A, Specific
standards, residential construction, and § 164-18B, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 164-13C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 164-16.
A. Appeal board. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(1) The Joint Land Use Board as established by Borough of Lindenwold
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 164-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-16
1:226
(2) The Joint Land Use Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Joint Land Use Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Joint Land Use Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the Joint Land Use Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
§ 164-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-16
1:227
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) of this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 164-16 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-16
1:228
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 164-17. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 164-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-17
1:229
§ 164-18. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 164-8, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 164-15B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified) and require adequate drainage paths around structures
§ 164-17 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-18
1:230
§ 164-19. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 164-8 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(3) Together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 164-15C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 164-17A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
§ 164-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-19
1:231
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements must comply with this Article V.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 164-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 164-19
1:232
Chapter 171
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Damaging property — See Ch. 229.
§ 171-1. Prohibition.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any property within
the Borough to allow graffiti to remain upon any exposed surface of any
property.
§ 171-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any drawing, painting, mark or inscription on public or private
real or personal property without the prior written permission of the owner
of the property.
§ 171-3. Notice of order to remove.
In the event graffiti is found, the Borough shall provide the owner of record
written notice of an order to remove said graffiti by certified and regular
mail, which order shall afford the opportunity to remove the graffiti within
90 days of the date that the notice is sent. However, the State Department
of Transportation shall be afforded 120 days from the date a notice is sent
to remove graffiti from property owned by the Department.
§ 171-4. Certification of removal.
The Borough's order to remove shall contain a form to be utilized by a
property owner to inform the Borough that the graffiti has been removed
and shall contain a certification stating that, by affixing a signature to the
form indicating that the graffiti has been removed, the order is certifying
that the facts set forth therein are true and that the certification shall be
considered as if made under oath and subject to the same penalties as
provided by law for perjury.
§ 171-5. Response to order to remove.
An owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
Borough by personal delivery or certified mail:
A. Of any objection to the order, within 30 days of the date of the order.
§ 164-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-5
1:233
§ 171-6. Challenge to order to remove.
An owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an action
challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within 60
days of the date of the order.
§ 171-7. Removal by municipality.
If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within
90 days of the date of the order or, in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an action
challenging the order to remove graffiti is still pending, the municipality
may remove the graffiti from that property and present the property owner
with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the municipality, by
certified mail and regular mail, for reimbursement from the property owner.
§ 171-8. Assessing removal costs for municipality; actions for
collection.
Whenever a municipality undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure or other exposed surface, the governing body of the
municipality, in addition to assessing the cost of removal as a municipal
lien against the premises, may enforce the payment of such assessment,
together with interest, as a debt of the owner of the property and may
authorize the institution of an action at law for the collection thereof. The
Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
Chapter 175
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-41.
§ 175-1. Board of Fire Commissioners to recover cleanup costs.
The Lindenwold Board of Fire Commissioners is directed to charge and
recover the following costs and expenses it incurs in the cleanup of motor
vehicle or hazardous material incidents serviced by the entities under the
control of the Lindenwold Board of Fire Commissioners from any party
determined to be responsible for the incident.
B. Of notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the date
of the order; or in the case of the State Department of Transportation,
within 120 days of the date of the order.
§ 171-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 175-2
1:234
§ 175-2. Determination of responsible party.
The Board is directed and empowered to determine the party responsible
for the incident using the results of any police investigation. In the event
that any party so charged with responsibility objects to that determination,
the Board shall conduct a hearing and make a determination.
§ 175-3. Fees.81
Chapter 184
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
§ 184-1. Hunting prohibited.
Hunting of any type within the limits of the Borough of Lindenwold is
hereafter banned and prohibited.82
§ 184-2. Discharging of firearms, crossbows or bows and arrows.
[Amended 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 133783]
§ 184-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter cannot apply to the members of the Police
Department of the Borough of Lindenwold or to any law enforcement officer.
A. The Board is authorized to charge fees as provided in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-41, for items used in any incident.
B. These fees may be modified or increased by ordinance of Borough
Council.
A. No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, fire or discharge any
gun, pistol or firearm of any description; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to the use of such weapons at any military
exercise or law enforcement training approved by the Chief of Police or
in the lawful defense of the person, family or property of any citizen.
B. No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, fire or discharge any
bow, hunting bow, or crossbow of any description; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to the use of such weapons at any
military exercise or law enforcement training approved by the Chief of
Police.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
82.Editor's Note: Original § 109-6, Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions, as amended,
of the 1981 Code, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-4
1:235
§ 184-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
58784]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate this article or
any of its provisions shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 190
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 145,
Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-3 and Art. II.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 164.
Soil removal — See Ch. 273.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Stream buffer conservation zones — See Ch.
291
Streets and sidewalks excavations, new
construction — See Ch. 296, Arts. I and III.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 184-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 184-4
1:236
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 190-1. Purpose and intent.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to guide the use and
development of land within the Borough of Lindenwold in accordance
with and pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, the Municipal
Land Use Law.85
B. This chapter is derived from a comprehensive ordinance regulating and
limiting the uses of land and the uses and locations of buildings and
structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk of buildings
and structures and determining the area of yards and other open
spaces; regulating and restricting the density of population; dividing
the Borough of Lindenwold into districts for such purposes; adopting a
map of said Borough showing boundaries and the classification of such
districts; establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
subdivision and development of land within the Borough; establishing
the Borough of Lindenwold Joint Land Use Board; and prescribing
penalties for the violation of its provisions. [Added 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 1331]
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-1
1:237

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 190-2. Definitions of terms.
Certain words, phrases and terms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose thereof as follows:
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets or as delineated on the
current Tax Map.
BOARD OF EDUCATION — The Borough of Lindenwold Board of Education.
BOROUGH CLERK — The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Lindenwold.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
BUFFER ZONE — A zone as prescribed by the Joint Land Use Board of the
Borough of Lindenwold, which shall separate a development from a street
or commercial or industrial district by the planting of trees or shrubbery
to such a height and density as to restrict a clear view beyond the said
zone.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered section of a
building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. All
yard requirements are measured to the building line.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — That part of the street located between the
curbs.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. "Common open
space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in Chapter 365, Zoning, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Joint Land Use Board.[Amended 12-12-2012
by Ord. No. 1331]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:239
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land.86
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.87
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).88
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Joint Land Use Board taken
on a preliminarily approved major subdivision or site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been completed
or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
1331]
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and members of the Borough Council of
the Borough of Lindenwold.
JOINT LAND USE BOARD — The Joint Land Use Board of the Borough of
Lindenwold.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — A security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Art. I, Environmental Commission.
§ 190-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-2
1:240
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted pursuant to
Section 19 of the Municipal Land Use Law.89
MINOR SITE PLAN — Development of one or more lots or an addition to an
existing building or structure of less than 1,000 square feet; addition of an
accessory structure of less than 1,000 square feet; addition of a handicap
ramp; or addition to an existing parking lot or paved area involving less
than 500 square feet, and which does not involve planned development, any
new street or extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.[Added 3-10-1993 by Ord. No. 929]
MINOR SUBDIVISION —
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.90
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any space utilized for the parking of motor
vehicles, including both the parking spaces and the driveways, aisles,
turnaround, loading areas and open space used to provide access to parking
spaces or to control traffic within a parking lot, except the access drive
Any subdivision resulting in not more than four lots, not involving any
new street or road or the extension of municipal improvements for the
common use of residents in the proposed subdivision, and not adversely
affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master
Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance or this chapter.
A.
Any subdivision of an area located within a tract that has received final
site plan approval, provided that the subdivision is consistent with the
design of the development as approved by the Joint Land Use Board
and that a performance guaranty has been posted for all improvements
proposed by the site plan. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
B.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:241
connecting a parking lot and a public right-of-way and within which no
parking maneuver could occur.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not require more
than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
Sections 34, 36 and 37 of the Municipal Land Use Law91 prior to final
approval, after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Joint Land Use Board and the applicant.[Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another special use.
SITE PLAN — A development plan for one or more lots on which is shown
the information required by Article VII of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway, or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or which is
approved by official action as provided by this chapter, or which is shown on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer
prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of
the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
line. Streets within the Borough of Lindenwold shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this act if no new streets are created: (1) divisions of land found by the
planning board or subdivision committee thereof appointed by the chairman
to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size; (2) divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
ARTERIAL STREET — Any state or county highway or any municipal
street linking one section of the Borough with another section of the
Borough or an adjoining municipality.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street located within a development or
neighborhood which links the minor streets within that development or
neighborhood with the arterial street system.
B.
MINOR STREET — A street whose primary function is serving abutting
properties within the area.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street designed to provide access to
a minor street or property.
D.
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49, respectively.
§ 190-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-2
1:242
provisions; (3) divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure; (4) consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument; and (5) the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer
to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations
and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax
Map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include
the term "resubdivision."92
UNDERDRAIN — Artificial means, such as pipes or other conduits,
constructed to collect and disperse subsurface groundwater.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to Section 47 and Subsections 29.2b, 57c and 57d of the
Municipal Land Use Law.93
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Lindenwold.94
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, 40:55D-40b and 40:55D-70c and d, respectively.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 365, Zoning.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:243

ARTICLE III
Joint Land Use Board
[Added 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 133195]
§ 190-3. Membership; terms of office.
A. The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as heretofore
established, shall be and are hereby continued under the name "The
Borough of Lindenwold Joint Land use Board," with all powers and
duties as described herein.
B. There shall be a nine-member Joint Land Use Board, the membership of
which shall consist of the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
(a) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to
such member's official tenure. If such member is the Mayor's
designee in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure.
(b) The Mayor may appoint a designee to serve at his/her pleasure,
provided a letter of appointment is filed with the Borough
Clerk. Any person appointed shall serve until a letter of
appointment of another person is filed with the Borough Clerk.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Borough of Lindenwold other
than a member of the governing body of the Borough of
Lindenwold, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there is
an Environmental Commission the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Joint Land Use Board, as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II
Joint Land Use Board member for purposes of this section in the
event that there is among the Class IV or alternate members of the
Joint Land Use Board a member of the Board of Education.
(a) The term of the member composing Class II shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of the member's respective
term in office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission.
(b) The term of a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of the member's term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs
first.
95.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Art. III, Planning Board, as amended
7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 658, and Art. IV, Zoning Board of Adjustment, as amended
7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 657 and 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164. Pursuant to Sec. 2 of Ord. No.
1331, all references in this chapter to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment have been changed to the Joint Land Use Board.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:245
(3) Class III: a member of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Lindenwold, provided that the term of the member composing
Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of the
member's respective term of office, whichever comes first.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the Borough of Lindenwold to be
appointed by the Mayor.
(a) The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
position or employment. Not more than one member of the
Board of Education may be a Class IV member of the Joint Land
Use Board. If and while there is an Environmental Commission,
the member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Joint Land Use Board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Joint Land Use Board member,
unless there is among the Class I or alternate members of the
Joint Land Use Board a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member common to the Joint Land Use Board
and the Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II
member of the Joint Land Use Board. For the purpose of this
section, membership on a Borough board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which
is discretionary and not required by statute, shall be
considered the holding of municipal office.
(b) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of his or her term as a member of
the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
(c) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his
or her Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
(d) To the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of the terms
of all Class IV members shall be distributed so that concurrent
term expirations are avoided, provided that the initial Class IV
term for no member shall exceed four years. After the
establishment of the Board's membership as aforesaid, the
Class IV term of each member shall be four years.
(5) If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
the Joint Land Use Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as
above provided, for the unexpired term.
(6) All members of the Board, except the Class II member, shall be
municipal residents.
(7) Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if
requested, may be removed by the governing body of the Borough
of Lindenwold for cause.96
§ 190-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-4
1:246
§ 190-4. Alternate members.
There shall be four alternate members of the Joint Land Use Board, all of
whom shall be municipal residents. Alternate members shall be appointed
by the appointment authority for Class IV members and shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members shall be designated
at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2,"
"Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." The terms for the alternate
members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate
members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate member
shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall
the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be filled
by appointment by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:247

ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Joint Land Use Board
§ 190-5. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Joint Land Use Board shall act on any matter in which
he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a
particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing
of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 190-6. Meetings.
§ 190-7. Minutes.99
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes as listed in
Chapter 150, Article I, Fee Schedule. Transcripts shall be at the expense of
the requester.
A. Meetings of the Joint Land Use Board shall be scheduled no less often
than once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to
process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291.97
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231.98
97.Editor's Note: See the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8
1:249
§ 190-8. Fees.100
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Joint Land
Use Board or any member of its administrative staff which are not otherwise
provided for by ordinance will be presented to the Mayor and Council for
approval and included in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule.
§ 190-9. Hearings.
§ 190-10. Notice of hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Rules. The Joint Land Use Board shall make rules governing the
conduct of hearings before such body, which rules shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or of this
chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-10
1:250
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Said notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate or
his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the
said current tax duplicate. A return receipt is required. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice
to a corporation owner may be made by service upon its president, a
vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment
or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B of this section to the owners of lands
in such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291, 101Section 6b.102
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of hearing; the nature
of the matters to be considered; an identification of the property
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:251
§ 190-11. List of property owners furnished.103
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the municipality shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee as prescribed in Chapter
150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-3, make and certify a list from
the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to § 190-10B of this chapter.
§ 190-12. Decisions.
§ 190-13. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board without separate charge to the
applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication
within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 190-14. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Joint Land Use Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application, or if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property, any approvals or other relief granted by the Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
a lot and block number as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without
separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of
the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the
same manner as those established for copies of other public documents
in the municipality.104
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-14
1:252
or the making of adequate provisions for the payment thereof in such
manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 190-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-14
1:253

ARTICLE V
Appeals
§ 190-15. Appeals to Joint Land Use Board.105
An appeal to the Joint Land Use Board may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the municipality
based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 365, Zoning, or Official
Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal
in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use
Law of 1975.106
§ 190-16. Appeals to governing body.107
An appeal from any final decision of the Joint Land Use Board, other than
an appeal of the type described in § 190-15 hereof, may be taken to the
governing body, provided such appeal shall be taken in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:255

ARTICLE VI
Subdivision Review and Procedure
§ 190-17. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of subdivision review shall be to ensure that land subdivision
in the Borough shall adhere to the provisions of Chapter 365, Zoning, the
revised statutes of the State of New Jersey, the resolutions of the County of
Camden, the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations,
and to exercise the powers granted to the Borough in the Municipal Land
Use Law. Subdivision review shall be administered to ensure the orderly
growth and development, conservation, protection and proper use of land
and the adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 190-18. Minor subdivisions: application and plat requirements;
approvals.
The following regulations shall apply to applications for the approval of
minor subdivisions as defined by this chapter:
A. The applicant shall submit the application for minor subdivision
approval to the administrative officer of the Joint Land Use Board at
least 28 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Joint
Land Use Board. The application shall include: [Amended 6-14-1989
by Ord. No. 821]
(1) A completed Borough application form in 18 copies. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164, 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(2) A Camden County Planning Board application form in
quadruplicate.
(3) Two copies of the certificate from the Borough Tax Collector that no
taxes or assessments are due or delinquent (tax search).
[Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(4) A copy of the deed, including the text of any easements, protective
covenants and deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided.
(5) The application fee.
(6) Eighteen paper copies of the minor subdivision plat. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
B. The following shall be included on the minor subdivision plat:
(1) A title block prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-2.
(2) The state, county and borough in which the property is located; the
zoning of the tract; the owner of record; the tax plate, block and lot
numbers and the address of the property; the tract name; and the
name and address of the subdivider.
§ 190-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:257
(3) North arrow with reference used.
(4) Scale, not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
(5) The point of beginning and metes and bounds of the property in
question. All measurements shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
(6) Property corner markers, both found and set, or the relation of
existing markers to the property corner.
(7) Streets and street names and widths where such streets abut or
adjoin the property in question. If the street is not open, the plat
should indicate this fact.
(8) All fences, tree rows, hedges, streams, ditches, building locations,
any physical occupation influencing property line determination,
driveways and site improvements.
(9) The location of proposed or existing easements and the purpose
served by the easement.
(10) Minimum front, side and rear building setback lines for each lot.
(11) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided and the acreage of the
resultant lots to the nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(12) Block, lot, zoning and owner's name of adjoining properties.
(13) The following certifications shall appear on the subdivision plat:
It is hereby certified that the lands subdivided by this map are
owned by title of record and that consent to the approval of said
map is given.
DATE:
NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER
I hereby certify that this map and survey has been made under
my supervision and complies with the provisions of the Map Filing
Law.
DATE:
LICENSED LAND SURVEYOR N.J.
#_______________
I certify that the public streets or other ways shown hereon have
been approved as to location and width and names by the proper
authority.
DATE
BOROUGH CLERK
§ 190-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-18
1:258
I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms to the
provisions of the Map Filing Law and the municipal ordinances
and requirements applicable thereto.
DATE:
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
This map is hereby approved by the Joint Land Use Board of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
DATE:
JOINT LAND USE BOARD CHAIRPERSON
I certify that this map was duly approved by resolution of the Joint
Land Use Board at an official meeting held on ________________ and
shall be titled on or before_______________.
I hereby certify that the Joint Land Use Board is the constituted
proper authority.
DATE:
SECRETARY OF JOINT LAND USE BOARD
This map has been reviewed as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2
and has been approved as required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 on
_______________ for the Camden County Planning Board.
DATE:
PLANNING DIRECTOR
DATE:
ATTEST:
This map is certified to the Register of Deeds as conforming to the
provisions of the Map Filing Law for the Camden County Planning
Board.
DATE:
PLANNING DIRECTOR
C. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application to the Joint Land
Use Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from
the date of Joint Land Use Board approval unless within such period a
plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map
Filing Law108 or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed must be signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Joint
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:259
§ 190-19. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions.
The following regulations shall apply to applications for the preliminary
approval of major subdivisions:
Land Use Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County
Recording Officer. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be
final approval of the subdivision by the Board, provided that the Joint
Land Use Board may condition such approval on terms ensuring the
provisions of improvements pursuant to Sections 29, 29.1 and 41 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.109
A. The applicant shall submit the application for preliminary subdivision
approval to the Joint Land Use Board's administrative officer. The
application shall include:
(1) Completed Borough application form in 18 copies. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(2) Camden County Planning Board application form in quadruplicate.
(3) Two copies of the certificate from the Borough Tax Collector that no
taxes or assessments are due or delinquent (tax search).
[Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(4) A copy of the deed, including the text of any easements, protective
covenants and deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided.
(5) The application fee.
(6) A list of all federal, state or county agencies from which approvals
must be granted prior to the development of the site and a list of
the approvals and procedures which apply to the development
under review.
(7) Eighteen copies of the preliminary plat. [Amended 7-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
B. The following shall be included on the preliminary plat:
(1) A title block prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-2.
(2) The state, county and borough in which the property is located; the
zoning of the tract; the owner of record; the tax plate, block and lot
numbers and the address of the property; the tract name; and the
name and address of the subdivider.
(3) North arrow and reference used.
(4) Scale, not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
109. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-53, respectively.
§ 190-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-19
1:260
(5) The point of beginning and metes and bounds of the property in
question. All measurements shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
(6) Property corner markers, both found and set, or the relation of
existing markers to the property corner.
(7) Streets and street names and widths when such streets abut or
adjoin the property in question. If the street is not open, the plat
should indicate this fact.
(8) All fences, tree rows, hedges, streams, ditches, swales, location of
existing buildings, easements, driveways and site improvements.
(9) The location of proposed or existing easements and the purpose
served by the easement.
(10) Minimum front, side and rear building setback lines for each
proposed lot.
(11) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided and the acreage of the
resultant lots to the nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(12) Block, lot, zoning and owner's name of adjoining properties.
(13) The location and proposed cross sections and center-line profiles of
all new streets and pedestrianways, including sidewalks, bike
trails, cartways and planting strips.
(14) The number of proposed dwelling units, the proposed residential
density per acre, and a list of all other buildings proposed in
conjunction with the development of the subdivision.
(15) The location and extent of all open space, recreation areas, historic
sites, floodplains and the surface water elevation and depth of all
proposed or existing ponds.
(16) A drainage plan containing the following:
(a) The size, location and slope of any existing or proposed pipes.
(b) The size, type, invert elevation and location of any existing or
proposed drainage inlets.
(c) The disposition of all off-site drainage.
(d) The location of any ditches, swales, berms, streams, detention
basins, retention basins or related drainage improvements.
(e) Complete design criteria and calculations to substantiate the
capacity of the storm drainage system.
(17) Location and size of all water mains, sanitary sewers, groundwater
underdrains and underground utilities.
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-19
1:261
(18) Any other information deemed necessary to the review of the
subdivision by the Joint Land Use Board, Borough Engineer or
Borough Planner.
C. Public hearing requirement. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12a, a
public hearing shall be held on each application for the preliminary
approval of a major subdivision. The public hearing shall follow the
regulations and procedures described in Article IV, Provisions
Applicable to Joint Land Use Board, and the date for the public hearing
shall be set by the Joint Land Use Board at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Joint Land Use Board following the submission of a
complete application for the preliminary approval of a major
subdivision.
D. The plat and engineering documents to be submitted shall be required
in tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval. If
the application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of submission of such
application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
E. If the Joint Land Use Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and
proceeded upon as in the case of the original application for
development. The Joint Land Use Board shall, if the proposed
subdivision complies with Chapter 365, Zoning, this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law, grant preliminary approval to the subdivision.
F. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Joint Land Use
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Joint Land Use
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise the Joint Land Use Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
G. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall, except as provided in
Subsection H of this section, confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance such general
§ 190-19 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-19
1:262
§ 190-20. Final approval of major subdivisions.
The following regulations shall apply to applications for the final approval
of major subdivisions:
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to the public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Joint Land Use Board may
grant extensions of such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance such revised standards may govern.
H. In the case of a subdivision involving an area of 50 acres or more, the
Joint Land Use Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
G(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer than three years,
as shall be determined by the Joint Land Use Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Joint Land Use Board
may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Joint Land Use
Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been revised
such revised standards may govern.
A. The applicant shall submit the application for final approval to the
administrative officer of the Joint Land Use Board at least 28 days prior
to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Joint Land Use Board.
The applicant shall include: [Amended 6-14-1989 by Ord. No. 822]
(1) A completed Borough application form in 18 copies. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(2) Camden County Planning Board application form in quadruplicate.
(3) Two copies of the certification from the Borough Tax Collector that
no taxes or assessments are due or delinquent (tax search).
[Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
(4) A copy of any amendments or changes in the deed, including the
text of any easements, protective covenants and deed restrictions
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:263
applying to the land being subdivided, which have been
incorporated into the deed after the application for preliminary
approval was submitted.
(5) The application fee.
(6) One translucent tracing on cloth or plastic film, one opaque cloth
print and 18 paper copies of the final plat. [Amended 7-13-2005
by Ord. No. 1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
B. The following shall be included on the major subdivision final plat:
(1) All of the information required to be submitted on the application
for preliminary approval in its final form, including the final design
for any improvements within the section covered by the final plat.
(2) A list of the proposed street names.
(3) The proposed block and lot numbers. Lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively, beginning with the number one, and
such numbering shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Engineer and Tax Assessor.
(4) The following certifications shall appear on the subdivision plat:
It is hereby certified that the lands subdivided by this map are
owned by the title of record and that consent to the approval of
said map is given.
DATE:
NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER
I hereby certify that this map and survey has been made under
my supervision and complies with the provisions of the Map Filing
Law.
DATE:
LICENSED LAND SURVEYOR N.J. #
_____________________
I certify that the public streets or other ways shown hereon have
been approved as to location and width and names by the proper
authority.
DATE:
BOROUGH CLERK
I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms to the
provisions of the Map Filing Law and the municipal ordinances
and requirements applicable thereto.
DATE:
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
§ 190-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-20
1:264
This map is hereby approved by the Joint Land Use Board of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
DATE:
JOINT LAND USE BOARD CHAIRPERSON
I certify that this map was duly approved by resolution of the Joint
Land Use Board at an official meeting held on ____________ and
shall be filed on or before ____________.
I hereby certify that the Joint Land Use Board is the constituted
proper authority.
DATE:
SECRETARY OF JOINT LAND USE BOARD
This map has been reviewed as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2
and has been approved as required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 on
____________ for the County of Camden Planning Board.
DATE:
PLANNING DIRECTOR
DATE:
ATTEST:
This map is certified to the Register of Deeds as conforming to the
provisions of the Map Filing Law for the Camden County Planning
Board.
DATE:
PLANNING DIRECTOR
C. When an application for land approval includes a portion of the land for
which preliminary approval has been granted, a tax map at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 200 feet shall be submitted which shows
the lots proposed by the final plat, any lots created by the approval of a
prior final plat within the tract covered by the preliminary plat, and any
lots or portion of any lots within the preliminary plat which have
received final approval and their acreage and dimensions.
D. An application for the final approval of a major subdivision plat shall not
be complete and will not be accepted for review or consideration unless
the developer has installed the improvements shown on the preliminary
plat or the Joint Land Use Board shall require the posting of an
adequate performance guaranty to assure the installation of the
required improvements. Posting of the performance guaranty shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, Performance
Guaranties, of this chapter. Said performance guaranty shall have been
reviewed and have the approval of the Borough Solicitor as to both form
and amount. The time limit on the installation of the required
§ 190-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:265
§ 190-21. Building permits; occupancy permits.
improvements under the performance guaranty shall not exceed 24
months from the date of posting.
E. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Joint Land Use Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Joint Land Use Board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes of
filing subdivision plats. No final approval shall be granted unless the
application for final approval conforms to this chapter, the Borough's
Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of the Map Filing Law110 and all other
applicable municipal, county, state and federal regulations. Approval
shall be conditioned on the timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required
period of time.
F. If the final plan is approved by the Joint Land Use Board, the final plat
shall be signed by the Borough Clerk, Municipal Engineer, Joint Land
Use Board Chairman and Joint Land Use Board Secretary and returned
to the developer for the securing of the certification of the County
Recording Officer. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95
days from the date of the signing of the plat unless within such period
the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the County
Recording Officer. The Joint Land Use Board may, for good cause
shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat. The signatures
of the Chairman and Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the guaranty required pursuant
to Section 41 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975111 and Article VIII of
this chapter.
A. Building permits. No lot in a subdivision shall be sold and no building
permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision
shall be issued until a subdivision plan has received final approval and
until the municipal improvements required by this chapter have either
been constructed or been guaranteed by an improvement bond or
certified check as approved by the Borough.
B. Certificate of occupancy. No structure shall be occupied and no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all of the subdivision
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 190-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-21
1:266
§ 190-22. Exceptions from requirements for subdivision approval.
The Joint Land Use Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions
from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision
review and approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question.
§ 190-23. Certificate of approval.
improvements have been completed. The developer shall be responsible
for obtaining the building permit and certificate of occupancy.112
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms a part of a subdivision or which
formed a part of such subdivision three years preceding August 1, 1976,
may apply in writing to the administrative officer for the issuance of a
certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been
approved by the Joint Land Use Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered
by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate within
15 days after the receipt of such written application and the fees
therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "Certificate as to Approval of
Subdivision of Land" and shall certify that there exists in the Borough of
Lindenwold a duly established Joint Land Use Board and that there is an
ordinance controlling subdivision of land adopted under the authority of
the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, P.L. 1975, c. 291.
D. The administrative officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for
such certificate issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess of those
provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so collected by the
administrative officer shall be paid by him or her to the Borough.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-23
1:267

ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Review and Procedure
§ 190-24. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the site plan review shall be to determine whether the
proposed use, building, structure or development, or addition to any
building, use, structure or development, conforms to the Revised Statutes
of the State of New Jersey, the resolutions of the County of Camden,
Chapter 365, Zoning, and all other applicable regulations, and to exercise
the powers granted to the Borough pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law. Site plan review shall encourage adequate
provision for traffic and circulation, the provision of recreation and open
space when required, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers,
adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of good design, the
general purpose of guiding the development of the Borough and to best
promote the health, safety, order, convenience and general welfare as well
as efficiency and economy in the process of development and the
maintenance of established property values.
§ 190-25. Review and approval requisite to permit for
development.113
Site plan review and approval by resolution of the Joint Land Use Board
shall be required as a condition for the issuance of any permit for
development, except that subdivision or individual lot applications for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings shall be exempt from such site
plan review and approval.
§ 190-26. Change of use.
Site plan review and approval must be obtained prior to the conversion of
any use to any other use even though no new construction is planned when
the conversion occurs. The purpose of the Joint Land Use Board review shall
be to determine that the new use will conform to all appropriate municipal
regulations and to assure that the existing facilities shall be adequate for
the proposed use.
§ 190-27. Preliminary site plan approval. [Amended 6-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 818; 3-10-1993 by Ord. No. 929; 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
1164; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335114]
The following regulations shall apply to applications for preliminary site
plan approval:
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-27
1:269
A. The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the site plan to the
administrative officer at least 28 days prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Joint Land Use Board. The administrative
officer shall then forward one copy of the site plan to the Borough
Engineer and two copies of the site plan to the County Planning Board if
the proposed development will have any impact on a county facility.
B. The administrative officer shall review the site plan to assure that it
conforms to the requirements of Chapter 365, Zoning, the graphic
standards of this chapter and any other applicable municipal
regulations. If the application for development is found to be
incomplete, the developer shall be notified of this fact within 45 days of
the submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted.
C. If the Joint Land Use Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application
for development. The Joint Land Use Board shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law, grant preliminary site plan approval.
D. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less, the Joint Land Use
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete
application for a site plan of more than 10 acres, the Joint Land Use
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise the Joint Land Use Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
E. Any preliminary site plan applications submitted under the provisions
of this chapter shall include the following:
(1) A completed application form and the payment of the application
fee.
(2) A true and accurate plot plan at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet or, in the case of an area of 50 acres, the plot plan
may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. All
submissions must be on a uniform sheet size.
(3) The zoning classification of the property, the tax plate and block
and lot numbers, the tract name and the owner of record as listed
in the Official Tax Book.
(4) The location of any proposed buildings, structures, open spaces
and park or recreation areas if the use is residential.
§ 190-27 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-27
1:270
(5) Natural Resources Conservation Service soil classification.
(6) Acreage of the tract to the nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(7) Contours at a maximum two-foot interval; contours should be
referenced to United States Geological Survey datum, extended
200 feet beyond the lot lines where possible and necessary.
(8) The location of watercourses and their extent, surface elevation,
depth and their floodplains.
(9) All lot lines, setback lines, railroads and their rights-of-way, the
location and purpose of any easements, underground or overhead
utility lines in any street which abuts the property.
(10) A parking schedule in accordance with Chapter 365, Zoning, .
(11) A parking and circulation plan showing the location and
arrangement of vehicular accessways and the location, size and
capacity of all parking and loading areas.
(12) A complete landscape plan, including size and type of all plantings.
(13) Pavement construction detail.
(14) A drainage plan containing the following:
(a) The size, location and slope of any existing or proposed pipes.
(b) The size, type, invert elevation and location of any existing or
proposed drainage inlets.
(c) The disposition of all off-site drainage.
(d) Proposed contours at intervals of one foot where slopes are
more than 3% but less than 15%, and five feet when 15% or
more. The location of any ditches, swales, berms or streams
shall also be shown.
(e) The drainage calculations to substantiate the capacity of the
storing drainage system.
(15) Curbs, sidewalks and all other areas devoted to pedestrian use.
(16) The building's front, side and rear elevations and floor plan.
(17)Key map showing the location of the site within the Borough.
(18) The site lighting plan.
(19) A copy of any protective covenant or deed restrictions applying to
the tract to be developed shall be submitted along with the site
plan.
(20) Any other information which is deemed to be necessary for the
review of the site plan by the Joint Land Use Board.
§ 190-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-27
1:271
§ 190-28. Final site plan approval.
The following regulations shall apply to applications for final site plan
approval:
F. Any minor site plan application submitted under the provisions of this
chapter shall include the following:
(1) A completed application form and payment of the application fees
and escrows.
(2) An accurate survey at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50
feet, drawn by a licensed professional surveyor in the State of New
Jersey.
(3) The zoning classification of the property, the tax plate, block and lot
numbers and the owner's and applicant's names and addresses.
(4) The location of any proposed buildings, structures and parking.
(5) Acreage of the tract to the nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(6) Spot elevations at corners of structures, paved areas and handicap
ramps.
(7) All lot lines and setback lines and the location and purpose of any
easements, underground or overhead utility lines.
(8) A parking and circulation plan showing the location and
arrangement of vehicular accessways and the location, size and
capacity of all parking and loading areas.
(9) A complete plan, including location, size and type, of all plantings.
(10) Pavement construction detail and any other construction detail
necessary to construction.
(11) Curbs, sidewalks and all other areas devoted to pedestrian use.
(12) Architectural elevations.
(13)Key map showing the location of the site within the Borough.
(14) A complete site lighting plan, including location, size, type and
wattage of all proposed fixtures.
(15) A copy of any protective covenant or deed restrictions applying to
the tract to be developed, to be submitted along with the site plan.
(16) Any other information which is deemed to be necessary for the
review of the plan by the Joint Land Use Board.
A. Upon receiving preliminary site plan approval, a developer shall
become eligible to apply for final site plan approval.
§ 190-27 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-28
1:272
B. The applicant shall submit eighteen copies of the site plan to the
administrative officer at least 28 days prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Joint Land Use Board. The designated
employee shall then forward one copy of the site plan to the Borough
Engineer and two copies of the site plan to the County Planning Board if
the proposed development will have any impact on a county facility.
[Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
C. The administrative officer and Borough Engineer shall review the site
plan to assure that it conforms to the graphic standards of this chapter,
Chapter 365, Zoning, the conditions imposed under the terms of the
preliminary site plan approval and any other applicable municipal
regulations.
D. Time for decisions.
(1) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Joint Land Use Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Joint Land Use
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall
be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required.
(2) Whenever review or approval of the site plan application by the
County Planning Board is required by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), the Joint Land Use Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
E. No building permit shall be issued and no construction shall commence
until the Construction Official has received an approved site plan
bearing the signature of the Joint Land Use Board Secretary. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued and no occupancy shall take
place until and unless all construction and required improvements shall
be completed in conformity with the approved site plan and any
conditions required under the terms of the site plan approval.
F. Any final site plan application submitted under the provisions of this
chapter shall include the following:
(1) A completed application form and the payment of the application
fee.
(2) All information required on the preliminary site plan under the
provisions of § 190-27E.
(3) The following certification shall appear on the site plan:
§ 190-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-28
1:273
§ 190-29. Responsibilities of applicant.
The applicant is responsible to include all data required to enable the Joint
Land Use Board and the agencies affiliated with it to assure that the site
plan will be in the best interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare of the Borough. Failure to supply the information alluded to above
shall be sufficient basis for the disapproval of an application for building
design and site plan approval.
§ 190-30. Site plan review guidelines.
Site plan review shall take into consideration but not be limited to the
following:
§ 190-31. Performance bonds.
The Joint Land Use Board shall be empowered to require that the applicant
furnish a performance bond for any off-site or on-site improvements shown
Final site plan approval granted on ____________ by the Borough of
Lindenwold Joint Land Use Board.
SECRETARY
I hereby certify that the engineering conditions imposed on this
application for final site plan approval have been met.
BOROUGH ENGINEER
A. Provisions to minimize any adverse effects that the proposed project
could have on the human or natural ecology of the area.
B. Assurance that the proposed project shall comply with the regulations
of the state, county and Borough.
C. Parking and traffic control, including design requirements for curbing,
parking areas, driveways, pedestrian walkways and requirements to
further the best interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
D. The protection of the rights of adjoining property owners.
E. Provisions for necessary utilities such as water, sewers, gas and
electric.
F. The stormwater collection and disposal system.
G. Noise abatement, odor and rodent control, and trash and garbage
collection.
H. Provisions for soil erosion control.
§ 190-28 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-31
1:274
on his site plan which will affect the public interest, for the purpose of
guaranteeing the completion of said improvements. An estimate of
improvement cost shall be prepared by the Borough Engineer in order
to determine the amount of the performance guaranty. Said performance
guaranty shall have been reviewed and have the approval of the Borough
Solicitor as to both form and amount prior to the issuance of any permits.
§ 190-32. Amending an approved site plan.
An application for the amending of an approved site plan may be made
by the applicant following the approval of his site plan application by the
Joint Land Use Board. Amendments shall be limited to minor changes in
the design of the proposed development and shall not include any proposal
for a different use of the property as defined in this article. Applications
for amendments to approved site plans shall adhere to the following
procedures:
A. Applications shall be made in the form of a letter to the Secretary of the
Joint Land Use Board identifying the changes requested. The letter
shall be accompanied by 18 copies of a site plan detailing the proposed
site design change. [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1164;
2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335]
B. The Secretary shall review the plans in order to ensure that they
comply with the requirements of this article and all appropriate
municipal regulations. He shall then submit the application for an
amendment to the site plan to the Joint Land Use Board for its action.
C. The Joint Land Use Board shall either approve, approve with conditions
or disapprove the proposed amendment. In the event of a disapproval,
the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated during the public
meeting at which the action is taken. Disapproval may be based on the
Joint Land Use Board's decision that the scope of the proposed change
justifies the submission of a new application for building design and site
plan approval.
D. In the event of approval with conditions, the plan shall not become
eligible to receive a building permit from the Building Inspector until
such time as a site plan is submitted which is revised to comply with the
conditions imposed by the Joint Land Use Board.
E. In the event of an approval or an approval with conditions in which the
applicant has submitted a site plan that has been revised to conform to
the requirements established by the Joint Land Use Board, the
Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board shall sign one copy of the
approved site plan and transmit it to the Building Inspector in order
that the applicant may apply for a building permit.
§ 190-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-33
1:275
§ 190-33. Completion of construction.
The construction proposed by a preliminary site plan or final site plan
approved by the Joint Land Use Board must be completed within two years
from the date upon which site plan approval was granted by the Joint Land
Use Board. Failure of the applicant to complete construction within such
period shall nullify and void the site plan approval granted for the premises
as if no site plan approval had ever been granted for the plans, and said
applicant will be in violation of this chapter if any construction or excavation
is undertaken or continued after the expiration date of the two-year period
from the date of approval. The Joint Land Use Board may, upon good cause
shown, extend the period specified above for a reasonable period of time in
order to avoid undue hardship and unfairness.
§ 190-34. Exceptions from requirements for site plan approval.
The Joint Land Use Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site plan review and
approval of this chapter if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions
of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 190-35. Simultaneous review of uses, site plans and subdivisions.
The Joint Land Use Board shall have the power to review and approve
or deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make further
application to the Joint Land Use Board or the Joint Land Use Board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Joint Land Use Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing
on the plat shall include reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 190-36. Effect of final approval of site plan.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
this article, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed
for a period of two years after the date of final approval. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the
Joint Land Use Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions.
B. In the case of site plan for 150 acres or more, the Joint Land Use Board
may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this section for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Joint Land Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
§ 190-33 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-36
1:276
§ 190-37. Fee schedule. [Added 8-22-1979 by Ord. No. 522;
amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 567; 5-10-1989 by Ord. No. 812;
5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 856; 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 1120; 7-13-2005
by Ord. No. 1164; 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1252115]
Fees shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule,
§ 150-3.
under final approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness
of the development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the
Joint Land Use Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by
the Joint Land Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area remaining to be developed, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:277

ARTICLE VIII
Performance Guaranties
§ 190-38. Performance guaranty; maintenance guaranty.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site
plan approval, the approving authority may require, and shall accept in
accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter, for the purpose
of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Borough
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 2011, c. 217,
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq., water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices,
public improvements and landscaping, provided that no more than
10% of the total performance guaranty shall be required to be in
cash, and the balance shall be in the form of a bond using the
standardized forms for a performance guarantee or maintenance
guarantee and letter of credit in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D.116
(2) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
Borough Council for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the improvement.
B. The Borough Engineer shall review the improvements required by the
approving authority which are to be bonded and itemize their cost. Said
itemization shall be the basis for determining the amount of
performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty required by the
approving authority. The Borough Engineer shall forward his estimate
of the cost of improvements to the applicant within 30 days of the date
of receipt of a request sent by certified mail for said estimate.
C. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the
case may be, shall be required for such utilities or improvements.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:279
§ 190-39. Reduction of guaranty amount; time for installation.
The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the Borough
Council by resolution when portions of the improvements have been
certified by the Borough Engineer to have been completed. The time
allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance
guaranty has been provided may be established by the Borough by
resolution.
§ 190-40. Improvements not completed or corrected.
If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable
thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
completed or corrected, and the Borough may, either prior to or after the
receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such improvements.
§ 190-41. Inspection of improvements; approval or rejection.
When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obligor
shall notify the Borough Council in writing, by certified mail addressed in
care of the Borough Clerk, of the completion of said improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon, the Borough
Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements and shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Borough Council, indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of the improvements, with a statement of
reasons for any rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth.
§ 190-42. Decision by Borough Council; notice to obligor.
The Borough Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough Engineer and shall
notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of said report
and the action of said approving authority with relation thereto not later
than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion
of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty except for
the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the Borough Council to send
or provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any,
shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty.
§ 190-43. Correction or completion of rejected improvements.
If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and upon
completion the same procedure of notification as set forth in this article
shall be followed.
§ 190-39 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-44
1:280
§ 190-44. Reimbursement of inspection fees.
The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements.
§ 190-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-44
1:281

ARTICLE IX
Design Standards
§ 190-45. Compliance with requirements and principles.
The developer shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision or site work in the design of each subdivision or site plan.
§ 190-46. General design standards.
§ 190-47. Specific design standards.
Design criteria and policy shall, at a minimum, meet the standards
established for comparable improvements installed by the Borough. They
shall, in addition, be subject to the following design requirements.
§ 190-48. Streets.
A. The subdivision plat or site plan shall conform to design standards that
will encourage good development patterns within the Borough. Where
either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted,
the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon. A developer shall not utilize an alternate design standard
without the approval of the Borough Joint Land Use Board. Said
approval shall be obtained by submitting a letter and any graphic
material needed to support the requested change to the Borough
Engineer, who shall review the alternate design standard and report his
findings to the Joint Land Use Board. The alternate design standard
may then be approved by the Joint Land Use Board if the Borough
Engineer certifies that it equals or exceeds the standard established by
this chapter.
B. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master
Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be
shown on the final plat in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of
the Laws of 1953117 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the
harmonious development of the Borough and enhance the public
welfare in accordance with the following specific design standards of
this chapter.
C. All future site improvements in the right-of-way of Berlin Road shall be
constructed in conformance with the proposed Berlin Road Streetscape
Project. Specifically, improvements being targeted include the north
side of Berlin Road from Gibbsboro Road to Pinelawn Avenue and Block
104, Lots 1, 2 and 3, on the south side of Berlin Road. [Added
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1293]
117. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44.
§ 190-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-48
1:283
A. A major subdivision shall be so designed as to provide a street pattern
which is curvilinear in design. The design of the residential subdivision
street pattern shall be based upon a local residential street pattern
connected to a residential collector street system.
B. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
C. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
D. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a twenty-five-foot buffer strip for planting
or some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the
Joint Land Use Board may determine appropriate.
E. Right-of-way and cartway widths.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured to the lot lines and shall
not be less than listed below in the following table. In all cases the
right-of-way shall be of sufficient width and design to safely
accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and
maximum access for fire equipment.
Name
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Sidewalks
Required
Parking
Permitted in
Right-of-Way
Arterial 86 46 Yes No
Collector 60 40 Yes Yes
Minor 50 30 Yes Yes
Marginal
access
50 30 Yes Yes
(2) The right-of-way for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Engineer.
F. No subdivision showing reverse strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips have been conveyed to the governing body under conditions
approved by the Joint Land Use Board.
G. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street
width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width
along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along
the one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
§ 190-48 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-48
1:284
H. Grades above 8% at intersections will be allowed if environmental
factors justify it. At the intersection of any street and a collector street,
grades shall not exceed 5%. [Amended 10-15-1979 by Ord. No. 529]
I. Street intersection angles. The intersection of two local residential
streets shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case
shall be less than 60°. The intersection of a local residential street with
a residential collector street shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible and in no case shall be less than 85°. The intersection of a
residential street with another residential collector street shall not be
less than 90°. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the
curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than 25 feet.
J. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
K. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
L. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by
more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets, measured along the center line.
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by
more than 45°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not
less than 500 feet, measured along the center line.
M. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance as
determined by the Borough Engineer.
N. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of 50 feet to the
outside edge of the cartway and 60 feet to the outside edge of the rightof-
way and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street.
The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along its center line from
its intersection with the intersecting street's center line to the center of
the radius of the cul-de-sac. If a dead end is of a temporary nature, a
similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future
extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the
adjoining properties.
O. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. All street names shall be
checked against the Borough master file of street names.
P. Subdivisions shall be so designed as to minimize the total area of the
subdivision devoted to street right-of-way.
Q. The access road and the area on each side thereof for a distance of 10
feet on each side of the pavement of said road and for a height of 16 feet
§ 190-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-48
1:285
six inches from the surface of the road shall be kept free and clear
of tree limbs, vines and other obstructions to permit free and
unobstructed use of said access road by emergency vehicles.
R. In general, continuous longitudinal downgrades shall not be run for
more than 1,000 feet. Where the general ground slope makes longer
runs desirable, such run shall be broken by a short upgrade of sufficient
length to create a low point at least six inches in depth. Double inlets
shall be located at the low point.
S. Pavement thickness design.
(1) The pavement thickness design shall, as a minimum, conform to the
following schedule:
Surface
(inches FABC-1)
Stabilized Base
(inches)
Arterial 2 6
Collector 2 6
Minor 2 5
Marginal access 2 5
Parking lots
Automobile 2 6, quarry blend stone
Truck 2 5
(2) In lieu of the requirements of Subsection S(1), flexible roadway
pavements may be designed using the procedures established in
the publication entitled "Thickness Design — Full Depth Asphalt
Pavement Structures for Highways and Streets," Manual Series No.
1 (MS-1), published by the Asphalt Institute, or by using the
Structural Number System, which is taken from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual.
T. Four-way intersections. Four-way intersections connecting a local
residential street with another local residential street or with
residential collector streets shall be prohibited.
U. Half streets. New half or partial streets shall not be permitted.
Wherever a proposed subdivision borders an existing undeveloped
street, the Joint Land Use Board may require that at least one lane of
the other part of the street be constructed if it is found that such a
requirement will increase or improve the effect of the traffic circulation
system in the area. Full-width construction may be required depending
on size or development existing or anticipated traffic congestion and/or
the general conditions of the area.
V. Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving a junction of
more than two streets shall be prohibited.
§ 190-48 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-48
1:286
§ 190-49. Lots.
W. Intersections with arterial streets. To the fullest extent possible, local
residential streets and residential collector streets shall not intersect
with arterial streets less than 800 feet apart, measured from the center
line.
A. General. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the
minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 365, Zoning, and lots abutting major and collector streets shall
exceed the minimum depth requirements where necessary to increase
the safety and privacy thereon.
C. Access. Each lot shall front on an approved street.
D. Street widening. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of
existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
E. Side lot lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
F. Double frontage. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least
10 feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic
artery or other disadvantageous condition. There shall be no right of
access across such easement.
G. Off-street parking. Where no garage is erected on a lot to be used for
the building of housing accommodations, a hard-surfaced driveway
shall be constructed from the street line to the building line in order to
provide off-street parking.
H. Odd-shaped lots. Where there is a question as to the shape and
boundary line of a lot or lots for their optimum use by future occupants,
including such conditions as narrow or unduly elongated lots and other
awkward appearing angles or appendages, the Joint Land Use Board
may withhold approval of such lot or lots.
I. Extra lot depth. Residential lots fronting on arterial streets, lots having
reverse frontage on arterial streets, and lots backing on streams shall
be provided with 30 feet of extra depth.
J. Lots backing on railroads. Lots backing on a railroad right-of-way shall
have additional depth equal to not less than 25%. In the interest of
maintaining the safety and welfare of future residents of the lots
backing on a railroad, a protective fence and landscaped buffer screen
§ 190-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-49
1:287
§ 190-50. Blocks.
shall be erected by the subdivider, the type and location of which shall
be subject to the approval of the Joint Land Use Board.
A. General. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall
be such as to accommodate the size of lot required by this chapter and
to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street
traffic. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall
be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
B. Block lengths.
(1) It is recognized that setting minimum and maximum block length
standards must be related to sound planning principles and to the
varying densities and lot widths specified in Chapter 365, Zoning.
To provide for this needed flexibility, the minimum and maximum
length of a block shall be governed by the minimum and maximum
number of lots specified in each lot width category in the following
schedule:
Schedule of Minimum and Maximum Block Length
Standards
Lot Width
Categories Number of Lots
(feet)
Minimum Maximum
Recommended
Standard
A 100 or less 5 15 10 to 12
B 101 to 120 5 14 10 to 12
C 121 to 160 4 12 8 to 10
D 161 to 200 or
more
3 10 6 to 8
(2) A block shall fit into a specific lot-width category when the widths
of not less than 75% of the lots measured at the front building
setback line fall within a specific ten-foot lot frontage category.
(3) Block lengths shall fall within the minimum and maximum required
standards; however, a developer should take notice of the
recommended standard for block lengths. This recommended
standard is set forth as an ideal standard for the majority of the
blocks in the proposed subdivision. Some deviation from this
recommended standard, however, is considered desirable in the
interests of variety and good subdivision design.
C. Block-end planting. In cases where lot and block design results in
undesirable sighting down rear property lines from block ends, a
landscape screen not less than eight feet in height shall be provided at
block ends by the developer.
§ 190-49 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-51
1:288
§ 190-51. Easements.
§ 190-52. Public sites and recreation facilities.
A. General. An easement shall be provided for all natural drainageways
and all utility lines when such utility line or lines do not fall within a
dedicated right-of-way. All easements shall be plotted on a preliminary
and final plat. A clause shall be inserted in the deed of each lot affected
by an easement, specifically reserving the easement.
B. Minimum easement width. Except as further required by this article,
easements shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
C. Pedestrian walkways. Interior pedestrian walkways may be required by
the Joint Land Use Board where necessary to assist pedestrian
circulation. Such walkways shall have a right-of-way width of not less
than 15 feet and a paved sidewalk not less than four feet in width. A
fence of a height and type to be specified shall be provided along both
sides of the easement. Adjoining lots next to the walkway easements
shall be increased in width from the center of the easements an amount
equal to 1/2 of the required pedestrian walkway easement.
D. Drainageways. Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainageway,
channel or stream, a drainageway easement conforming substantially
with the lines of such watercourse shall be provided. The easement
shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide or such width as will be adequate to
preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for
maintenance. Where it is found that additional easement width is
needed, such width shall be determined by the Joint Land Use Board in
consultation with the Borough Engineer.
E. Easement location. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
F. Easements and lot sizes. In specific cases where lots front or side on
easements, the Joint Land Use Board, upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer, may require the depth or width of said affected lots
to be increased by the width of the easement. This determination shall
take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the future
residents of said lots as well as the usefulness of the lots by the future
residents as a result of the easement.
G. Street shade tree easement. A five-foot easement running parallel and
contiguous to all street or highway rights-of-way shall be deeded to the
Borough, granting the Borough the exclusive right to protect, plant,
prune, spray, remove, control, regulate and improve shrubbery and
shade trees thereon. In new development where a shade tree easement
has been provided, no plantings will be permitted within the street
right-of-way.
A. Where a park, playground, school or other site for public use is
proposed in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the Joint
§ 190-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-52
1:289
§ 190-53. Utility lines.
§ 190-54. Preservation of natural resources.
§ 190-55. Landscaping and ground cover.
Land Use Board may accept the dedication or reservation of such area
within the subdivision.
B. When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, the Joint Land Use
Board may request the developer to provide additional land along the
stream for park purposes.
C. No removal of natural growth, grading or depositing of debris shall be
permitted in any area designated as a proposed park or other public
site.
A. In all major residential subdivisions, all electrical, telephone and similar
service facility installations shall be installed underground in
accordance with the requirements and tariffs of the serving
organizations.
B. The subdivider shall contact the electric, telephone and any other
service facility organization as early as practicable about supplying
underground facilities to the proposed new subdivision.
A. Existing trees. To the fullest extent possible, existing trees shall be
preserved by the developer. Special consideration shall be given to the
layout of lots and the position of dwellings on the lots to ensure that
existing trees are preserved. Special precautions shall also be taken to
protect existing trees during the process of grading lots and roads.
Where any land other than streets is to be dedicated to public use, the
developer shall not remove any trees or topsoil from the site or change
the site in any way without written permission from the Joint Land Use
Board.118
B. Watercourses. Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural lake, pond
or stream, the boundaries or alignment of said watercourse shall be
preserved and shall conform substantially to the natural alignment or
boundary. Where required, the developer shall be responsible for and
shall bond for such stream improvements as deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer.
C. Unique physical features. Unique physical features such as historic
landmarks, rock outcroppings, hilltop lookouts and similar features
shall be preserved if possible. The Joint Land Use Board may, after
proper investigation, withhold approval of the lotting of such area or
areas.
118. Editor's Note: Original § 139-73A, Topsoil protection, of the 1981 Code, which immediately
preceded this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 190-52 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-55
1:290
§ 190-56. Monuments.119
Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by P.L. 2011, c. 217,
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 190-57. Water supply.
§ 190-58. Sanitary sewers.
§ 190-59. Storm drainage.
A. Lot seeding or sodding. All lot areas which are not covered by
structures or paving shall be properly seeded or sodded by the
developer. All future site improvements in the right-of-way of Berlin
Road shall be constructed in conformance with the proposed Berlin
Road Streetscape Project, with particular attention to the installation of
landscaping and ground cover. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1293]
B. A plan and a statement of material to be removed and/or demolished
shall be submitted for approval.
A. All proposed water mains shall be shown on the development plan and
their general location approved by the Borough Engineer.
B. All proposed fire hydrants shall be shown on the development plan and
their general location approved by the Fire Marshal.
C. All waterlines should be looped and unconnected wherever possible and
shall be subject to Water Company and Fire Marshal approval.
A. All sanitary sewer systems, sewer and industrial waste treatment works
shall comply with the rules and regulations established by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey, as
amended and revised.
B. Sanitary sewer pipe shall be sized for full flow from the tract. The
Borough Engineer may require larger pipe, sized to accommodate
future extensions.
C. Minimum grades at terminal runs of all sanitary sewer lines shall be
7%.
D. Manholes shall be placed at every point where the sanitary sewer line
changes direction. In no instance shall the spacing exceed 400 feet.
E. Prior to final approval the Borough Engineer shall approve all sanitary
sewer designs which will become a part of the Borough facilities.
A. Runoff computations.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-59
1:291
(1) Computations of the rate of flow at any given location shall be
based on the following Rational Formula:
Q = CIA
In which:
Q = Volume in cubic feet per second
C = Runoff factor
I = Intensity of rainfall in inches per hour
A = Watershed area in acres
(2) In setting the value of the runoff coefficient C, consideration will be
given to the physical features of the drainage basin and the best
available data on the future density of development of the drainage
basin.
Land Use Description Coefficient
Residential Individual dwelling with lot
size of 20,000 square feet
0.40
Residential Individual dwelling with lot
size of less than 20,000
square feet
0.50
Apartments 0.70
Commercial 0.85
Industrial 0.80
Undeveloped or
parks
0.25
B. The intensity of the storm shall be based on the following:
(1) As a minimum, a five-year storm shall be used where excess flow
can continue downhill in the street without flooding adjoining
properties.
(2) As a minimum, a ten-year storm shall be used at low points with a
relief swale, or twenty-five-year storm where carried in a pipe.
(3) As a minimum, all box culvert designs shall be based on a twentyfive-
year storm.120
(4) Standard headwalls shall be installed on all pipes.
C. Pipeline design.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-59 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-59
1:292
(1) Storm sewer pipelines shall be designed by the following method
and shall be based on the Manning equation and shall utilize the
following friction factors:
n = 0.105 Concrete pipe
n = 0.021 Corrugated metal pipe
(2) The minimum allowable pipe size is 15 inches. Reinforced concrete
Class III shall be used in pavement areas and wherever there is
vehicular traffic, unless otherwise designated by the Borough
Engineer. Where the cover on the pipe will be less than two feet,
reinforced concrete pipe Class IV shall be used.
(3) This method is based on the assumption that hydraulic gradient will
match the inside top of the pipe when system is under maximum
hydraulic load.
(4) For this method, head losses through manholes, inlets, etc., shall be
ignored.
(5) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a minimum
velocity of 2.5 feet per second shall be maintained when the pipe is
flowing at 1/4 full.
(6) When the pipe sizes change, the inside tops of the pipes shall be
matched.
(7) Continuous profiles for each reach of pipe shall be plotted, along
with the location of the hydraulic gradient, and the hydraulic
information shall include the pipe size and type, the "n" factor, the
slope of the hydraulic gradient, slope of the pipe, the design
capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
D. Inlet design.
(1) Stormwater inlets shall be equal to New Jersey State Highway
Department inlet Type B. The maximum collecting capacities of the
inlets shall be considered to be:
(a) When installed on streets where the grade is 0.75%, five cubic
feet per second.
(b) When installed on streets where the grade is 2%, 4.8 cubic feet
per second.
(c) When installed on streets where the grade is 3%, 4.6 cubic feet
per second.
(d) When installed on streets where the grade is 4%, 4.4 cubic feet
per second.
(e) When installed on streets where the grade is 5%, 4.2 cubic feet
per second.
§ 190-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-59
1:293
(f) When installed on streets where the grade is 6%, four cubic
feet per second.
(2) Sufficient inlets shall be located and constructed so that the length
of surface runoff will not contribute a runoff to the inlet exceeding
the preceding designated collecting capacities. In no case shall the
distance between inlets be greater than 400 feet.
(3) The gutter grate of all inlets shall be set not more than two inches
below the gutter grade. The surface of the paving adjacent to the
inlets shall be constructed to blend into the lowered gutter grade at
the inlet in such a manner that a sudden dropoff or dip at the inlet
will not be created. At such locations where drainage is entirely
dependent on inlets, the collecting capacities of the inlets shall be
designed for 1/2 the preceding considered capacities.
(4) Where surface water is collected from two directions at one street
corner, inlets shall be placed at or near the tangent points of both
ends of the radius. The use of one inlet in the radius shall not be
allowed.
(5) Access manholes shall be spaced at maximum intervals of 400 feet
through rights-of-way and at sewer junctions where there are no
catch basins.
E. Open channel design.
(1) Open ditches or channels will not be permitted when the design
capacity requires a fifteen-inch pipe or larger, unless approved by
the Borough Engineer. Where permitted, open-channel design
should be based on the following hydraulic considerations:
(a) Manning's equation.
n = 0.015 Best concrete-lined ditch
n = 0.025 Best unlined ditch
n = 0.03 to 0.15 Fair to poor natural streams and
watercourses
(b) Allowable velocity.
Excavation Material
Velocity
(feet per second)
Fine sand and firm loam 2.5 to 3.5
Stiff clay and hardpan 3.75 to 6.0
Concrete-lined ditch 15
(2) Ample freeboard not less than one foot should be provided on all
channels.
§ 190-59 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-59
1:294
§ 190-60. Streetlighting.
(3) The channel should be designed to conform wherever possible to
the adjacent ground conditions. This means that it should not be
projecting excessively above the surrounding ground.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of open channel shall be plotted
along with adjacent average ground and the hydraulic information
pertinent to each reach within the system. This information shall
include the type of channel lining, the "n" factor, the width of the
channel bottom, the side slopes, the water depth, the design
capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
(5) Open channels shall have a maximum side slope of 3:1 and shall
have adequate slope protection as required by Chapter 273, Soil
Removal, of the Code of the Borough of Lindenwold.
F. Culverts. All culverts shall be limited to a single opening. Multiple pipes
will not be permitted. The design of culverts shall be such as to
minimize the probability of debris accumulation.
G. Detention basin design. Detention ponds will be required in all major
developments and site plans unless deemed unnecessary by the
Borough Engineer. Detention ponds shall be designed to limit the
stormwater runoff to a controlled rate of flow equal to or less than the
stormwater runoff prior to development. The required storage in the
basin should be for a twenty-five-year storm, with the outflow from the
basin limited to a ten-year storm. Complete calculations for the basin
should be supplied at the time the preliminary plan or final site plan is
submitted. These calculations should include runoff prior to
development, runoff after development and complete calculations for
design.
A. Streetlighting shall be installed by the subdivider in locations approved
by the Borough Engineer, in accordance with the Borough's
streetlighting policy. All future site improvements in the right-of-way of
Berlin Road shall be constructed in conformance with the proposed
Berlin Road Streetscape Project, with particular attention to the
installation of lighting. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1293]
B. For normal street usage, thirty-foot-high laminated poles shall be
spaced at a minimum distance of 150 feet, with one-hundred-watt
mercury vapor luminaires.
C. At intersections, a thirty-foot-high laminated wood pole shall be placed
with a one-hundred-seventy-five-watt mercury vapor luminaire.
D. At any intersection of two streets, both of which have cartways in
excess of 40 feet or where one street is an industrial road and the other
street has a cartway in excess of 40 feet, a thirty-foot-high laminated
pole shall be placed with a four-hundred-watt high-pressure sodium
luminaire.
§ 190-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-60
1:295
§ 190-61. Underground wiring.
Electric, telephone, television and other communications service facilities,
both main and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables
installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the
utility or other companies providing such services.
§ 190-62. Underdrains.
§ 190-63. Topsoil protection.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved
during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at
least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized
by seeding or planting. Under no circumstances shall any soil or earth be
sold or otherwise removed from the site unless application is made and
approval granted therefor under Chapter 273, Soil Removal, of the Code of
the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 190-64. Natural features.
Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
E. The Borough will assume the operating expense for streetlights in a
particular section when 75% of that section is occupied.
A. Underdrains shall be provided throughout all of the developments to
carry water by gravity from below all basement floors to storm drains or
other proper places of disposal. Where perimeter underdrains are
provided, they shall be connected into a sump pit (approved by the
Borough Engineer) and discharge to a storm drainage system or shall
be tied into a separate underdrain system. In no case shall perimeter
underdrains be tied into the underdrain beneath the sanitary sewers.
B. Where sump pumps are used on individual lots, they shall discharge
into a pipe which shall run from the structure to the underdrain in the
street. A sump pump may only be used to supplement the underdrain
system around the structure. No underdrains in streets shall be less
than six inches in diameter. The size of the underdrains shall be
increased not less than 10% in cross-sectional area for each 1,000 feet
of longitudinal drain. Cleanouts shall be provided at all changes in line
or grade; however, the distance between cleanouts shall not exceed 400
feet. In no case shall cleanouts be permitted in sanitary manholes. One
cleanout with a brass cap shall also be provided in each basement floor
in drain to the underdrain in the street. Underdrains in the street shall
be separated from the sanitary sewer by a horizontal and vertical
distance of at least one foot.121
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-60 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-65
1:296
§ 190-65. Soil erosion and sediment control.
Soil erosion prevention and sediment control techniques shall be submitted
with the preliminary plan in conformance with the guidelines established
by the Camden County Soil Conservation District and the United States
Department of Agriculture soil survey for Camden County.
§ 190-66. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. [Amended 12-15-1980 by
Ord. No. 561; 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 729; 10-17-1988 by Ord. No.
792]
A. Sidewalks shall be installed on one or both sides of a street, as the Joint
Land Use Board may direct, and at such width as may be determined by
the Joint Land Use Board in accordance with the attached construction
standards.122 All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide and
four inches thick, except at a driveway crossing, where they shall be six
inches thick. All future site improvements in the right-of-way of Berlin
Road shall be constructed in conformance with the proposed Berlin
Road Streetscape Project, with particular attention to the installation of
decorative sidewalks. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1293]
B. Concrete curbs, gutters and drive aprons shall be in accordance with
the construction standards as set forth by the Engineer for the
municipality.
C. Streets shall be in accordance with the construction standards and
constructed of materials as set forth by the governing body. Such
streets shall be repaired, maintained or improved by such landowner as
reasonably determined by the municipality.
D. The landowner or builder, or both, shall be responsible for the costs of
the installation of all requirements, such as sidewalks, curbs,
driveways, streets, etc., as outlined in this chapter and amendments
thereto.
E. In the event that a particular building is located on an undeveloped or
partially underdeveloped street, that is, one in which there are no
sidewalks or curbs or streets on which only a portion of the properties
have sidewalks or curbs, then, in that event, prior to the issuance of a
building permit or certificate of occupancy, the landowner or builder
shall contact the Borough Engineer and obtain from him instructions as
to the proper grades, elevations, specifications and materials to be used
for the installation of curbs, sidewalks and/or streets as required above.
F. All costs of services of the Borough Engineer or other professionals,
inspectors or other employees shall be borne by the applicant. The
Engineer's fees to be charged shall be a portion of the necessary costs
to establish grades and elevations on a street prorated among all the
lots upon said street. Each applicant shall bear its portion of these said
122. Editor's Note: Said standards are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 190-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-66
1:297
§ 190-67. Street signs.
costs according to lot size and block. The costs may be deducted
from the escrow deposit made pursuant to Subsection I hereof, or in
the event that said costs exceed the deposit, they must be paid to
the Borough of Lindenwold prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
G. In all cases requiring curb and/or sidewalk and/or street installation or
repair, a bond or cash in lieu of bond shall be posted by the applicant in
an amount determined by the Borough Engineer prior to the issuance of
any building permit. The amount of said bond requirement shall be
determined by the use of bond estimate forms prepared in advance by
the Borough Engineer, which form shall be complete with unit prices
and a list of typical improvements per linear foot of frontage.123
H. All building permits which require the installation and/or repair of
sidewalks and/or curbs and/or streets shall also require that such
installation be staked out by the Borough Engineer and the actual
construction be subject to periodic inspection and approval of the
Borough Engineer or his designee, which may be the Director of Public
Works or other qualified person.124
I. An escrow deposit of $500 per application shall be made with the
Borough Engineer, in addition to whatever bond or cash in lieu of bond
is required. This deposit money is to be used for the purpose of
reimbursing the Borough of Lindenwold for any costs incurred by it for
engineering, stakeouts, inspections or related items concerning the
installation and/or repair of curbs, sidewalks and/or streets. All actual
costs may be deducted from the deposit of $500 made with the
application, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant. In the
event that the costs exceed $500, the excess must be reimbursed to the
Borough of Lindenwold prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for said property. [Amended 12-11-1991 by Ord. No.
893125]
J. All requests for the waiver of any provision of this section relating to
curbs, sidewalks and gutters shall be made by the filing of an
application for development with the Lindenwold Joint Land Use Board.
Thereafter, upon a hearing on the waiver request, the Lindenwold Joint
Land Use Board shall rule upon the application. [Added 9-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 865]
A. There shall be one sign assembly mounted at each intersection, and
each street will be clearly marked. Unless approval for other types is
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-66 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-67
1:298
§ 190-68. Trees; landscaping; topsoil protection; trash enclosures.
[Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1217]
given by the Board, each sign unit shall consist of four signplates with
theftproof fixtures and hardware for assembling and mounting on a
steel post.
B. The signplates shall be 0.080 gauge aluminum, six inches high and of
sufficient length to accommodate the names without unduly crowding
the sign. The background for the sign shall be red reflectorized
Scotchlite™. The letters for the name shall be four inches high. The
abbreviation for road, street, court, etc., shall be two inches high. All
letters shall be of white reflectorized Scotchlite™. Posts shall be two
inches inside diameter galvanized steel, 10 feet six inches in length,
embedded in a twelve-inch circular concrete anchor three feet deep
along each post. There shall be a one-half-inch hole drilled six inches
from the bottom of each post to accommodate a one-half-inch-by-nineinch
anchor rod, which shall be furnished with each post. The developer
shall be responsible for the cost of labor and material for installation.
A. Tree removal and replacement plan/compensatory replacement.
(1) Other than for a single-family residential use, an application for
minor site plan approval must be submitted to the Joint Land Use
Board for tree removal of more than five trees. [Amended
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1221]
(2) All site plan or subdivision plan approval applications shall include
a tree removal and replacement plan and statement indicating the
trees and/or material to be removed and the plan for compensatory
replacement.
(3) A wooded site may not be cleared prior to signature of the site plan
or subdivision plan approval.
(4) The following shall be exempt from the requirements of tree
removal and replacement plan/compensatory planting
requirements:
(a) Managed woodlands and agricultural uses.
(b) Trees removed during normal homeowner maintenance.
Examples would include trees removed due to storm damage
or disease and those removed to prevent damage to roofs,
swimming pools, utilities, driveways and landscaping.
(c) Trees removed due to clearing for the following:
[1] Road, driveways, and utility and pedestrian rights-of-way;
[2] Areas within the foundation lines of a proposed building;
and
§ 190-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-68
1:299
[3] Areas within front yard areas required for the installation
of utility service lines, entry walks and driveways.
(5) Removal of trees having a caliper of five inches or greater as
measured 36 inches above the ground from any lot is prohibited in
the process of grading or installing improvements except for
invasive species. Invasive species should be removed. Tree
protection measures shall be provided for noninvasive species per
American Association of Nurserymen Standards, and tree
protection measures shall be installed prior to the start of
construction in accordance with tree protection measures.
(6) Where in the judgment of the reviewing board removal of trees
having a caliper of five inches or greater is unavoidable, the
applicant shall install replacement trees on the basis of not less
than one inch of tree diameter for every three inches of existing
tree diameter removed, in such locations and of such size, variety
and quantity as reviewed and approved by the reviewing board
engineer or reviewing landscape architect. New trees shall have a
caliper of 2.5 inches at the time of planting.126
(7) Notwithstanding the five-inch-caliper limitation set forth above, no
substantial area of smaller trees or shrub cover shall be removed
without the provision of comparable replacement as approved by
the reviewing board pursuant to the compensatory planting
requirements set forth in this section.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be provided as approved by the reviewing board
to provide shade, designate entrances, screen parking from roads,
buffer utility areas and provide aesthetic interest throughout the
year. Along U.S. Route 30, a berm and plantings are required to
screen parking from the road.
(2) Slope plantings. Landscaping in the area of all cuts and fills and/or
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway
slopes steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontally
shall be planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose
and soil conditions, water availability, and environment.
(3) Additional landscaping. In nonresidential developments, all areas
of the site not occupied by buildings and improvements shall be
landscaped by the planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs
and trees as part of a site plan approved.
(4) All landscape plants shall be typical full specimens conforming to
the American Association of Nurserymen Standards (ANA) for
quality and installation.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-68 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-68
1:300
(5) Plant species. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be
considered in the plant selection. All plants shall be tolerant of
specific site conditions. The use of native species is recommended.
(6) An appropriate variety of tree species shall be provided to avoid
die-out due to species-specific diseases.
(7) Landscaping shall not inhibit access by emergency vehicles or
inhibit visibility within vehicular sight triangles required in
accordance with AASHTO (American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials).
(8) Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specific plant species through the first growing
season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the applicant
during the first two planting seasons.
(9) Parking lot landscaping. In parking lots, at least 5% of the interior
parking area shall be landscaped with plantings in interior islands,
and one tree for each 10 spaces shall be installed. Parking lot street
frontage screening and perimeter screening shall be a minimum of
five feet wide. Planting required within the parking lot is exclusive
of other planting requirements such as street tree requirements.127
C. Tree protection measures. Developers shall exercise care to protect
trees which are to be retained from damage during construction. The
following procedures shall be observed in order to protect remaining
trees:
(1) Protection from mechanical injury.
(a) All trees to be retained within 25 feet of a building site and
lining ingress or egress roads, parking areas and utility
easements shall be protected from equipment damage by
wrapping the trunk with sections of snow fence or boards
wired together. All exposed roots, trunks and low-hanging
branches shall be equally protected. Groups of trees may be
protected by fencing the entire area where they are located.
(b) Heavy equipment operators shall be careful not to damage
existing tree trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut
closer than 25 feet to tree trunks.
(c) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction
shall be protected from further damage by being treated
immediately by a tree surgeon.
(d) Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be removed and/
or treated immediately by a tree surgeon.
127. Editor's Note: Original § 139-86.1C, Topsoil protection, of the 1981 Code, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 190-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-68
1:301
(e) The operation of heavy equipment over root systems shall be
minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.
(f) Deciduous trees shall be given an application of a slow-release,
low nitrogen, all-purpose fertilizer to aid in their recovery from
possible damage caused by construction operations. Such
applications shall be made according to appropriate rates.
(g) Trees shall not be used for roping, cables, signs or fencing.
Nails and spikes shall not be driven into trees.
(h) The area around the base of existing trees shall be left open to
provide access for water and nutrients. No impervious cover,
nor any storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill, shall be
allowed within the dripline of any existing tree, except as may
be necessary for a maximum of three months if no other
storage space is available.
(2) Protection from grade change.
(a) Raising the grade. If an increase in the grade of the land is
proposed, the developer shall install either:
[1] A system of gravel and drain tiles at the old soil level
opening into a dry well built around the trunk and
designed for each tree, individually fitting the contour of
the land so that it drains water away from the tree trunk.
[2] A retaining wall between the existing grade and the higher
grade.
(b) Lowering the grade. If a lowering of the grade is proposed, the
developer shall initiate one of the following methods to protect
the trees:
[1] Terracing the grade.
[2] A retaining wall between the existing grade and the lower
grade.
(c) Replacement of trees. If the proposed grade change, in the
opinion of the Board professional or the Environmental
Commission, is too excessive to allow retention of existing
trees, the developer shall be required to replace the trees to be
removed on a one-to-three basis, one inch of new tree diameter
for every three inches of tree diameter removed.
(3) Protection during cleanup.
(a) All construction debris shall be hauled away. Debris may not be
burned or buried on site.
(b) Fences and barriers around trees shall be the last thing to be
removed from the site.
§ 190-68 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-68
1:302
D. Standards for plant material.
(1) Plantings shall not be of an invasive nature, easily susceptible to
pest infestation or diseases.
(2) All proposed material shall be nursery-grown, disease free and
shall conform to the standards of American Association of
Nurserymen. A variety of plant species is encouraged to avoid
monocultures. The plants selected should provide a variety of color,
texture and habit.
(3) Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches measured
six inches above ground level and a minimum height of 13 to 15
feet at installation. A minimum of 50% of the trees shall be native to
the region.
(4) Ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of eight feet to 10
feet at installation.
(5) Upright shrubs shall be a minimum height of three feet at planting.
Spreading shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in spread at
planting.
E. Shade trees.
(1) Every principal building shall be built upon a lot whose frontage
shall be provided with a street shade tree conforming to the
standards of the Borough's shade tree requirements. In cases
where sufficient shade trees conforming to this requirement are
not already in existence, provisions shall be made by the owner for
the planting of new shade trees in accordance with the same
standards and procedures as prevail under the Borough's
ordinances.
(2) Recommended shade trees.
Acer rubrum "Columnare" Columnar red maple
Acer rubrum "October Glory" October glory red maple
Acer saccharum "Green
Mountain"
Green mountain sugar maple
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana American hornbeam
Carpinus japonica Japanese hornbeam
Fraxinus americana White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green ash or Marshall's seedless
green ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica
"Summit"
Summit ash
§ 190-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-68
1:303
Glenitsia triacanthos inermis
"Shademaster"
Shademaster thornless
honeylocust
Glenitsia triacanthos inermis
"Skyline"
Skyline thornless honeylocust
Liriodendron tulipfera Tulip poplar
Plantanus acerfolia London planetree
Plantanus occidentalis Sycamore
Tilia cordata Little leaf linden
Tilia cordata "Greenspire" Greenspire little leaf linden
Tilia tomentosum Silver linden
Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
Zelkova serrata "Village
Green"
Village green zelkova
(3) Prohibited shade trees.
Acer platanoides Norway maple
Pyrus calleryana "Bradford" Bradford callery pear
Quercus palustris Pin oak
Quercus rubra Red oak
Invasive Weak branching
Bacterial leaf scorch
F. Trash enclosures.
(1) Trash enclosures shall be large enough to handle trash and
recycling material.
(2) The trash enclosure shall be constructed on three sides by masonry
walls not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height with a
facade treatment that is compatible with the facade treatment of
the building.
(3) Trash enclosures shall be located a minimum of 15 feet away from
the building wall unless specifically approved by the Fire Marshal.
(4) The trash and recycling area shall have an enclosure gate of
durable material that will be kept closed when trash is not being
picked up.
(5) Landscaping consisting of six-foot-high evergreen trees at the time
of planting shall be installed to screen the perimeter of the masonry
walls.
(6) Trash containers may not be located in the parking lot without a
trash enclosure.
§ 190-68 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-68
1:304
§ 190-69. Environmental assessment. [Added 12-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 1217128]
It is in the best interest of the Borough and its residents to require that
preliminary assessments be submitted with those applications for
development specified in Subsection A of this section. Such preliminary
assessments should provide a history of the site, prior uses of the land, past
and current owners and the potential pollution-related effects of such uses
on property.
(7) Private trash and recycling pickup shall only be permitted between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Assessment required. The developer shall submit a preliminary
assessment as part of and as a condition for approval for each
application for preliminary major subdivision and planned and cluster
development approval and preliminary major site plan approval. This
required assessment is a checklist item for a complete application.
B. Contents of assessments. The preliminary assessment shall conform to
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's Technical
Requirements for Site Remediation (N.J.A.C. 7:26E) and with industry
standards for Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessments (ASTM
Designation E1527-93) and ASTM Standards for Transaction Screening
(ASTM Designation E1528-93). The preliminary assessment shall be
performed by qualified firms or individuals licensed in the State of New
Jersey, and a preliminary assessment report shall be submitted to the
Borough at the time the applications for development are submitted.
The applicant shall submit six copies with the application to the Joint
Land Use Board Secretary or the Board having jurisdiction. The
minimum required scope of work for the preliminary assessment shall
include the following:
(1) Records review.
(2) Site reconnaissance.
(3) Interviews.
(4) Preparation of report.
C. Review of regulatory agency file data, environmental reports, aerial
photographs, historical photographs and property ownership records.
File data and existing reports should be reviewed to determine if any
existing records show that the site was used for waste disposal or burial
of waste and to determine if the site has previously been identified as a
suspected source or receptor of contamination. The minimum
documents that should be reviewed for this requirement include but are
not limited to:
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-69
1:305
(1) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and State of New Jersey
databases. The EPA and state databases should be reviewed to
determine if national priority lists (Superfund NPL) or state
Superfund sites or other alleged contamination sites are located
within the minimum search distance as specified within the ASTM
standards.
(2) Historical aerial photographs and/or other historical photographs.
If available, aerial photographs from the 1940s to current periods
and/or any other historical photographs should be reviewed and
submitted with the report. The photographs will be inspected for
signs of excavations, vegetation stress, or other features indicative
of contamination, both on and adjacent to the site. The preferred
scale of the aerial photographs is one inch equals 200 feet, and
stereoscopic pairs are recommended.
(3) Recorded land title records and/or chain of title and/or ownership
property tax files indicating property ownership from 1940 to the
present.
(4) Local and county files of the health, zoning, construction code,
environmental, police and fire departments.
D. Site inspection. The applicant shall employ an environmental consultant
licensed by the State of New Jersey to conduct the environmental
assessment. The environmental consultant shall physically inspect the
site. The consultant should collect information on these subjects, as
appropriate, to identify past or current practices which could cause soil
or groundwater contamination or which could cause contamination in
any structures at the property, including but not limited to:
(1) Past and current materials use.
(2) Storage, handling and disposal of wastes at the subject property, as
applicable.
(3) The number and location of chemical storage containers, such as
drums and storage tanks, and the material stored in them.
(4) Transformers and capacitors at or directly adjacent to the property
for signs of leaks, spills and fires.
(5) The properties and structures around the site to document
evidence of obvious and severe impacts from the adjacent
properties on the subject property. Examine exterior of adjacent
buildings and grounds of adjacent properties for evidence of
staining and spills.
E. Interviews. The environmental consultant shall conduct interviews with
local government officials, occupants and adjoining property owners
relative to obtaining information indicating recognized environmental
§ 190-69 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-69
1:306
conditions in connection with the property. The interviews shall
generally confirm the following:
(1) The prior use of the property.
(2) Conditions or events related to environmental conditions.
(3) Questions about helpful documents.
(4) Prior assessments.
(5) Proceedings involving the property.
F. Report. The environmental consultant shall prepare a report that
includes but is not limited to:
(1) A description of the physical site, description of the site history and
the surrounding land use.
(2) A United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographic map
indicating surrounding land use.
(3) A list of all hazardous substances or wastes that are or were at the
site.
(4) A description of past and present production processes, including
water use, disposal discharge and storage practices and
containers.
(5) A list of environmental reports, permits and background
documents reviewed.
(6) A list of interviewees.
(7) A discussion of causes of environmental concern, as applicable,
such as underground storage tanks, PCBs, asbestos and other
applicable environmental hazards.
(8) Statements regarding the presence of wells on site and a statement
regarding the presence or past presence of septic systems or other
subsurface disposal systems.
(9) The result of contact with regulatory agencies concerning potential
contaminated sites in the site vicinity.
(10) Prints of all aerial photographs and other historical photographs.
(11) A table that indicates the dates of property ownership from 1940 to
the present and the corresponding property use(s) for those years,
if known.
(12) A description of the methods of disposal of solid waste generated
at, stored at, transported to or disposed of at the subject site.
§ 190-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-69
1:307
(13) A discussion of potential contamination in the soil and groundwater
of the site.
(14) A description of past remedial operations, including results and
sampling and testing data.
(15) A listing of all federal, state and local governmental permits, past
and present, applied for or obtained for the site.
(16) A list of all administrative, civil and criminal enforcement actions
for alleged violations of environmental laws and regulations,
including their resolution.
(17) Qualifications of individual(s) who performed preliminary
assessment.
G. Preparer qualifications. The individual who conducts the preliminary
assessment shall be an environmental professional, as defined within
the ASTM standard. Individual qualifications must show that the
person(s) conducting the preliminary assessment is qualified to conduct
environmental assessments based upon education and previous project
experience.
H. Certification.
(1) The preliminary assessment report shall include a statement as
follows:
"I certify under penalty of law that I have personally examined
and am familiar with the information submitted in this application
and all attached documents, and that based on my inquiry of those
individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information,
I believe that the submitted information is true, accurate and
complete. I am aware that there are significant civil penalties for
knowingly submitting false, inaccurate or incomplete information
and that I am committing a crime of the fourth degree if I make a
false statement which I do not believe to be true. I am also aware
that if I knowingly direct or authorize the violation of any statute,
I am personally liable for the penalties."
(2) This statement shall be signed by the principal of the company that
performed the preliminary assessment, by the applicant's
professional engineer and by the applicant.
I. Indemnification. The preliminary assessment report shall also include
the following statement:
§ 190-69 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-69
1:308
"The applicant hereby indemnifies the Borough, the Borough's
engineers, Borough consultants and engineers and its affiliates against
liability, loss, expense, lien, claim, demand and cause of action of
every kind for damage to property of the applicant and third parties,
including fines or penalties, attorney's fees and other costs that result
from activities associated with or the findings of this preliminary
assessment."
J. Waiver. All requests for waiver of requirements of the preliminary
assessment shall be forwarded to the Borough Joint Land Use Board
Secretary or board having jurisdiction of the application. The request
for waiver shall include justification for relieving the standards.
K. Further requirements. Upon review of the preliminary assessment by
the Borough Engineer and upon recommendation of such Engineer, the
Joint Land Use Board may require such other studies, tests or
environmental treatments and remedies as may be determined
reasonable and necessary for the environmental safety and security of
the site, including but not limited to a site investigation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7-26C, 7-26D and 7-26E.
§ 190-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-69
1:309

ARTICLE X
Design Specifications
§ 190-70. General specifications.
Unless otherwise specified by the Borough, all work shall be performed
in accordance with New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction — 1961, as revised. These
specifications shall govern the installation and construction of
improvements in all sections of a subdivision whose final plats have not
received formal Borough approval prior to the effective date of this chapter
and shall apply to all construction work hereafter performed on previously
approved final plats where adherence to the new specifications will not
impose unnecessary hardship by reason of prior commencement of such
construction, prior commitments of contracts or prior delivery of materials.
§ 190-71. Pavement subbase and subdrainage.
A. After the roadway site has been cleared, the Borough Engineer
(hereinafter referred to as the "Inspector"), together with the
engineering representative of the owner, shall make an analysis of the
natural subsoil material and subsoil drainage conditions by borings and
soil analysis.
B. On the basis of the analysis and determination of his professional
judgment as to the minimum standards for fully satisfactory results, the
Borough Engineer shall specify the requirements for subbase,
subdrainage, roadway base and pavement among the alternatives
below. Such requirements shall then be incorporated by the owner in
the final cross sections, profiles and utility plans submitted by him to
the Joint Land Use Board in accordance with §§ 190-27 and 190-28 of
this chapter. The Borough Engineer shall also submit a written report
as to the conformance of the final plans to the requirements he has
specified.
(1) If the natural subsoil contains 15% or less of material passing a No.
200 sieve and has adequate subsurface drainage, the owner shall
be permitted to construct directly upon the graded natural subsoil
pavement of a kind hereinafter specified.
(2) If the natural subsoil contains more than 15% of material passing a
No. 200 sieve and has adequate subsurface drainage, a subbase of
a thickness determined by the Engineer, but in no case less than six
inches thick, shall be constructed. The subbase shall be of road
gravel or similar material containing not more than 12% of material
passing a No. 200 sieve and shall be constructed in accordance
with Division 2, Section 9, of the state specifications.
(3) If the natural subbase contains more than 15% of material passing
a No. 200 sieve and does not have adequate subsurface drainage,
underdrains of such size, location and number, together with
§ 190-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-71
1:311
§ 190-72. Pavement.
access facilities as determined by the Engineer, shall be
constructed in addition to the required subbase. Such underdrains
may be constructed longitudinally on the side of the street and
transverse to the street. Where constructed in the center of the
street, underdrains shall be located with a minimum of 18 inches
clearance from the sanitary sewer. The trench in which
underdrains specified for roadway subsurface drainage purposes
are laid shall be filled with crushed stone or washed pebbles from
3/8 inch to 3/4 inch in size for a minimum of six inches below, on
both sides of and above the pipe, and the balance of the trench
from the top of the stone or washed pebbles to the subbase shall
be filled with approved porous material for a width at least equal
to the bottom of the trench, with a two-inch layer of salt hay or
untreated paper being placed upon the top of the stone or washed
pebbles. Underdrains shall be Type F, constructed in accordance
with Division 5, Section 1, of the state specifications.
A. Materials.
(1) Bituminous stabilized base course. Materials shall conform to the
requirements specified therefor in Section 2A of the Standard
Specifications of the New Jersey State Highway Department for
Bituminous Stabilized Base Course, stone mix, mix No. 1, except
that the minimum bitumin content shall be 5%.
(2) Surface course. The paving material shall be FABC mix No. 5 as
specified in the New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications, except the minimum percentage of bitumen shall be
6%.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) Subgrade. Before construction of the pavement, the subgrade shall
be in a properly finished condition conforming to the proper line
and grade and free of any soft spots or other deficiencies. Not more
than 24 hours prior to commencing of operations on any subgrade,
the subgrade shall be tested by running a roller of a weight at least
equal to that to be used in the paving operation over the entire
subgrade area. When permitted by the Engineer, testing may be
performed by other equipment, such as loaded trucks. When in the
opinion of the Engineer or his representative the deformation of the
subgrade under such tests is excessive, the subdivider will be
required to stabilize the subgrade in a manner satisfactory to the
Engineer. The subgrade shall not be prepared during freezing
weather or when frozen or when it is unstable.
(2) Bituminous stabilized base course. The method of construction
indicated for materials above shall be used. The base course shall
be laid on a properly prepared subgrade and shall consist of two
§ 190-71 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-72
1:312
§ 190-73. Concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
equal courses unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer.
Upon completion of base course construction, the contractor shall
cut samples from the pavement with a jackhammer, coring machine
or other means suitable to the Engineer. The sample shall be
intact for the full thickness of the base course and shall be of a
size suitable to the Engineer. At least one sample shall be cut for
every 1,000 square yards of base course. Where deficiencies in
the required minimum thickness are noted, at least two additional
cores will be required to determine the extent of such deficiency.
The average thickness of the base course as determined by any
five or more samples representing continuous areas of pavement
shall be not less than five inches or six inches, and the minimum
thickness permitted at any location will be 4 1/2 inches or 5 1/2
inches. The deficiency shall be made up by increasing the thickness
of the surface course.
(3) Surface course. Prior to placing of the surface course, the
contractor shall repair any defects in the base course. Where
cracking or any other type of failure has occurred in the base
course, the contractor shall completely remove the base course,
stabilize the subgrade if necessary and construct new base course.
Where the deficiency involves depressions or raveling in the
surface of the base course, the repair may be made by skin
patching with a suitable bituminous material.
C. For checking of gutter drainage, the subdivider shall supply sufficient
water at the high points of the streets and shall run said water into the
gutters in order to determine whether or not gutter grades are
satisfactory. Wherever puddles occur, he shall skin patch the base
course to achieve proper grades in the gutters. After repair of the base
course, a tack coat shall be applied as specified in Section 3.10 of the
New Jersey State Highway Department Standard Specifications.
D. In the event of any deficiency in the surface course, such as raveling,
depressions, cracking, etc., such deficiencies shall be repaired by
removing the surface course and replacing with new material.
E. All equipment and methods of construction shall conform to the New
Jersey State Highway Department Standard Specifications of 1961,
except that only one roller may be used where the area to be paved is
sufficiently small, in the opinion of the Engineer, to make the second
roller unnecessary.
A. Materials. Curbs, sidewalks and aprons shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete prepared in accordance with Division 3, Section 12, of
the state specifications, except as modified by the following mixture and
construction specifications:
(1) Mixture.
§ 190-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-73
1:313
Mix No. 1
Curbs, Gutters and
Streets
Mix No. 2
Sidewalks
Water-cement ratios
(maximum gallons/bag)
5.5 6
Cement content
(minimum bags)
6.6 6
Air content 6% ± 1% 6% ± 1%
Aggregate size (inches) 3/4 -1 3/4 -1
Slump (inches) 3 ± 1 3 ± 1
Fine aggregate
(maximum)
40% 40%
Strength (pounds per
square inch)
4,200 3,750
(2) Joint filler shall be cellular compression material conforming to the
requirements therefor of the Standard Specifications of the New
Jersey State Highway Department, as amended and revised to date.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) The contractor shall make all necessary excavations or
embankments for the construction and dispose of surplus
materials. No filling shall be done below the proposed curb or
gutter except when absolutely necessary, in which case such fill
shall be made with clean sand or approved gravel and thoroughly
tamped before concrete is laid thereon. All soft spots shall be
thoroughly tamped or, if necessary, soft or spongy material shall be
removed and clean sand or approved gravel refilled in its place.129
(2) Backfill for curb. Within 72 hours after curbing is completed and
forms removed, the contractor shall backfill to the top of the curb in
back and to the established gutter grade in front. Backfill shall be
made with the materials excavated, except that any large or frozen
lumps, wood, boulders or other foreign matter shall be removed
before placing. Backfill shall be thoroughly compacted.
(3) Forms. Forms for concrete may be of lumber or steel. They shall be
straight and of sufficient strength to prevent warping or bulging
and to retain the concrete accurately in position. All mortar and
dirt shall be removed from forms which have been previously used.
Forms shall be well staked to the proposed lines and grades, and
their upper edges shall conform to the finished surface of the curb.
All forms shall be thoroughly wetted immediately before concrete is
deposited against them.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-73 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-73
1:314
(4) Concrete. Concrete construction, including curing, shall conform to
the applicable requirements of the section on concrete structures
contained elsewhere herein.130 The concrete shall be tamped and
spaded or vibrated so that the forms are completely filled, the
concrete is thoroughly compacted and mortar is flush with the face
and top.
(5) Joints.
(a) Concrete curbs and gutters. Expansion joints shall be provided
at intervals of 20 feet or when new construction abuts existing
construction. The expansion joints shall be filled with 1/2 inch
of thick cellular compression material to within 1/2 inch of the
top and face of the curb and to within 1/4 inch of the top of the
gutter. Dummy joints shall be provided at alternate twenty-foot
intervals.
(b) Concrete sidewalks and aprons. Expansion joints 1/2 inch wide
shall be provided at intervals of 20 feet where the new paving
abuts curb or old work. The expansion joints shall be filled with
1/2 inch of thick cellular compression material to within 1/4
inch of the top of the paving. For sidewalks, surface grooves
shall be cut with an approved tool at least 1/4 inch thick at
right angles to the line of the sidewalk and at intervals equal to
the width of the sidewalk. Where new work abuts existing
sidewalk, the surface grooves shall be spaced to conform to the
lines of the abutting walk. All surface edges shall be rounded to
a radius of 1/2 inch.
(6) Curb finish. Before initial set, the top of the curb and the gutter
shall be finished with a wood float to an even, smooth, dense
surface. As soon as the forms can be removed, the face of the curb
shall be given the same finish. Exposed edges shall be neatly
rounded to a radius of 1/2 inch. The finished curb shall be true to
the required grades, lines, dimensions and curvatures. Completed
work shall be protected from traffic and the elements and shall be
thoroughly wetted and kept moist for at least one day. Damaged,
broken or cracked work shall be renewed by the contractor at his
own sole cost and expense.
(7) Concrete sidewalk and apron finish. The finish shall be with a wood
float, followed by brooming to a neat and workmanlike surface.
Exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a radius of 1/2 inch. The
concrete shall be cured as provided elsewhere herein. The sidewalk
and grass shall slope at a rate of 1/4 inch per foot toward top of
curbline except as otherwise amended by the Borough Engineer.
(8) Concrete work in cold weather. No concrete shall be poured
between December 1 and March 1 of each year without the prior
130. Editor's Note: See § 190-74.
§ 190-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-73
1:315
§ 190-74. Concrete structures.
expressed written permission of the Engineer. Where such written
permission is obtained, the Engineer shall specify the appropriate
procedures to be followed from the state specifications, whose
requirements shall also apply from March to November in cold
weather conditions.
(9) Concrete curbs. Concrete curbs shall be constructed in accordance
with Division 5, Section 5, of the state specifications, except that
the mixture shall be as designated in these specifications. True
joints shall be placed on curb at twenty-foot intervals. Backfilling
for curbs shall be made within 72 hours after construction. Curb
dimensions shall be six inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at
the bottom and 18 inches deep. Unless otherwise required by the
Engineer, the reveal shall be six inches except at driveways, where
a two-inch reveal shall be used. Where the curb is to be constructed
along lines having a radius of 250 feet or less, securely anchored
curved forms shall be used. Multiple ten-foot-long tangent straight
forms will be permitted for curved curbs where the radius exceeds
250 feet, provided that the ends of the tangents are finished to
prevent the appearance of sharp angles. At street intersections, the
curb corners shall have a minimum radius of 25 feet unless
conditions are such that minimum radius of 25 feet is not
practicable. Where such conditions may occur, the owners shall
obtain written permission from the Engineer to decrease the
radius.
A. Materials.
(1) Cement used shall conform to the following requirements of ASTM
as amended to date:
(a) Standard portland cement: ASTM Designation C-150 Type 1.
(b) High early-strength portland cement: ASTM Designation C-150
Type 3.
(c) Air-entraining portland cement: ASTM Designation C-175 Type
1-A.
(d) Air-entraining agent shall be Vinsol resin or Darex A.E.A.
(2) Aggregate, both fine and coarse, shall conform to the requirements
therefor of the New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications, as amended and revised to date.
(3) Water shall be clean, fresh and free of oils, acids, salts, organic
matter or other injurious substances. Unless otherwise provided,
all concrete shall be air-entrained, having 4% to 7% of entrained
air, and shall be produced by using standard portland cement with
or without additional additive as may be required.
§ 190-73 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-74
1:316
(4) Reinforcing steel shall be intermediate grade deformed bars
conforming to ASTM Designation A-15 and ASTM Designation
A-432, as amended and revised to date.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) The Engineer will determine the slump ranges within which the
contractor must work. Ready-mix or transit-mix concrete may be
used if obtained from sources approved by the Engineer.
Equipment used to proportion and mix concrete on the job is
subject to the approval of the Engineer.
(2) Forms shall conform to the shape, lines, dimensions and grades
shown on the plans. They shall be firmly braced, tight and
substantial so as to prevent movement, bulging and mortar
leakage. Wherever concrete will be exposed to view, forms shall be
smooth and clean.
(3) Forms for footings may be omitted wherever soil and workmanship
permit accurate excavation to the size required. All forms shall be
completely removed.
(4) Reinforcements shall be accurately cut, bent and placed in
accordance with the plans. They shall be free of excessive scale or
any foreign material that would tend to reduce bond. They shall be
securely supported, tied and fastened to prevent movement while
concrete is being placed.
(5) Subgrades, excavations and soil bases for foundations and slabs
shall be properly finished to the prescribed lines, grades and
dimensions and shall be approved by the Engineer before concrete
is placed. All areas to receive concrete shall be free of frost, foreign
matter and excessive water; provided, however, that forms and soil
surfaces shall be uniformly damp when the concrete is placed.
(6) Concrete shall be handled and placed so as to avoid any
segregation. Concrete which has begun to set or which has been
contaminated with foreign materials or to which too much water
has been added shall not be used. Pouring of concrete shall
generally be a continuous operation until the placing of an
individual section has been completed. Concrete shall be
thoroughly compacted with vibrators or by other suitable means.
(7) All concrete shall be finished by screeding and floating to the
required lines and grades. Unless otherwise specified, all work
shall have a wood float finish; provided, however, that the
contractor shall provide other finishes when so required by the
plans or specifications or so directed by the Engineer.
(8) After the concrete has been poured, it shall be kept continuously
set for a period of one day or longer as directed by the Engineer.
§ 190-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-74
1:317
§ 190-75. Water supply.
Fire hydrants shall be as manufactured by the Kennedy or Mueller Valve
Company or other type approved by the Fire Marshal. Operating and cap
nuts shall be one-and-one-half-inch pentagon. They shall be equipped with
two hose nozzles and one steamer nozzle, size and threads to be in
accordance with local fire company requirements. They shall have a
provision for six-inch connection to the main. Minimum valve opening for
the hydrant shall be 4 1/4 inches.
§ 190-76. Sanitary sewers.
Curing compound may be substituted for water, but in all cases
curing shall be done in a manner approved by the Engineer.
(9) Expansion joints, dummy joints, construction joints and other
appurtenances shall be provided as shown on the plans. Expansion
joints shall have joint filler of the thickness indicated, which shall
extend the full depth of the concrete.
(10) After removal of forms, all permanently exposed surfaces shall be
cleaned of stains and dirt, and all surface defects which do not
impair structural strength shall be repaired by cutting and
patching in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
(11) Concrete shall not be poured when the atmospheric temperature is
below 40° F. or when there is any precipitation, unless precautions
satisfactory to the Engineer have been taken to prevent any
damage to the work. Precautions necessary to avoid freezing of the
concrete shall be in accordance with the current recommendations
of the American Concrete Institute.
A. Materials.
(1) Cast-iron pipe and fittings. Cast-iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast
cement lined and shall conform to the requirements of the
American Standards Association specifications therefor, as
amended and revised to date. In general, cast-iron pipe shall be
thickness Class 22 for nominal pipe diameters of 12 inches and less
and Class B for sizes 14 inches and greater. Cast-iron saddles shall
be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
(2) Asbestos-cement pipe and fittings. Asbestos-cement pipe and
fittings shall conform to the requirements of the American Society
for Testing and Materials specifications therefor, as amended and
revised to date. Except where required for special conditions such
as excessive depth, asbestos-cement pipe and fittings shall be
nonpressure and in no case less than Class 2400. All asbestoscement
pipe and fittings shall be furnished complete with sleeve
and gasket-type couplings designed for use with the size and class
of pipe specified.
§ 190-74 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-76
1:318
(3) Vitrified clay pipe and fittings. Vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall
conform to the requirements of the American Society for Testing
and Materials specifications therefor, as amended and revised to
date. Except where required for special conditions such as
excessive depth, vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall be extrastrength
or Vitra-Chem. All vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall have
factory-fabricated gasket-type couplings with O-ring joints which
conform to the American Society for Testing and Materials
specifications therefor, as amended and revised to date.
(4) Concrete. Any concrete required for cradles, pads, drop
connections at manholes and any other miscellaneous items shall
be 4,000 pounds per square inch conforming to the requirements
set forth elsewhere herein.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) Excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements set forth
for subsurface structure excavation. The contractor shall provide
adequate equipment and so operate it as to maintain an essentially
dry excavation, stable trench bottoms, suitable working conditions
and protection from water damage throughout and until the
completion of the work.
(2) Pipe shall be laid in straight lines between manholes except when
otherwise specifically provided or directed by the Engineer. When
deviation from a straight line is permitted, the deflection of each
joint shall not exceed the manufacturer's recommended maximum
for the type of joint and size of pipe being installed. All pipe shall be
laid to uniform grades between manholes.
(3) Before making each joint, the ends of the pipes and all joint
members shall be thoroughly cleaned. All jointing shall be done in
strict accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and
directions of the Engineer.
(4) No defective or leaking pipe, fittings, joints, connection, manholes
or other parts of the work will be acceptable. All visible leakage of
any description, no matter where located, shall be corrected by the
contractor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer, whether or not
the total leakage into the sewer is within the allowable maximum as
determined by infiltration tests. Internal inspection by the Borough
Television Inspection Unit shall be made after heavy construction
traffic has ceased and before top course of FABC is installed.
(5) Infiltration tests shall be made when and as directed by the
Engineer, and no connections to flowing lines shall be made until
the testing is complete and satisfactory results have been obtained.
The contractor shall furnish all labor, material and equipment
necessary for the infiltration tests.
§ 190-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-76
1:319
§ 190-77. Storm drainage.
(6) No section of sanitary sewer between adjacent manholes will be
considered satisfactory or acceptable when the rate of infiltration
thereinto exceeds 100 gallons per inch of internal diameter per
mile of sewer per day, and no section of sanitary sewer one mile or
more in length will be considered satisfactory or acceptable when
the rate of infiltration thereinto exceeds 1/2 of the above specified
rate. Leakage in excess of the above shall be located and corrected
by the contractor. Where deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer, exfiltration tests by use of air or water may be required in
lieu of infiltration tests.
(7) Y-branches and service laterals which are not to be immediately
connected to flowing lines shall be securely plugged with an
approved type of plug which will provide a permanently watertight
seal.
(8) The contractor shall accurately record the station of each Y-branch
placed and the direction of the Y. He shall also show the location of
each Y-branch on his copy of the plans and permanently mark each
location with a crosscut on the curb or a hub stake driven at the
curbline.
(9) Drop connections at manholes and concrete pads at service risers
shall be constructed as shown on the detail sheet of the plans and
at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer.
All concrete work shall conform to the requirements as set forth
elsewhere herein.
(10) When so required by the Engineer, the contractor shall flush such
newly completed sewers as may be designated by the Engineer in
order to remove any foreign matter which may have accumulated
therein during construction. The contractor shall furnish all labor,
material, equipment and water necessary for flushing and shall
provide for the disposal of water used for flushing.
A. Materials.
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform
to the requirements of the American Society for Testing and
Materials specifications therefor, as amended and revised to date.
Unless otherwise specified herein, reinforced concrete pipe shall
be Class III, Wall B.
(2) Corrugated metal pipe.
(a) Corrugated metal pipe and pipe arch shall conform to the
requirements of the American Association of State Highway
Officials specifications therefor, as amended and revised to
date, and conform to the following gauge requirements:
§ 190-76 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-77
1:320
Diameter
(inches)
Gauge
(aluminum)
Gauge
(corrugated)
15 14 16
18 12 16
21 12 16
24 12 14
30 12 14
36 10 12
42 10 12
48 10 10
54 8 10
60 8 8
(b) For pipe diameters in excess of 60 inches, the specific design
shall be approved by the Engineer.
(c) Corrugated metal pipe and pipe arch shall be fully bituminouscoated
inside and outside in accordance with current American
Railway Engineering Association specifications and shall have
bituminous paved inverts. The invert paving shall fill the
valleys of the corrugations a minimum of 1/8 inch. For round
pipe the invert shall cover not less than 25% of the inside
perimeter of the pipe, and for pipe arch the invert paving shall
cover not less than 40% of the inside perimeter of the pipe.
Corrugated metal pipe shall be permitted only by specified
written approval of the Borough Engineer.
(3) Concrete. Concrete of a strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch
conforming to the requirements set forth elsewhere herein shall be
used for the construction of concrete cradles and in making
connections to existing drainage structures.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) Excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements for
subsurface structure excavation. The contractor shall provide
adequate equipment and so operate it as to maintain an essentially
dry excavation, stable trench bottoms, suitable working conditions
and protection from water damage throughout and until the
completion of the work.
(2) Pipe shall be laid in straight lines between drainage structures
except when otherwise specifically provided. When deviation from
a straight line is permitted, the deflection of each joint shall not
exceed the manufacturer's recommended maximum for the type of
joint and size of pipe being installed. All pipe shall be laid to
uniform grades.
§ 190-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-77
1:321
§ 190-78. Manholes, inlets and catch basins.
(3) Each section of pipe shall be solidly bedded in the trench bottom
and shall be supported for its full length except where excess
excavation has been made for joints. Before making each joint, the
ends of the pipes and all joint members shall be thoroughly
cleaned. All jointing shall be done in strict accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(4) No defective or leaking pipe, joints, connections, manholes, inlets
or other parts of the work will be acceptable. All visible leakage of
any description, no matter where located, shall be corrected by the
contractor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
(5) Except when necessary to maintain a flow, storm drains shall not be
placed in embankment until the embankment has been constructed
and consolidated to proposed finished grade or subgrade or to an
elevation not less than three feet above the proposed top of pipe,
whichever is lower. After an embankment has been so constructed,
trenches for storm drainage shall be excavated as hereinabove
specified.
(6) When so required by the Engineer, the contractor shall flush such
newly completed drains as may be designated by the Engineer in
order to remove any foreign matter which may have accumulated
therein during construction.
(7) The contractor shall furnish all labor, material, equipment and
water necessary for flushing and shall provide for the disposal of
water used for flushing.
(8) The locations of existing pipes and structures shown on the plans
are approximate, and before construction the contractor shall
determine the exact locations of all existing pipes and structures in
the vicinity of the proposed work. Connections to existing pipes and
structures shall be made in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
A. Materials.
(1) Concrete. Concrete shall conform to the requirements specified
elsewhere herein.
(2) Concrete block. Concrete block for the construction of manholes,
inlets and catch basins shall conform to the requirements of the
American Society for Testing and Materials specifications therefor,
as amended and revised to date. Concrete blocks for manholes
shall have the required radius and batter.
(3) Brick. Brick shall be Grade MA, conforming to the American
Society for Testing and Materials specifications therefor, as
amended and revised to date.
§ 190-77 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-78
1:322
§ 190-79. Subsurface structure excavation.
(4) Mortar. Mortar shall be one-to-two cement and mortar.
(5) Iron castings. Iron castings shall conform to the requirements of
the American Society for Testing and Materials specifications for
gray iron casting, as amended and revised to date, supplemented
as follows: castings shall have to be boldly filleted and risers shall
be sharp and perfect. The castings shall be true to pattern in form
and dimension, free of pouring faults, sponginess, cracks,
blowholes and other defects which affect their strength and value
for the service intended. The bearing surfaces of frames, covers
and grates shall be fitted together so as to prevent rocking and the
pieces matchmarked.
(6) Ladder rungs. Ladder rungs shall be fabricated of rolled wrought
iron or aluminum conforming to the current American Society for
Testing and Materials specifications therefor and shall be subject to
the approval of the Engineer.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) Excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements of
subsurface structure excavation. Manholes, inlets and catch basins
shall be constructed in accordance with the standard details shown
on the plans. Unless otherwise specified or directed, manholes,
inlets and catch basins may be constructed of either brick, concrete
block or concrete of a strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch.
(2) Concrete construction shall conform to applicable requirements
elsewhere herein.
(3) Concrete blocks and bricks shall be laid with vertical joints
staggered. Joints shall be not more than 1/2 inch thick and shall be
completely filled with mortar. The masonry shall be carried to such
a height that a mortar joint not more than 1/2 inch thick will be
required for setting the head casting without using split blocks or
bricks. Outside walls shall be plastered with a five-eighths-inchthick
coat of mortar, troweled to a smooth finish. Inside walls shall
have wiped joints.
(4) Outside walls of sanitary sewer manholes shall receive two coats of
an approved coal-tar pitch.
A. Materials.
(1) Material for backfill, if acceptable to the Engineer or his
representative, shall be the material excavated, except that any
large and frozen lumps, wood, boulders or other foreign matter
shall be removed before placing.
§ 190-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-79
1:323
(2) If the excavated material is not acceptable as backfill material, all
excavations shall be backfilled with run-of-bank sand or gravel. All
excess excavated material will be disposed of by the contractor in a
manner acceptable to the Engineer.
B. Methods of construction.
(1) The contractor shall do all excavation of whatever substances
encountered to the depth shown on the plans.
(2) Excavation shall not be carried below the required level except
where unstable soil is encountered. The Engineer shall determine
the depth of removal of unstable soil, and the contractor shall, at
the Engineer's direction, remove and replace the same with gravel,
crushed stone or crushed slag thoroughly tamped. Whenever
excavation has been made below the required level, it shall be
replaced with gravel, crushed stone or crushed slag, which shall be
thoroughly tamped.
(3) Ground adjacent to the excavations shall be graded to prevent
water from running in. The contractor shall remove any water
accumulating in excavations by pumping or other suitable means.
(4) The contractor shall do all bracing, shoring and sheeting necessary
to prevent failure of the banks of the excavation and to protect the
work, workmen, public, underground and aboveground utilities and
structures, pavements and public and private property. No bracing,
shoring or sheeting shall be placed below the bottom of the pipe or
structure unless approved by the Engineer.
(5) The contractor shall provide, install and operate an adequate wellpoint
system of dewatering when necessary to stabilize trench
bottoms and banks or other excavations or when necessary to
protect the work, workmen, public, underground and aboveground
utilities and structures, pavements and public and private property.
The well-point system or portions thereof shall be removed by the
contractor upon completion of backfill, and the holes remaining
from the points shall be backfilled and thoroughly tamped.
(6) Excavations for manholes and other structures shall have a twelveinch
minimum clearance and twenty-four-inch maximum clearance
on all sides. The width of trenches for pipes shall not be less than
16 inches and not more than 22 inches in excess of the outside
diameter of the pipe. Rocks and boulders present in excavations
shall be removed within six inches of the pipe. Banks of excavation,
unless otherwise indicated or allowed, shall be vertical.
(7) Preliminary excavation shall be made only to a depth of three
inches above the final depth of any trench or other excavation. The
remaining depth shall be carefully excavated, shaped and formed
with hand tools immediately preceding laying of pipe or placing
concrete. Trench bottoms shall be accurately formed to receive and
§ 190-79 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-79
1:324
support the bottom of the barrel of the pipe. Additional excavation
shall be made in pipe trenches at the pipe joints and to prevent any
possibility of a pipe resting on the bell rather than the barrel.
(8) After the structure has been completed, inspected and approved or,
in the case of pipe, after each joint has been made, inspected and
approved, backfilling shall proceed immediately. Where pipe has
been laid, this shall be done in four-inch layers of suitable fine
material, each layer thoroughly tamped, to a height of 12 inches
above the top of the pipe. The remainder of the trench and the
entire excavation for all structures other than pipe shall be
backfilled in nine-inch layers, loose measure, each layer thoroughly
tamped. Dampening of the material to be tamped may be required
by the Engineer.
(9) Puddling or flushing in lieu of tamping may be used if approved by
the Engineer or may be required by the Engineer. Shoring,
sheeting and bracing of any kind shall be withdrawn as the
backfilling proceeds, except that the Engineer may require such
bracing to be left in place if it has been placed below the bottom of
any structure or pipe or if he deems it necessary in order to protect
adjacent structures, utilities or property.
§ 190-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-79
1:325

ARTICLE XI
Capital Improvements Program and Project Review
§ 190-80. Preparation of capital improvements program.
§ 190-81. Adoption of capital improvements program.
Whenever the Joint Land Use Board has prepared a capital improvement
program pursuant to § 190-80 of this chapter, it shall recommend such
program to the Borough Council, which may adopt such program with any
modification approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Borough Council, with the reasons for said modification
recorded in the minutes.
A. The Borough Council may authorize the Joint Land Use Board from time
to time to prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of at least six years, and amendments thereto.
Such program may encompass major projects being currently
undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with federal, state,
county and other public funds or under federal, state or county
supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption by the
Borough Council, constitute the capital budget of the Borough as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et seq. The program shall classify projects
in regard to the urgency and need for realization and shall recommend
a time sequence for their implementation. The program may also
contain the estimated cost of each project and indicate probable
operating and maintenance costs and probable revenues, if any, as well
as existing sources of funds or the need for additional sources of funds
for the implementation and operation of each project. The program
shall, as far as possible, be based on existing information in the
possession of the departments and agencies of the Borough and shall
take into account public facility needs indicated by the prospective
development shown in the Master Plan of the Borough or as permitted
by other municipal land use controls.
B. In preparing the program, the Joint Land Use Board shall confer in a
manner deemed appropriate by the Board with the Mayor, the chief
fiscal officer, other municipal officials and agencies and the school
board or boards.
C. Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement of
persons and establishments caused by each recommended project.
D. In addition to any of the requirements in Subsections A, B and C of this
section, whenever the Joint Land Use Board is authorized and directed
to prepare a capital improvements program, every department,
authority or agency shall, upon request of the Joint Land Use Board,
transmit to said Board a statement of all capital projects proposed to be
undertaken by such municipal department, authority or agency during
the term of the program for study, advice and recommendation by the
Joint Land Use Board.
§ 190-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-82
1:327
§ 190-82. Review of capital projects.131
Whenever the Joint Land Use Board shall have adopted any portion of the
Master Plan, the Borough Council or other public agency having jurisdiction
over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure
of any public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such
project, shall refer the action involving such specific project to the Joint
Land Use Board for review and recommendation in conjunction with such
Master Plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation or
until 45 days have elapsed after such reference without receiving such
recommendation. This requirement shall apply to action by a housing,
parking, highway, special district or other authority, redevelopment agency,
school board or other similar public agency, state, county or municipality.
In addition, this requirement shall apply to any public entity taking any
action to permit the location, erection, use or maintenance of an outdoor
advertising sign required to be permitted pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 413
(N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq.).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-82 LINDENWOLD CODE § 190-82
1:328
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 190-83. Construction in environmentally sensitive areas.
§ 190-84. Continuance of pending applications.
All applications for development prior to the effective date of this chapter
may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on any
such applications shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 190-85. Copies to be filed.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all ordinances
of the municipality relating to land use, such as subdivision, zoning and site
plan review ordinances.
§ 190-86. Violations and penalties.132
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 and Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of this Code.
A. Floodplains. No construction or development of any kind shall be
permitted within the area of a stream encroachment line based upon a
one-hundred-stream unless a stream encroachment permit has been
obtained from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Impoundments. No construction, fillings, excavating, development or
encroachment of any kind shall be permitted in any man-made or
natural impoundment, lake, pond, detention area or retention area
unless the proposed encroachment has been reviewed and approved by
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Joint Land Use Board in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Article VII of this chapter.
132. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 190-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-86
1:329
Chapter 195
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drive-in restaurants and shopping
centers — See Ch. 137.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 229, Art. II.
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and also
includes the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or custody
of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court
or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, and includes
any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front
or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of
business, and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as parking lots or other
vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the person
charged with violating this chapter, or in the case of a minor, not owned by
or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 195-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 195-3. Discretion of police officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 195-2, he may, if he
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 195-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom or in
whose hearing they are made.
§ 190-86 LINDENWOLD CODE § 195-3
1:330
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 195-4. Loitering by minors.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter.
§ 195-5. Notice of violation.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation
of this chapter, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the
Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 195-6. Presumptive evidence.
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
§ 195-5 the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this chapter, it
shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor
did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
§ 195-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
587133]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this
Code
Chapter 199
MERCANTILE LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-4. Sanitary standards — See Ch. 386.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 195-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-7
1:331

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 199-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to require individuals and businesses to
acquire and maintain a Borough-issued mercantile license. The purpose of
the Borough license requirement is to promote the public health, safety,
morals and welfare of the Borough of Lindenwold. The license will enable
law enforcement officers and public and safety officials to better serve
the businesses and community by enabling better access to information
about the businesses' property, location, hours of operation and activity. The
Borough licensing requirement is not a tax. The Borough license seeks to
further the independent interests of the Borough of Lindenwold described
herein. The Borough hereby requires all individuals, persons and
businesses, including those that require a state-issued license for the
operation of their business or trade, to comply with the licensing
requirements in this chapter.
§ 199-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS (as used in both singular and plural sense) — Includes all kinds
of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all
other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines,
vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for
private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in
the Borough of Lindenwold, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and the acts
amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto.
CANVASSER and SOLICITOR — Any person traveling either by foot, wagon,
automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to
take orders for sales of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property
of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not such
person is collecting advance payments on such sales. Further, these terms
shall include any person who hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment,
shop or any other place within the Borough of Lindenwold for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — A machine used for the sale of
cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and/or matches and controlled by the insertion
of a coin or coins.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL* — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
§ 199-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-2
1:333
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:
FIRE-AND-OTHER-ALTERED-GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock
and goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including
but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's; adjustments; alterations;
assignee's; bankrupt's; benefits of administrator's; benefit of creditors';
benefit of trustee; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee;
creditor's end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business;
insolvent's; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage
sales; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business.
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaged in distributing
commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed
to subscribers thereof, for himself or any other person, upon any of the
public and private streets, places and premises other than his own premises
in the Borough of Lindenwold. This definition shall not prohibit the sale
of newspapers, regularly published, through newspaper boys, newsmen or
from news store premises in the Borough of Lindenwold.
INSIGNIA or INSIGNE — Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any
other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with
any license.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine operated
mechanically, electrically or otherwise which, upon the insertion of a coin,
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
things; or
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishments or other activity for the purpose of either, directly or
indirectly, promoting the interests thereof by sale; or
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any show, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
price is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
C.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; and
D.
E. Which is not distributed on a regular basis.
§ 199-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-2
1:334
slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It
shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball,
mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto under whatever name they may be included.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL* — Any printed matter or written matter,
any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, paper,
booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
letter or literature not included in the aforesaid definition of "commercial
handbill."
PEDDLER — Any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, food,
liquids, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive
vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance, or a person who solicits
orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part
of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter. The term
"peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups, or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES — Includes all land, structures, places and also the equipment
and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also
any personal property which is either affixed to or otherwise used in
connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
REMOVAL-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock and goods on hand and then move to and resume business at a new
location within the Borough of Lindenwold or will then continue business
from other existing locations in the said Borough.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT and ITINERANT
VENDOR — Any person, whether as owner, agent, servant, employee or
consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering
goods, wares and merchandise within the Borough of Lindenwold and who,
in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar or boat, public
rooms in hotels, apartments, shops or any street, alley or other public place
within the Borough for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
§ 199-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-2
1:335
VENDING MACHINE — Any machine or device, whether automatic or not,
controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins, for the vending of service,
food, liquids, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or articles of any type,
kind or description.
* NOTE: The foregoing definitions of "commercial handbill" and
"noncommercial handbill" shall not include any newspaper of general
circulation, as defined by general law, or any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues a year and
sold to the public.
§ 199-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-2
1:336
ARTICLE II
Applicability and Licenses
§ 199-3. License required.
It shall not be lawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct
any business as defined in this chapter or any sale as defined in this chapter,
or to operate or conduct a business as a transient merchant, handbill
distributor, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or
solicitor as defined in this chapter, or operate or put into use any cigarette
vending machine, jukebox, vending machines or mechanical amusement
device, or to use in connection with the foregoing any vehicle, premises,
machine or device, in whole or in part, unless a license or a permit therefor
is first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this
chapter or any other law or ordinance of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 199-4. Scope and applicability.
For the purposes of this chapter, any person shall be deemed engaging in
business and subject to the provisions of this chapter when he does one act
of:
§ 199-5. Responsibility for compliance.
The agents, servants, employees or other representatives of corporations,
partnerships, resident or nonresident individual natural persons, joint
adventurers, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or
unincorporated groups shall be personally responsible for compliance with
this chapter by their principals and by the businesses they represent.
§ 199-6. License requirements for fire and going-out-of-business
sales.
For a going-out-of-business sale or a removal-of-business sale or a fire-orother-
altered-goods sale, no person shall be granted a license unless:
A. Selling any goods or service; or
B. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire; or
C. Acquiring or using any vehicle, machine or device or any premises in
the Borough of Lindenwold for business purposes.
A. He has been the owner of a business as described in the application for
a license hereunder for a period of at least six months prior to the date
of the proposed sale.
B. He has not held a similar sale at the location stated in the application
within one year last past from the date of such application.
C. It applies to only one business and is not conducted or advertised in
cooperation or by participation with any other business.
§ 199-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-6
1:337
§ 199-7. Scope of license; term and transferability.
In cases covered by § 199-6 preceding, the license shall:
§ 199-8. Exemptions.
The provisions of §§ 199-5 and 199-7 preceding shall not apply to or affect:
D. He shall file with the assigned municipal employee a complete
inventory of goods that are to be offered for sale. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
A. Authorize only one type of sale, described in the application, at the
location named therein.
B. Authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory filed with
the assigned municipal employee and forbid additions or replacements.
C. Continue for a period not exceeding three months from the date of
granting of the license and shall not be renewable, assignable or
transferable.
A. Any person acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
§ 199-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-8
1:338
ARTICLE III
Licensing Procedure
§ 199-9. Submission of application.
§ 199-10. Form and content of application.
Said application shall be a written statement upon the forms provided by
the assigned municipal employee and shall contain the following:
A. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this
chapter shall submit an application for such license to the assigned
municipal employee of the Borough of Lindenwold at the Borough Hall,
Lindenwold, New Jersey, which shall be accompanied by the full amount
of the fee chargeable for the license applied for.
B. For all new applicants or changes in ownership with a facility located in
Lindenwold, an inspection is required prior to the issuance of a
mercantile license. The inspection fee is as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-4, Mercantile licenses, Subsection
B. [Added 12-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
A. Previous license history of the applicant and whether any previous
license was suspended or revoked and the reasons therefor. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
B. Statement that applicant is not violating Chapter 365, Zoning, of the
Borough of Lindenwold. If applicant is occupying a nonconforming use,
proof of date of occupancy and operation must be given.
C. Statement that applicant is not in default under the provisions of this
chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the Borough of
Lindenwold, except for current taxes.
D. Such other facts relative to the general personal history of the
applicant, or its officers and managers if said applicant is not an
individual, as to enable the assigned municipal employee to make a fair
determination of the eligibility of the applicant. [Amended 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01]
E. Name of person to whom license will be issued and his residence
address. If applicant is not an individual, then the names, positions and
residence addresses of all officers and managers of the applicant.
F. The premises at which the business is to be carried on and the name
and address of the owner of said premises.
G. If applicant is a tenant, a letter from the landlord granting permission
for said business, and proof of compliance with public health statutes,
codes and licensing of the State of New Jersey and county authorities
such as but not limited to barber shop license, beauty/nail salon,
contractors, etc. [Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
§ 199-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-11
1:339
§ 199-11. Additional information required for certain persons.
In addition to the requirements of § 199-10 preceding, persons applying
for licenses as transient merchants, itinerant merchants, itinerant vendors,
peddlers, solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors shall furnish this
further information on their respective applications or attach the same
thereto:
§ 199-12. Vendors of food products from vehicles within Borough.
A. A listing of all misdemeanors, felonies or violations of any municipal
ordinances for which the applicant has been convicted, the nature of
the offense and the punishment assessed therefor. If the applicant is not
an individual, these provisions shall apply to its officers and managers.
B. The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business.
C. The place or places in the Borough of Lindenwold where applicant
proposes to carry on business, peddle, solicit, canvass or distribute and
the dates he proposes to do so. Hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. [Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
D. The place or places within or without the Borough of Lindenwold where
the applicant within two years next preceding the date of said
application did carry on business, peddle, solicit, canvass or distribute.
E. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, where manufactured and
located, and the proposed method of delivery.
F. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done
and proposed to be done in order to attract customers.
G. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
H. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the
person or persons having the management or supervision of the
applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the
assigned municipal employee may deem proper to fulfill the purposes of
this chapter in the protection of the public good.
I. Three photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be
two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
J. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license registration number or other means of identification and proof
of insurance.
§ 199-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-12
1:340
§ 199-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any person applying for a mercantile license pursuant to § 199-11 as a
transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor,
A. The sellers of any food products from a motor vehicle within the
Borough of Lindenwold shall be subject to the requirements of this
section.
B. Persons covered by this section shall be required to obtain a mercantile
license from the Borough prior to engaging in any commercial activity
within the Borough.
C. The mercantile license shall be issued to a qualifying individual by the
assigned municipal employee following the submission of an
application, payment of the appropriate fee and a clean background
investigation.
D. No mercantile license shall be issued to an individual not legally
residing in the United States or who has been convicted of a crime of
moral turpitude or who does not have valid driving privileges in the
State of New Jersey.
E. The applicant for a mercantile license must, as part of the application,
provide proof of insurance on the vehicle to be used by the applicant
with a minimum coverage of $100,000 per person and $200,000 per
incident and copy of New Jersey vehicle registration. [Amended
5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
F. Every applicant for a mercantile license hereunder shall set forth the
full name and address of the applicant, his or her date of birth, whether
or not he or she is a legal resident of the United States, and whether or
not he or she has ever been convicted of a crime and, if so, the crime
convicted of, the place and date of conviction and the punishment
thereof. Such applicant shall provide a valid driver's license from the
State of New Jersey. Each applicant shall, at the time of filing the
application, report to the Borough Police Department to obtain the
paperwork required for fingerprinting by the state-recommended
vendor. The applicant must consent to his fingerprints being used for
any appropriate background investigation.
G. If the mercantile license is issued, the assigned municipal employee
shall issue a permit card in evidence thereof setting forth the number of
the license and the name, address and date of birth of the license
holder. The permit card shall be signed by the Code Enforcement
Officer and at all times of operation shall be conspicuously displayed in
the vehicle used for the permitted activities. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
H. Provide proof of Camden County Board of Health Inspection. [Added
5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
§ 199-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-13
1:341
canvasser or handbill distributor is subject to a penalty for failure to comply
with any of the provisions. Partial compliance is not sufficient, and the
Borough will exact a penalty as prescribed in § 199-33 and/or prohibit the
person from obtaining a mercantile license. The Borough shall have the
authority to suspend business operations for the failure to comply.
§ 199-14. Ineligibility for license.
No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to a person not of good moral
character. If the applicant is not an individual, these provisions shall apply
to its officers and managers.
§ 199-15. Report by Chief of Police.
Upon request of the assigned municipal employee, the Chief of Police shall
ascertain if the applicant has any criminal record and report in writing
affirmatively or negatively after receipt of fingerprint results, indicating in
his report his approval or disapproval of the granting of a license and giving
his reason therefor.
§ 199-16. Approval or disapproval of application.
After submission of the application and the required fees to the assigned
municipal employee, said officer shall make any investigation necessary and
shall indicate his written approval or disapproval of the license application
within 30 days after the application is filed with the assigned municipal
employee. If approved, the license shall issue forthwith in the name of the
assigned municipal employee. If disapproved, the Municipal Compliance
Officer or the assigned municipal employee shall forthwith notify the
applicant in writing of such disapproval and the reasons therefor, and the
applicant shall have 10 days from receipt of notice of disapproval to appeal
from the decision of the Municipal Compliance Officer or the assigned
municipal employee to the Borough Council of the Borough of Lindenwold,
which after due hearing can affirm or reverse the decision of the Municipal
Compliance Officer or assigned municipal employee.
§ 199-17. Renewal or transfer procedure.
Applications for renewal or transfer of a license shall follow the same
procedure as is outlined in the preceding sections for an original
application.
§ 199-18. Bond required.
Before any mercantile license as provided for by this chapter shall be issued
for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler,
solicitor, canvasser or handbill distributor, the applicant for said mercantile
license shall file with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Lindenwold a
bond running to the Borough of Lindenwold in the sum of $2,000, executed
by the applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business
§ 199-13 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-18
1:342
in the State of New Jersey as surety, which bond is to be approved as to
form by the Borough Solicitor and conditioned as follows:
§ 199-19. Yard or garage sales. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01; 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
Any resident of the Borough of Lindenwold is permitted to conduct two
yard or garage sales on his or her own property during the course of the
year without applying for a license to conduct same. In the event that any
resident wishes to conduct more than two such sales, it shall be necessary
for said resident to apply for a permit for each sale and pay a fee as
prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule. The number of
yard sales are not to exceed four per calendar year. All items must be
removed at the end of the day of the sale.
A. Applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this chapter of the
Borough of Lindenwold and the statutes of the State of New Jersey
respecting the applicant's business.
B. Provide for payment of all judgments and costs rendered against such
applicant for any violation of said chapter and statutes.
C. Provide for payment of all judgments and costs rendered or recovered
against applicant or any of his agents, servants or employees for
damages growing out of any tort or crime committed by the applicant or
any of his agents or employees on any person in the Borough of
Lindenwold while engaged in business within the Borough and for
damages growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced
on any persons transacting such business with such applicant, whether
such misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the
applicant or by his servant, agent or employee, either at the time of
making the sale or through any advertisement of any character
whatsoever printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares
and merchandise sold or any part thereof.
D. Provide that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for
and applied according to the representation of the applicant or his
agents, servants or employees, and further guarantee to any citizen or
resident of the Borough of Lindenwold doing business with the said
applicant or his servants, agents or employees that the property
purchased will be delivered according to the representation of the
applicant or his agents, servants or employees.
§ 199-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-19
1:343

ARTICLE IV
Regulations and Fees
§ 199-20. Payment of license fees.
All license fees shall be due and payable by the 31st of January in each
year. However, in the event that any new business begins operation and
makes application for a mercantile license after July 1 of any given year,
said business shall only be required to pay 50% of the fee for such license.
This fee shall be rounded to the next highest dollar.
§ 199-21. Late fees. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01;
5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
Any license not renewed on or before January 31 annually shall be subject
to a late fee as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule,
§ 150-4, for every month that the mercantile license is not renewed. Any
license not renewed by the last day of January may be suspended or revoked
by the Borough of Lindenwold as found in Chapter 1, § 1-1.
§ 199-22. Term of license; transfer and fee. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
All mercantile licenses shall commence as of the first day of January in each
year and shall expire on the 31st day of December next. Upon the transfer
of location of a licensed business to a new location within the Borough of
Lindenwold or upon the sale of a going business remaining in the Borough,
the mercantile license may be transferred, provided the annual license fee
for the year has been paid and a transfer fee as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-4, is paid to the assigned municipal
employee.
§ 199-23. Issuance of duplicate license. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
A duplicate mercantile license may be issued by the assigned municipal
employee to replace any license previously issued, which license has been
lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of
the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a
notary public of the State of New Jersey attesting to such fact and payment
to the assigned municipal employee of a fee as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-4.
§ 199-24. Rebates or refunds.
No rebate or refund of any mercantile license fee or any part thereof shall
be made by reason of retirement of licensee from business or by reason of
the nonuse of such license for all or any portion of the licensed year, or
by reason of a change of location of business, or by reason of fire or other
accident or other casualty rendering the use of such license ineffective.
§ 199-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-25
1:345
§ 199-25. Contents of license.
Each mercantile license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the
following:
§ 199-26. Conduct and responsibilities of licensees.
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such
business is to be conducted.
B. The address of each business to be licensed.
C. The amount of license fee therefor.
D. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
E. Such other information as the assigned municipal employee shall
determine.
A. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business. New business or
change of ownership must be inspected and fee paid as listed in § 150-4
before license will be issued. [Amended 5-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
B. Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times by the
Municipal Compliance Officer.
C. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
D. Avoid all forbidden, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices,
businesses or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare.
E. Refrain from operating the licensed business on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period when his license is
revoked or suspended.
F. Post and maintain his license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times. Moreover, in the case of cigarette
vending machines, jukeboxes, vending machines and mechanical
amusement devices, the license or licenses herein provided for shall be
posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine or
device in the premises wherein the same is to be operated or
maintained to be operated, and said vending machine or device shall
have affixed thereto any insignia delivered for use therewith upon the
outside of the same so that it may be seen at all times.
G. Carry and display at all times his license and identification to any
person requesting the same, if licensee is a transient merchant,
itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor, canvasser or
handbill distributor.
§ 199-25 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-26
1:346
§ 199-27. License fees. [Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1333;
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
The license fees to be paid annually, unless otherwise specified, for
conducting the business or businesses herein named at the premises or
premises to be designated in the license or licenses issued hereunder, shall
be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-4.
H. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person or allow any other
person to use and display or to destroy, damage or remove or to have in
his possession, except as authorized by the Municipal Compliance
Officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to said
licensee.
§ 199-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-27
1:347

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Penalties; Special Licenses
§ 199-28. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Compliance Officer,
the Mayor and Borough Council and any police officer of the Borough of
Lindenwold to examine all places of business and all persons of the Borough
of Lindenwold to determine if this chapter has been complied with and
to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same. Further, it shall be their duty to require any person
seen peddling, soliciting, canvassing or distributing and who is not known
by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his peddler's, solicitor's,
canvasser's or distributor's license, as the case may be, and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 199-29. Exemptions from licensing.
No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the
Borough of Lindenwold of any property purchased or acquired in good faith
from such person at his regular place of business outside the Borough
where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 199-30. Special licenses.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lindenwold may authorize the
issuance of a special mercantile license, without the payment of any license
fee or other charge therefor, to any public, charitable, educational, literary,
fraternal or religious organization having its location in the Borough of
Lindenwold for the conduct or operation of a temporary nonprofit
enterprise for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or
religious purpose. The applicant, however, shall submit the usual
application form in the manner as hereinbefore required and shall operate,
if granted a mercantile license, in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 199-31. Causes for revocation of license.
Any permit or license granted or issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Borough Council, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
§ 199-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-31
1:349
§ 199-32. Notice of revocation hearing.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license under § 199-31 preceding
shall be given in writing by the Municipal Compliance Officer, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the attention of the licensee,
at his address indicated on his mercantile license application, at least five
days prior to the date set forth for the hearing.
§ 199-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
In addition to the provisions for revocation, the Municipal Compliance
Officer, the Chief of Police, any police officer of the Borough of Lindenwold
or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough may make complaint in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold for any violation of this
chapter or any article, section, subsection or provision thereof. Upon
conviction in such case, for each and every violation the violator shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Any conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
E. Conducting the business licensed under this chapter through the
applicant himself or any of his agents, servants or employees in any
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
F. Pursuant to and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, failure of a
licensee who is an owner of the property affected by the mercantile
license or upon which the licensed business or activity is conducted to
pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to or include
any alcoholic beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the New
Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.134
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 199-31 LINDENWOLD CODE § 199-33
1:350
Chapter 205
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 229, Art. II. Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 205-1. Findings and declaration.
It is found and declared that:
§ 205-2. General prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the Borough.
§ 205-3. Enumeration of specific prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
A. The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within
the limits of the Borough of Lindenwold is a condition which has existed
for some time and the extent and volume of noise is increasing.
B. The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are unusual and unnatural in their
time, place and use affects and is a detriment to the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of
the Borough of Lindenwold. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
C. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the
peace and quiet of the Borough of Lindenwold and its inhabitants.
A. Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device
on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street
or public place of the Borough, except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for any
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling
device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn,
§ 199-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:351
whistle or other device for or operated by engine exhaust; and the use
of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
B. Radios, phonographs. The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine
or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587; 3-11-2009
by Ord. No. 1249]
C. Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
D. Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets particularly between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence or of any person in the vicinity. [Amended 3-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 1249]
E. Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity.
F. Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam
whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon
request of proper Borough authorities.
G. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
H. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
I. Loading, unloading boxes. The creation of loud and excessive noise in
connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
§ 205-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 205-3
1:352
destruction of bales, boxes, crates, containers or any other material.
[Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
J. Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in
case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and
then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may
be granted for a period of three days or less while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days
or less while the emergency continues. If the Building Inspector should
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the
excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss of convenience
would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such
work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded
and during the progress of the work.135
K. Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
L. Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
M. Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale.
N. Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material
over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars,
trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to
disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
O. Street railway cars, operation thereof. The causing, permitting or
continuing of any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the
operation of a street railway car.
P. Pile driver, hammers. The operation between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick,
steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended
by loud or unusual noise. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:353
§ 205-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-17-1978 by Ord. No.
485; 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587136]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a petty disorderly person's offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 220
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 317.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 345.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
339.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 349.
Q. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or
any internal-combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 205-4
1:354
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 1-10-1989 by Ord. No. 836 (Ch. 200 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 220-1. Parking and storage of trailers and tankers. [Amended
3-12-1997 by Ord. No. 1010]
No trailer or tanker of eight wheels or more, either attached to or detached
from a tractor, shall hereinafter be parked, stored or garaged at any
dwelling unit or on any public street or on any lands within the Borough of
Lindenwold with the exception of the Industrial Zone, as it is designated on
the Zoning Map of the Borough of Lindenwold.137
§ 220-2. Temporary parking.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the temporary parking of a tanker or trailer
for the purpose of performing services or making pickups or deliveries
in the regular course of business; provided, however, that the aforesaid
temporary parking of such tanker or trailer shall not exceed three hours.
§ 220-3. Parking of trucks weighing in excess of five tons. [Added
5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1182]
No person shall park a truck, trailer, semitrailer or omnibus having a
registered gross weight in excess of five tons upon any street between the
hours specified.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All county and municipal
streets
Both 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
All
§ 220-4. Parking prohibition. [Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1347]
Parking motor vehicles on certain designated areas shall be prohibited at
the following locations at the following times:
137. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:355
Name of Street Locations
Crossing Way The certain area designated as the north
side of Crossing Way for a distance of 50
feet, plus or minus, from the intersection of
Tavistock Court and Crossing Way to be
designated as "no parking." The Borough
shall erect a no-parking sign at this location,
and shall paint the curb yellow for a distance
of 100 feet beginning at the no-parking sign.
Crossing Way The certain area designated as the south
side of Crossing Way for a distance of 75
feet, plus or minus, from the intersection of
Tavistock Court and Crossing Way to be
designated as "no-parking from here to the
corner" for the time period of 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Egg Harbor Road [Added
7-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
The area designated at the Lindenwold
Police Station and Municipal Court located
at 2001 Egg Harbor Road located on the
right side of the building seven parking
spaces starting back of the building (fence)
toward the front of the building for 70 feet
on designated days when court is scheduled.
Gibbsboro Road [Added
11-6-2013 by Ord. No.
1351]
The area designated as the north side and
south side of Gibbsboro Road from the White
Horse Pike to Hilliards Road.
Spring Garden Street The certain area designated as the east side
of Spring Garden Street for a distance of 75
feet, plus or minus, from the bend where
Spring Garden intersects Crossing Way, shall
be designated as "no parking." The Borough
of Lindenwold shall install a no-parking sign
at approximately 75 feet from the bend
where Spring Garden and Crossing Way
intersect, and such sign shall read "No
parking here to corner 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m." Parking shall be prohibited in that
designated area for the time period of 7:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 220-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-10-2006 by Ord. No.
1182; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 220-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 220-5
1:356
ARTICLE II
Fire Lanes
[Adopted 4-10-1991 by Ord. No. 878 (Ch. 111 of the 1981 Code);
amended 7-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1366]
§ 220-6. Issuance of summonses. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-155]
The Lindenwold Police Department, Executive Fire Inspector and/or Fire
Marshall, of the Lindenwold Fire District, and/or their designee, which shall
include the Code Enforcement Official, are hereby authorized to issue a
summons to any person illegally parked in a designated fire lane upon
receiving a prior authorized form from the owner or its designated
representatives (see Exhibit A).
§ 220-7. Exhibit A.
REQUEST TO LINDENWOLD POLICE DEPARTMENT AND/OR
LINDENWOLD FIRE ADMINISTRATOR TO ISSUE CITATION FOR
VEHICLES IMPROPERLY PARKED IN FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY
I, _____________________________, am the owner or designated representative
of ________________________ located at ____________________________. There
are designated fire lanes on the property.
I am hereby authorizing and requesting the Borough of Lindenwold Police
Department and/or the Executive Fire Administrator of the Lindenwold
Fire District to issue a citation to any person improperly parking or leaving
unattended a motor vehicle in a fire lane at the above location. Thank you
for your cooperation and assistance.
Date
Owner or Designated Representative
Witness
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-7
1:357

ARTICLE III
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 9-17-1984 by Ord. No. 663 (Ch. 129 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 220-8. Spaces to be designated; guidelines.
In all public parking areas, the governing body of the Borough of
Lindenwold shall designate and cause to be marked and posted in
accordance with law parking spaces for the physically handicapped, in
accordance with the following guidelines:
§ 220-9. Designation upon request of owner.
Upon the request of the owner or possessor of private property, the
governing body shall also designate appropriate spaces for handicapped
A. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but not less
than two parking spaces, shall be used for handicapped parking in a
parking facility. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
B. The location of the physically handicapped spaces shall be in an area of
the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to the
building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of
said location shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer in
conjunction and consultation with the owner, except where the location
has been determined by the Joint Land Use Board of the Borough of
Lindenwold. In shopping centers and other multistore facilities, the
handicapped spaces shall be as near to the flagship store as possible
and/or at such other locations as may be agreeable between the Code
Enforcement Officer and the owner. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 1331]
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of access along with the
following wording: "These spaces reserved for physically-handicapped
drivers." The lines designating the area shall be painted in fluorescent
yellow paint, and the center of the space shall have painted thereon the
capital letter H.138
D. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level, paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:359
parking, the use thereof to be subject to the provisions of this article and
the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 220-10. Vehicle identification required; presumption.
§ 220-11. Violations and penalties.139
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)(c), every person convicted of a violation of
a provision of this article or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a fine
of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days' community service on such terms and in such form
as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space designated and
marked as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking
facility unless said vehicle shall have affixed thereto an identification
certificate or marker issued by the New Jersey Director of the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
B. Parking in a handicap space without the aforesaid vehicle identification
shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of the space was not for
the physically handicapped.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 220-11
1:360
ARTICLE IV
School Buses
[Adopted 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1167; amended in its entirety
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1175]
§ 220-12. Bus parking in I-1 Zones.
School buses are permitted to park in an I-1 Zone at any time on private
property or in any zone during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday on private property.
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:361

ARTICLE V
Vehicles and Storage Containers
[Adopted 9-13-2006 by Ord. No. 1188; amended in its entirety
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1223]
§ 220-13. Prohibited parking.
The parking of trailers, boats, dumpsters, storage containers, recreational
vehicles, or any other wheeled vehicle not registered as an automobile,
motorcycle or noncommercial truck with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission on public streets within the Borough is prohibited. This
prohibition does not include temporary parking for the immediate purpose
of loading or unloading or making a delivery.
§ 220-14. On-street parking of dumpsters and storage containers.
In the event that it is physically impossible to park a dumpster or storage
container off street, an application for a temporary on-street parking permit
may be made to the Borough's Construction Official who shall issue the
permit if he concurs with the impossibility of off-street parking. The permit
shall be valid for a period of 10 days.
§ 220-15. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
AUTOMOBILE — A passenger automobile or a private passenger sedan,
station wagon, sports utility vehicle or van of a noncommercial type, that
is used and designed for the transportation of passengers, other than
omnibuses and school buses, or used for livery conveyance for passengers.
COMMERCIAL TRUCK — Includes every type of motor-driven vehicle used
for commercial purposes on the highways, such as the transportation of
goods, wares and merchandise, excepting such vehicles as are run only
upon rails or tracks and vehicles of the passenger-car type used for touring
purposes or the carrying of farm products or milk, as the case may be.
LOW-SPEED VEHICLE (LSV) — A four-wheeled vehicle with an attainable
speed of more than 20 miles per hour but no more than 25 miles per hour
on a paved surface. It cannot be powered by gas or diesel fuel and must
comply with federal safety standards.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscle power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and
motorized bicycles.
MOTORCYCLE — Includes motorcycles, motorbikes, bicycles with motor
attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle or tricycle type,
except motorized bicycles as defined in this article, whether the motive
power is a part thereof or attached thereto, and having a saddle or seat with
driver sitting astride or upon it or a platform on which the driver stands.
§ 220-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:363
MOTOR-DRAWN VEHICLE — Includes trailers, semitrailers or any other
type of vehicle drawn by a motor-driven vehicle.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 cubic centimeters or said motor is rated at no more than 1.5 brake
horsepower or is powered by an electric-drive motor and said bicycle is
capable of a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles per hour on a flat
surface.
NONCOMMERCIAL TRUCK — Every motor vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of property and which is not a commercial motor vehicle
otherwise defined in this article.
OMNIBUS — Includes all motor vehicles used for the transportation of
passengers for hire, except commuter vans and vehicles used in ridesharing
arrangements and school buses, if the same are not otherwise used
in the transportation of passengers for hire.
POLE TRAILER — Every vehicle without motive power designed to be
drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of
a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped
loads, such as poles, pipes or structural members capable generally of
sustaining themselves between the support connections.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A self-propelled or towed vehicle equipped
to serve as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel
purposes and used solely as a family or personal conveyance.
SCHOOL BUS — Every motor vehicle operated by, or under contract with, a
public or governmental agency or religious or other charitable organization
or corporation, or privately operated for the transportation of children to
or from school for secular or religious education, which complies with the
regulations of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission affecting school
buses, including School Vehicle Type 1 (any vehicle designed to transport
16 or more passengers including the driver) and School Vehicle Type 2
(any vehicle designed to transport fewer than 16 passengers including the
driver).
SEMITRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a
pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that
of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other then a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
TRUCK — Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.
§ 220-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 220-15
1:364
TRUCK TRACTOR — Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or motorized bicycles.
§ 220-16. Violations and penalties.140
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
140. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:365

ARTICLE VI
Temporary Restrictions
[Adopted 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1205]
§ 220-17. Temporary parking prohibition.
Council may, by resolution, prohibit on a temporary basis all on-street
parking on any Borough road.
§ 220-18. Street sweeping notices, towing and storage, violations
and penalties.141
In the instance of street sweeping operations, the Borough shall post the
dates, times and streets to be swept on the bulletin board in the Borough
Hall where notices are normally posted. On-street parking for the posted
streets shall be prohibited for the day and times posted. Any vehicle parked
in violation of this section shall be subject to being towed, and the owner
shall be responsible for the costs of towing and storage of the vehicle plus
be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:367
Chapter 224
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners — See Ch. 5, Art. II.
Fees — See Ch. 150, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 229.
§ 224-1. Permit procedures and standards and fees. [Amended
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1227142]
The Lindenwold Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners shall
determine the use of all Borough parks and playgrounds by groups and
organizations through the issuance of permits. The permit shall designate
the group or organization authorized to use the field or fields, the field or
fields it is permitted to use and the dates and times on which the use is
permitted. Permits shall be obtained by application to the Board of Parks
and Recreation Commissioners in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Applications can be obtained from the Borough Clerk and also returned
to the Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk will review for completeness
(checklist provided) and date-sensitive applications. If application is
incomplete it will be immediately returned to the applicant and missing
information identified. If it is date-sensitive the Chairperson will be
immediately notified so a determination can be made to hold an
emergency meeting if needed.
B. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners,
stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The date, day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) Any other information which the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
C. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners include the following findings:
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 220-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 224-1
1:368
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense of police operation by the Borough of
Lindenwold.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
D. In order to qualify to be considered for the issuance of a permit to use
any of the Borough's fields or facilities, one must do the following:
(1) Submit a complete team roster or a participant list with the names,
addresses and phone numbers of all members prior to the start of
the event.
(2) Present proof of liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 covering the use of the park and recreation area to be
used. The Borough of Lindenwold must be named as an additional
insured. Waiver of the insurance may be applied for depending on
the requested use.
E. Fee schedule.
(1) If the participants in the event consist of 50% Lindenwold residents
there is no fee. If 50% are not Lindenwold residents a fee will be
assessed per the fee schedule prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees,
Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-31.
(2) The Board shall designate the Director of Public Works or his
designee to inspect the facilities being used by the permit holder
prior to that use and after that use. The Director of Public Works or
his designee shall determine whether or not the permitted
premises have been left in reasonably the same condition as existed
prior to the use. In the event that is the case, the Director of Public
Works or his designee shall notify the Borough Clerk of such, and
the security deposit will be returned forthwith. If the Director of
Public Works or his designee reveals damage and/or lack of cleanup
to the permitted premises, the Director of Public Works or his
designee shall notify the Borough Clerk, who shall not release the
security deposit. The Director of Public Works shall cause any
necessary work to be done to return the permitted premises to its
before-use status. Thereafter, the Director of Public Works shall
§ 224-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-1
1:369
§ 224-2. Permit regulations.
Any group or organization which has received a permit shall be responsible
for seeing that the following conditions are adhered to:
notify the Borough Clerk as to the cost of the work based upon
employee hours times the hourly rate plus 20%. The Borough Clerk
shall deduct that cost from the security deposit and return the
balance to the permit holder. In the event there is not sufficient
deposit to pay for the work, the permit holder shall be responsible
for payment of any excess amount and shall not be permitted to
receive any additional permits until payment is made. The Borough
may also pursue any legal remedies it may have in such a situation.
F. Fee schedule for tournament use.
(1) For the use of the baseball fields at Lindenwold Park the fees shall
be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule,
§ 150-31A.
(2) A security deposit shall be posted as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-31A.
(3) A tournament shall not be for more than four days.
(4) Any applicant, in addition to the requirements of prior sections,
shall provide the Borough Clerk a schedule of games at least one
week before the scheduled event.
(5) Tournament hours shall be 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. with a fifteenminute
grace period for rain delays or overtime. The fields shall be
vacated at 11:15 p.m. No credit shall be allowed for weather
cancellations, but the Borough will attempt to reschedule any
cancelled games.
(6) In the event that any misconduct from parents, fans, coaches or
players occurs, the Lindenwold Police Department or the Director
of the Public Works Department is authorized and empowered to
suspend play of all remaining games for the entire tournament, in
which case there will be no fee refunded.
(7) All users shall be responsible for leaving the facilities in a clean and
orderly condition, and any cleanup work necessitated by a failure to
do so shall be charged against the security deposit.
A. The permit shall not be transferred or assigned. The permit holder or
designated representative must be present whenever the field is in use
during the time of its permit.
B. No alcoholic beverages are permitted at any time by anyone during the
use of the fields, including the team players and spectators. The permit
holder shall be responsible for enforcing this condition.
§ 224-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 224-2
1:370
§ 224-3. Appeal procedure.
§ 224-4. Permittees bound by park rules.
All park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances shall bind a
permittee fully as though the same were inserted in the permit.
§ 224-5. Hours and closings.
§ 224-6. Conduct and proper use of parks.
C. The permit holder shall be responsible for any and all illegal acts by
spectators and team members, including the opposing team.
D. The permit holder shall be responsible for ensuring that team members
and spectators adhere to no-parking regulations at and near the field in
use.
A. Within five days after the receipt of an application, the Board of Parks
and Recreation Commissioners shall apprise an applicant in writing of
its reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have
the right to appeal to the Borough Council of the Borough of
Lindenwold by serving written notice thereof on the Clerk of the
Borough of Lindenwold within five days of said refusal.
B. A copy of said notice shall also be served on the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners within the same time, and said Board shall
immediately forward the application and the reasons for its refusal to
the Borough Council of the Borough of Lindenwold, which shall
consider the application under the standards set forth under § 224-1C
hereof and sustain or overrule the decision of the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners within 10 days from the receipt of the
appeal by it. The decision of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Lindenwold shall be final.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely
for certain uses.
A. No person in a public park and recreational area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railing,
pavings or paving materials; waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts or other
§ 224-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-6
1:371
boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person above the age of five years
shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any trees or plant, or dig
in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird, or remove
or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs
or nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is
made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous or other deadly
reptiles may be killed on sight.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(10) Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
refuse or other trash. Such refuse or trash shall not be placed in
any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided; where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 224-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 224-6
1:372
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas.143
(12) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area and such shall be in accordance with posted direction thereat
and with the instruction of any attendant who may be present.
(13) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park area.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard for the safety of others.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement or set against
trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over
or be injured by it.
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereinafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, when such activities
are prohibited by the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(18) Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Board of Parks and
Recreation Commissioners for such purposes for each individual
site.
(19) Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area
any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least
two sides, nor shall any guide wire, rope or extension brace or
support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any
other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
(20) Allow his/her person to be so covered with a bathing suit as to
indecently expose his/her person.
(21) Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet room or
other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 224-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-6
1:373
(22) Bring into any waters or operate therein any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, except at places
designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
(23) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
(24) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning, nor shall any person be on or remain
on or in any boat during said closed hours of the park.
(25) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(26) Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden. This subsection does not apply to
members of the Borough Police Department or other law
enforcement officers who are duly authorized to carry firearms in
the discharge of their duties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
(27) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose.
(28) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for any unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(29) Leave a picnic area before all trash is placed in the disposal
receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
(30) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins,
horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes, except in those areas set
apart for such forms of recreation.
B. While in a public park or recreational area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
(1) Bring alcoholic beverages, drink them at any time or be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor in a park.
§ 224-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 224-6
1:374
(2) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material, or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with
any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the Board of Parks
and Recreation Commissioners, permits may be given for
conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park areas.
(3) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(4) Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
(5) Build or attempt to build a fire. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park or on
any highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
(6) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public" or use or abet the
use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(7) Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners.
(8) Go onto the ice of any of the waters.
(9) Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other
areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting
or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to breach the public peace.
(10) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(11) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, or erect or cause to be erected any sign
whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a
park.
C. No sport activity allowed. [Added 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(1) No sport activity is allowed on the grass in front of the
amphitheater in the park on United States Avenue. All sporting
activity is by permit only using the proper fields according to
Chapter 224.
(2) In addition, the Municipal Compliance Officer, Municipal Designee,
the Chief of Police, any police officer of the Borough of Lindenwold
§ 224-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-6
1:375
§ 224-7. Liability of permittee.
The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of the
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been
issued.
§ 224-8. Revocation of permit.
The Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners shall have the authority
to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
§ 224-9. Enforcement; powers and duties of authorities.
§ 224-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park property and
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 229
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Graffiti — See Ch. 171.
Loitering — See Ch. 195.
Noise — See Ch. 205.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 224.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 238 and
240.
or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough may make complaint in
the Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold for any violation
of this section or any article, section, subsection or provision
thereof. Upon conviction in such case, for each and every violation,
the violator shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners and park attendants
shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 224-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 224-10
1:376
ARTICLE I
Indecency; Damaging Property
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 163, Art. II, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 229-1. Enumeration of illegal acts.
The following acts are declared to be illegal in the Borough of Lindenwold:
§ 229-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
587144]
Any person guilty of committing any of the above illegal acts shall be subject
to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
A. Appearing in any street or public place in a state of nudity or in clothing
not belonging to his or her sex or in indecent or lewd clothing, or
making indecent exposure of his or her person or doing any lewd or
indecent act, or exhibiting, selling or offering to sell any indecent or
lewd book, picture or thing.
B. Inhumanely or cruelly beating or injuring or otherwise abusing any
dumb animal.
C. Maliciously, willfully or wantonly breaking, destroying, injuring,
overthrowing or carrying away lighting or extinguishing (except
persons duly authorized) any of the public lamps or lamp parts or
anything pertaining thereto in any of the streets, lanes or alleys within
the Borough.
D. Entering into any house, garden or other enclosure within the limits of
this Borough and breaking, cutting, rooting up or otherwise destroying
any tree, shrub or plant there growing without leave of the owner or
occupier first had and obtained, or cutting, breaking or otherwise
defacing or injuring any house or building or any porch, fence, pillar or
property belonging to any house, building or enclosure within this
Borough without leave of the owner or occupier first had and obtained.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 229-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-2
1:377

ARTICLE II
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 9-28-1970 by Ord. No. 240 (Ch. 163, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 229-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden and State of
New Jersey.145
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, organization, firm or
partnership.
§ 229-4. Damage to school property; disturbing school activities.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, enter the building or go
upon the lands of any school and break, damage or deface such building or
any part thereof or the fences or other property belonging to or connected
with such building or lands, and no person shall disturb the exercises of any
school or molest or give annoyance to the children attending such school or
any teacher therein either while on the school property or while going to or
coming from said school.
§ 229-5. Disturbing lawful assemblies.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, disturb any lawful
assembly of persons or of any neighborhood, family or person by any loud
or unnecessary noise or by shouting or by using any profane, indecent
or obscene language or by quarreling, assaulting, fighting or otherwise
disturbing the peace and quiet.
§ 229-6. Public intoxication; use of drugs.
No person shall be intoxicated or under the influence of drug or drugs or a
barbiturate in any street, highway, thoroughfare or public place within the
limits of the Borough or in any hotel, boardinghouse, store, restaurant or
other quasi-public place to the annoyance of any person.
§ 229-7. Destruction or damage to property.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, maliciously destroy or
damage any real or personal property belonging to another.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 229-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-8
1:379
§ 229-8. Throwing of objects into streets or at persons.
No person shall throw any debris, organic matter, stones, sticks, glass,
metal or any hard, dangerous or offensive substance into any street, road,
avenue, highway or public place or at any car, vehicle, house, building,
fence or person within the Borough limits.
§ 229-9. Littering or polluting waters or land.
§ 229-10. Open holes; unsafe structures; junk.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, keep or maintain on any
public or private property any open cistern, open hole, unsafe structure,
dilapidated vehicle or junk which would be likely to endanger the health or
safety of any person.
§ 229-11. Interfering with law officer.
No person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with any Borough officer in the
performance of his duties, nor shall any person willfully refuse or neglect to
assist any Borough officer when lawfully called upon by him to do so in the
execution of any process or in the suppression of any breach of the peace or
disorderly conduct or in case of an escape or when such officer is resisted
in the discharge of his duty. Nor shall any person knowingly resist, hinder,
obstruct or interfere with any officer or person authorized by law in serving
or attempting to serve any summons, writ, subpoena, order or other process
or when making an arrest.146
§ 229-12. False alarms.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, willfully or maliciously
ring or cause to be rung any bell, whistle or other alarm of any fire company
or in any other manner give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire.
A. No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, throw or discard any
tin cans, bottles, garbage or refuse of any kind whatsoever into the
waters of any pond, stream or lake or into waters adjacent thereto, or
discharge any sewage or waste into said waters or any of them or
pollute the said waters or any of them in any manner whatsoever.
B. No person shall deposit upon the surface of any public or private
property or upon any street, lane or alley of said Borough any rubbish
or matter likely to decompose or be blown about by the wind or use any
such substances to fill in or grade the surface or level of any ground in
the Borough.
146. Editor's Note: Original § 163-10, Discharging of firearms, as amended, of the 1981 Code,
which immediately followed this section, was moved to Chapter 184 during codification.
See now § 184-2
§ 229-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 229-13
1:380
§ 229-13. Trespassing or invasion of privacy.
No person shall trespass on private property and surreptitiously or
sneakingly invade the privacy of another by peering into the windows or
other openings of dwelling places located thereon for no lawful purpose.
§ 229-14. Loitering; illegal occupation or unlawful purpose.147
Any person who shall be apprehended either on foot or in any automobile,
vehicle or public conveyance within the limits of the Borough, who cannot
give a good account of himself or herself, or who is engaged in an illegal
occupation or who is in the Borough for an unlawful purpose, shall be
deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person and subject to the penalties
hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 229-15. Loitering in automobiles.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, loiter or remain in a
parked automobile on the public streets or public places or on the private
grounds of another.
§ 229-16. Begging alms.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, go about from door to
door or place himself or herself in any street, road, avenue, highway or
other public place to beg or gather alms, except upon written permit from
the Chief of Police.
§ 229-17. Removal of or injury to legal notices.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough, willfully or maliciously
take down, remove or injure any notice, advertisement or other placard
legally and publicly set up by an officer or person in accordance with law
before the time to which such notice, advertisement or placard relates.
§ 229-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 587148]
Any person who shall violate any terms or provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter
1, § 1-1, of this Code.
147. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 195, Loitering.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 229-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-18
1:381
Chapter 234
PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND SECONDHAND GOODS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee schedule — See Ch. 150, Art. I. Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 199.
§ 234-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Words used in
the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number shall
include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Acceptable forms of identification
include a current valid New Jersey driver's license or New Jersey
identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued by another
state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable United States
government-issued identification.
ARTICLE — Any article of merchandise, including any portion of such
article, whether a distinct part thereof or not, including every part thereof
whether separable or not, and also including material for manufacture. And
as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Lindenwold or
his designee/representative.
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals,
gems, gemstones and/or other articles by requiring minimum reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for secondhand and transient
dealers.
B. No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or
occupation of buying scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home
electronics/audio and visual equipment, musical instruments,
telephones and telephonic equipment, scales, computers, computer
hardware and software, typewriters, word processors, scanners,
sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all other precious
metals, tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car
stereos, gift cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable articles,
hereinafter referred to as "secondhand goods or articles," or being a
secondhand dealer within the Borough of Lindenwold without having
first obtained a license from the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 229-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 234-2
1:382
DATABASE — A computerized Internet-capable database with hardware and
software compliant to that set by the Chief of Police.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells or otherwise exchanges or trades secondhand gold, silver,
precious metals, gems or jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the
purchase or sale of any of the aforementioned items.
DESIGNATED VENDOR — A person or entity that is appointed or
designated by the Chief of Police who is authorized to collect and maintain
precious metal transaction information, or other purchase information as
defined herein, for the Borough of Lindenwold.
GIFT CARD — A restricted monetary equivalent or scrip that is issued by
retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a nonmonetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
Borough of Lindenwold or at varying locations.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, partnership, joint venture,
business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.
PRECIOUS METALS — Comprised of gold, silver, sterling, platinum and/or
their alloys, as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq., and/
or N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of jewelry
herein contained.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
PURCHASE — The exchange of money and the exchange, deposit, pledge,
sale, conveyance or trade of any tangible or intangible article.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which precious metals or other tangible property are purchased or
exchanged from or with the public.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, including but not limited
to scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio and visual
equipment, telephones and telephonic equipment, scales, computers,
computer hardware and software, coins, electronic tablets, cameras,
scanners, sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all other precious
metals, tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car stereos,
gift cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable articles.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer who has not been in any retail business
continuously for at least six months at any address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register or who intends to close out or
discontinue all retail business in the Borough of Lindenwold within six
months. Or as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1.
§ 234-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:383
§ 234-3. Application and issuance of license.
§ 234-4. License fees; nontransferability.
§ 234-5. Revocation of license.
A. Initial license application process. Every dealer intending on
conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Lindenwold shall first make application to the Mercantile Clerk or
designee and shall complete the application.
B. Upon initial application and fee to the Mercantile Clerk or designee,
each dealer shall provide proof that the dealer has obtained computer
equipment and software required in § 234-6 of this chapter for purposes
of reporting all transaction data in electronic format to the Lindenwold
Police Department.
A. Each application for a dealer of secondhand goods license shall be
accompanied by a fee as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule, § 150-4, payable to the Clerk or designee by January 10
annually.149
B. The fee for the electronic database software system shall be as
prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-4. The
database software system fee shall be paid by the dealer and shall be in
addition to the annual mercantile license fee. The dealer shall pay all
fees annually, on or before January 10 of each year, and shall pay the
mercantile fee and database software system fee separately. [Added
11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1352150]
C. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
said license is issued.
D. No license fee shall be prorated.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Chief of Police after a hearing upon notice to the applicant for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious
metals, gems and jewelry;
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 234-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 234-5
1:384
(4) Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving
moral turpitude; and
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
C. Procedures; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation of a license may be filed by the
Chief of Police or any designate of the Chief of Police who is an
active member of the Lindenwold Police Department. Such
complaint shall be in writing and filed with the Borough Clerk or
designate. The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to
apprise the licensee of the charges, so as to permit the licensee to
present a defense. The individual filing the complaint may do so on
the basis of information and belief and need not rely on personal
information.
(2) Upon filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough governing body,
and a date for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be
sooner than 10 nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough
Clerk or designee shall forward a copy of the complaint and a
notice as to the date of the hearing to the licensee and the agent, if
any, at the address indicated on the registration form. Service upon
the agent shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Borough governing body, unless, in its discretion, the Borough
determines that the matter should be heard by a hearing officer,
who shall be appointed by the Borough. If the matter is referred to
a hearing officer, such officer shall transmit the findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the Borough within 30 days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The Borough shall then review the matter and may
accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the hearing officer
based upon the record before the hearing officer. In the event the
matter is not referred to a hearing officer and is heard by the
Borough, then the Borough shall render a decision within 30 days
of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a decision
shall be rendered, either dismissing the complaint, revoking or
suspending the license, or determining that the license shall not be
renewed for one or more years.
§ 234-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-5
1:385
§ 234-6. Dealers' responsibilities, requirements and recordkeeping.
Every dealer within the Borough of Lindenwold shall, upon the purchase of
any precious metals or second hand goods from the public, be required to
do as follows:
(4) A stenographic transcript may be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burdens of
proof shall be that which generally control administrative hearings.
(5) The Borough Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant at all hearings conducted pursuant to
this chapter.
A. Record on a numbered receipt the name, address and telephone
number of the purchaser; the name, address and telephone number of
the seller or sellers; the time and date of the transaction; the net weight
in terms of pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams of the
precious metals; fineness in terms of karats for gold and sterling or coin
for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1
et seq. This information is to be documented through use of an
electronic database software system as designated by the Chief of
Police. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
B. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and using
the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transactions into the electronic database within 48 hours from the date
of purchase. The information entered will contain the information in
Subsection A above, plus the following:
(1) A physical description of the seller.
(2) The receipt number.
(3) A full description of the item or items purchased, including but not
limited to marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers.
(4) The price paid for the item.
(5) The form must be signed by the seller.
(6) The form must be legibly initialed by the Clerk or the dealer who
made the transaction so as to readily identify that individual
(7) A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
identification.
(8) A color photograph or color image of all items sold. When
photographing or imaging, all items must be positioned in a
manner that makes them readily and easily identifiable.
§ 234-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 234-6
1:386
§ 234-7. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by jewelers or other dealers
from wholesalers or other suppliers but shall only apply to those purchases
made from the public or other retail purchases. The dealer shall keep
records of all wholesale purchases for a period of six months from the date
of such purchase, which records shall be opened to investigation by the
Lindenwold Borough Police Department.
(9) Items should not be grouped together when photographing or
imaging; each item will have its own color photograph or color
image.
C. The precious metals are to be made available for inspection by the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Lindenwold or a designee of the Chief of
Police for a period of five days from the date the information required
above is received by the Chief of Police on the approved form. The
precious metals shall remain in the same condition as when purchased
and shall not be changed, modified, melted or disposed of by the
purchaser until the five-day period has expired. During this five-day
period, the precious metals shall be placed in public view at the
purchaser's place of business. If the property is such that it would
create a hardship on the dealer by holding the precious metals for such
period, the dealer may present the property to the Chief of Police in
order that it may be photographed and, if deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, an investigation be implemented. The Chief of Police has
the authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this
section.
D. In the event a database failure or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction
information into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced or the database coming back into
service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer equipment
in a reasonable fashion or failure by the dealer to replace faulty
computer equipment may result in the dealer being cited for a violation
of the ordinance and subsequently being subject to the penalties for
doing so.
E. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer and of every person in the
dealer's employ to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Lindenwold Police Department to examine any database,
book, ledger or any other record on the premises relating to the
purchase of precious metals from the public, as well as the articles
purchased or received, and to take possession of any article known by
the police officer or official to be missing or to have been stolen or
where the officer or official has probable cause to believe the article is
missing or stolen.
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-8
1:387
§ 234-8. Purchases from minors.
No dealer within the Borough of Lindenwold shall purchase any precious
metals from any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 234-9. Violations and penalties.151
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each and every violation shall
be considered a separate violation. Every day that a violation continues
shall be a separate violation. Each violation shall result in an additional tenday
suspension. Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of
this chapter within one year of the date of a previous violation and who
was fined for the previous violation may be sentenced by the Court to
an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed as a
repeat offender shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this chapter.
Chapter 238
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See § 150-49. Property maintenance code — See Ch. 240.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 234-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 234-9
1:388
ARTICLE I
Storage of Junk
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 136 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 238-1. Storage of junk prohibited.
§ 238-2. Enforcement officials. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any member of the Lindenwold Police Department or the Director of Public
Safety shall be required to enforce this article.
§ 238-3. Abatement of violating conditions; extension.
If in the discretion of the enforcing public officer the violator genuinely
intends to abate the condition existing on his premises which violates the
intent of this article, such officer may grant the violator an extension of 10
days in which to clean the premises so involved. This extension shall be
given in writing, setting forth the termination date.
§ 238-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
587; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such under this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to
store or allow to gather or to maintain or collect on any premises within
the Borough of Lindenwold any junk, debris, trash, waste materials or
other articles, including motor vehicles of every type and description
deemed to be unsightly, objectionable or which tend to detract from the
aesthetic appearance of the surrounding area.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to
store or allow to gather or to maintain or collect on any premises within
the Borough of Lindenwold any junk, debris, trash, motor vehicles of
every type, or waste materials of any description deemed to be safety or
health hazards or which constitute an attractive nuisance to children as
defined by the court decisions of the State of New Jersey.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:389

ARTICLE II
Emergency Situations
[Adopted 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 1248; amended 12-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-17]
§ 238-5. Responsibilities of owners; Borough to remedy uncorrected
emergency situation.
A. When in the opinion of the construction official, or in their absence the
designate of the construction official, there exists an emergency
situation concerning the condition of a property which represents an
immediate threat to the public safety, health or welfare, or in the
opinion of the construction official, a building or structure is dangerous
to human life or constitutes a fire hazard, requiring immediate action to
avoid and mitigate the emergency situation, immediate notice, if
practicable, shall be given to the property owner requesting that the
situation be remedied. The construction official shall attempt to contact
the property owner via telephone, fax, or email concerning the
emergency situation, and the owner shall be provided 24 hours within
which to rectify and remediate the emergency situation. In the event
the construction official is unable to make contact with the property
owner, or the property owner otherwise fails to respond within the
twenty-four-hour period, the Borough may take all actions necessary
and appropriate to remedy the situation, including but not limited to
demolition of the property.
B. In addition to assessing the cost of any such removal or demolition as a
municipal lien against the premises, the Borough may enforce the
payment of such assessment, together with interest, as a debt of the
owner of the premises and may authorize the institution of an action at
law for the collection thereof. The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction
over any such action.
§ 238-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-5
1:391

ARTICLE III
Vacant Property
[Adopted 12-4-2013 by Ord. No. 1353]
§ 238-6. Purpose.
This article governs the maintenance of vacant properties in the Borough
of Lindenwold, amending registration requirements and amending
registration fees for owners of vacant properties.
§ 238-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provision of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17) or any
other entity determined by the Borough of Lindenwold to have authority to
act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used, or to be used, which is not legally
occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction operation or
occupancy has ceased; provided, however, that any property that contains
all building systems in working order, is fully compliant with property
maintenance codes and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental shall not be deemed vacant. Property determined to be "abandoned
property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed
to be vacant property for the purposes of this article.
§ 238-8. When effective; when required.
A. Effective January 1, 2014, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 60 days after the building becomes vacant or within
30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant property, whichever is
later, file a registration statement for each such vacant property with
the Construction Official or his designee on forms provided by the
Construction Official or his designee for such purposes. The
registration shall remain valid for one year, from January 1 until
December 31 of the following year. The owner shall be required to
renew the registration annually as long as the building remains vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed in this article for each vacant property registered.
B. Any owner of any building that meets the definition of vacant property
prior to January 1, 2014, shall file a registration statement for that
property on or before January 31, 2014. The registration statement
shall include the information required under this article, as well as any
additional information that the Construction Official or his designee
may reasonably require.
§ 238-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-8
1:393
§ 238-9. Registration statement requirements; property inspection.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the Borough to
conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine
compliance with the municipal code, following reasonable notice, during the
period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
C. The owner shall notify the Construction Official or his designee within
30 days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Construction
Official or his designee for such purposes.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
owner or owners of the building.
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, email
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age
or older designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notice of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the State of
New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey. The statement
shall also include the name, street address, e-mail address and
telephone number of the person responsible for maintaining and
securing the property, if different.
B. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this article as to location of residence or office may designate himself or
herself as agent.
C. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Construction Official or his designee of a change of authorized agent or
until the owner files a new annual registration statement. The
designation of an authorized agent in no way releases the owner from
any requirement of this article.152
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 238-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 238-10
1:394
§ 238-10. Fee schedule.153
The registration fee for each building shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-49.
§ 238-11. Requirements for owners of vacant property.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant, shall, within 30 days:
§ 238-12. Administration.
The Construction Official or his designee may issue rules and regulations
for the administration of the provisions of this article.
§ 238-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Code of the Borough of Lindenwold.
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process, and the person responsible for day-to-day
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different
from the owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be a
size and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest
public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller
than 18 inches by 24 inches.
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete.
D. Post the property with "No Trespassing" signs of a nature sufficient to
give notice to any person entering upon the property that it is against
the law to enter the property without permission of the owner.
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this article or who
otherwise violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Fines
assessed under this article shall be recoverable from the owner and
shall be a lien on the property. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of this article, or such
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 238-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-13
1:395
§ 238-14. Effect on other laws; interpretation of provisions.
Nothing in this article is intended nor shall be read to conflict or prevent the
Borough from taking action against buildings found to be unfit for human
habitation or unsafe structures as provided in applicable provisions of the
Code of the Borough of Lindenwold. Further, any action taken under any
such code provision other than the demolition of a structure shall relieve an
owner from its obligations under this article.
§ 238-15. Effective date.
This article shall take effect January 1, 2014.
other matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
Construction Official or his designee shall be deemed to be violations of
this article.
C. If the municipality expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation of the Property Maintenance Code on a residential
property in situations in which the creditor was given notice pursuant
to this article, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violations
as directed, the municipality shall have the same recourse against the
creditor as it would have against the title owner of the property.
Additionally, the municipality may assess a lien against a property
subject to this article, for any failure to comply with this article, to
include imposition of a lien for any unpaid fees or late charges assessed
pursuant to this article. The municipality may also assess a lien against
the subject property for the moneys expended by the municipality. The
lien may be enforced and collected in the same manner as real estate
taxes are enforced and collected, with interest to accrue at the same
rate on all such liens as real estate taxes. [Added 3-22-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-03]
§ 238-13 LINDENWOLD CODE § 238-15
1:396
ARTICLE IV
Foreclosed Property
[Adopted 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 238-16. Statutory authority.
A. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides in relevant part that a municipality may make
and enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations not contrary to the
laws of this state or of the United States as it may deem necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51a provides in relevant part that a creditor serving a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage on
residential property in this state shall within 10 days of serving the
summons and complaint notify the municipal clerk of the municipality
in which the property is located that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been filed against the subject
property. The notice shall contain the name and contact information for
the representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations. The notice
may contain information about more than one property, and shall be
provided by mail or electronic communication, at the discretion of the
municipal clerk. The notice shall also include the street address, lot and
block number of the property and the full name and contact information
of an individual located within the state who is authorized to accept
service on behalf of the creditor.
C. N.J.S.A. 46: 10B-51b provides in relevant part that if the owner of a
residential property vacates or abandons any property on which a
foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a residential property
becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the creditor's filing the
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against
the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor or any
other third party, and the property is found to be a nuisance or in
violation of any applicable state or local code, the appropriate local
municipal official shall notify the creditor of the nuisance or violation.
The creditor shall have the responsibility to abate the nuisance or
correct the violation in the same manner and to the same extent as the
title owner of the property, to such standard or specification as may be
required by state law or municipal ordinance.
D. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51c provides in relevant part that if the municipality
expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct a violation
on a residential property in situations where the creditor was given
notice pursuant to the aforesaid statute but failed to abate the nuisance
or correct the violation as directed, the municipality shall have the
same recourse against the creditor as it would have against the title
§ 238-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-16
1:397
§ 238-17. Findings and purpose.
owner of the property including, but not limited to, the recourse
provided under N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
E. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.1 provides in relevant part that the owner of any
non-owner-occupied residential property who takes title to the property
as the result of a sheriffs sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, other than
an owner who has previously provided notice to the municipality
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, shall provide notice, within 10 business
days, to the municipal clerk of the municipality wherein the property is
located providing the name and address of the owner. If the owner is
not located within New Jersey, then the owner shall designate an agent
within New Jersey, including the agent's address, who is authorized to
accept service of process on behalf of the property owner.
F. N.J.S.A. 55:19-100 provides in relevant part that with respect to any lien
placed against any real property pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3a or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 or any receiver's
lien pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:42-114 et seq., the municipality shall have
recourse with respect to the lien against any asset of the owner of the
property if an individual, against any asset of any partner if a
partnership, and against any asset of any owner of a ten-percent
interest or greater if the owner is any other business organization entity
recognized pursuant to law.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that
residential properties with pending foreclosure proceedings typically
become vacant. These vacant properties if not maintained rapidly
become eyesores with unkempt lawns and overgrown vegetation,
broken doors and windows, and deteriorating structures. These
properties create a wide range of negative secondary effects in the
neighborhoods where they are located in that they foster criminal
activity, create public health problems, and otherwise diminish the
quality of life for residents and business operators located in those
areas.
B. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that
residential properties with pending foreclosure proceedings which have
become vacant typically are not maintained by the creditor who has
filed the foreclosure proceedings. These vacant properties deteriorate
by neglect and diminish property values of neighboring properties,
increase the risk of property damage through arson and vandalism, and
discourage neighborhood stability and revitalization.
C. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are vacant residential properties located within the community that
constitute a nuisance which require the abatement or removal of the
nuisance by summary proceedings. Where a creditor has filed a
summons and complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage on a
§ 238-16 LINDENWOLD CODE § 238-17
1:398
§ 238-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the meaning given in
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
CREDITOR — A state-chartered bank, savings bank, saving-and-loan
association or credit union, any person required to be licensed under the
provisions of the New Jersey Licensed Lenders Act,154 and any entity acting
on behalf of the creditor named in the debt obligations, including, but not
limited to, servicers.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Grandfather, grandmother, father,
mother, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, uncle or
aunt.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A single-family, owner-occupied residential
dwelling. It shall also include a single-family residential dwelling which
is occupied by an immediate family member of the person who owns the
property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used, or to be used, which is not legally
occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction, operation, or
occupancy has ceased; provided, however, that any property that contains
all building systems in working order, is fully compliant with property
maintenance codes, and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental shall not be deemed vacant. Property determined to be "abandoned
property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned
residential property that is vacant, the creditor is responsible for the
abatement or removal of the nuisance.
D. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are vacant residential properties located within the community that
have violations of the Property Maintenance Code which require
affirmative action to correct the violation to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. Where a creditor has filed a summons and complaint
for the foreclosure of a mortgage on a residential property that is
vacant, the creditor is responsible for the correction of the violation of
the Property Maintenance Code.
E. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to require the
registration of residential properties where a creditor has filed a
summons and complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage on the
property so that the municipality can identify these properties, inspect
the structures, monitor the condition of the properties, insure that the
properties are maintained, and have a database of information to
contact and provide legal notice to the creditor.
154. Editor's Note: See now the New Jersey Consumer Finance Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 17:11C-1
et seq.
§ 238-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-18
1:399
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed
to be vacant property for the purposes of this article.
§ 238-19. Property Maintenance Code.
The Property Maintenance Code155 of the municipality is hereby made
applicable to all residential properties where a creditor has filed a summons
and complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage, or has already obtained a
judgment of foreclosure.
§ 238-20. Registration.
§ 238-21. Responsible party.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint to foreclose a mortgage on a
residential property within the municipality, or any creditor that has
obtained a judgment of foreclosure, must register the dwelling with the
municipality through the Lindenwold Construction Office within 10
days from the date when the complaint was filed with the court, or
within 10 days of the enactment of this article, in the event a judgment
has already been entered by the court.
B. The registration form shall include the full name and contact
information of an individual located within the State of New Jersey who
is authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor. The
registration form shall be accompanied with a registration fee as listed
in the Borough Fee Schedule, Chapter 150, § 150-49, for each dwelling.
There shall be no proration of fees paid during the course of the year.
Registration forms shall be available at the Lindenwold Construction
Office. Registrants shall mail the completed and executed form to the
Lindenwold Construction Office along with a check made payable to the
municipality. A registration form is required for each house, townhouse,
condominium, or duplex that is the subject of a foreclosure action.
Registration and payment of the fee under this article, shall fulfill the
owner's obligations under Article III of this chapter.
C. The registration fee covers the cost of administering the program and
up to two inspections of the residential dwelling. Thereafter, an
inspection fee as listed in the Borough Fee Schedule, Chapter 150,
§ 150-49D, shall apply to subsequent inspections during the year. One
of the purposes for the initial inspection is to establish a baseline
condition for the subject property.
D. Property registration shall be renewed every 12 months. The renewal
form shall be due on the anniversary date following the original
registration date. Failure to register a property on a timely basis shall
result in the assessment of civil penalties. It shall be the responsibility
of the registrant to notify the Lindenwold Construction Office in writing
whenever there is a change in the contact information of the registrant.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Property Maintenance Code.
§ 238-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 238-21
1:400
§ 238-22. Inspections.
Once a home is registered, the Lindenwold Construction Office shall send
an inspector to the property to determine whether there are any violations
of the Property Maintenance Code. After the inspection, a letter shall be
sent to the responsible party indicating what problems must be remedied.
The letter shall state the time period for the completion of the work.
A reinspection of the property shall take place at the end of that time
period to determine whether compliance has occurred. A vacant property
as defined in this article shall be subject to additional inspections by the
Lindenwold Construction Office, which shall occur at least once per year,
at the discretion of the Construction Official. The charge for any such
reinspection shall be listed in Chapter 150, § 150-49D.
§ 238-23. Violations and penalties.
A. The homeowner in possession of the subject property is the responsible
party for the upkeep of the property.
B. If a residential property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the
filing of the summons and complaint but prior to vesting of the title in
the creditor, the creditor is the responsible party for the upkeep of the
property. The creditor shall be responsible for the care, maintenance,
security, and upkeep of the exterior and interior of the vacant property.
C. If in the event a creditor is not located in the State of New Jersey, the
creditor must appoint an in-state representative or agent to act for the
foreclosing creditor. An out-of- state creditor shall provide the Borough
of Lindenwold with the full name and contact information, including
address, telephone number, cell phone number, and email address, of
the in-state representative of the foreclosing creditor. The in-state
representative/agent information shall be provided to the Lindenwold
Construction Office within 30 days of the filing of a summons and
complaint in a foreclosure action, or within 10 days of the date of the
enactment of this article in the event a foreclosure judgment has
already been obtained by the creditor.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in conflict with, or in violation
of, any of the provisions of this chapter or the Municipal Property
Maintenance Code.
B. The construction office of the Borough of Lindenwold shall issue a
notice of any violation pursuant to this chapter or any violation of the
Lindenwold Property Maintenance Code under the same procedures as
set forth in the Municipal Property Maintenance Code. If the creditor
has violated this article, or the Property Maintenance Code by failing to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior
or interior of the property, or any other violation of the property code,
the creditor shall be permitted 30 days from their receipt of the notice
to correct the violation, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the
violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety.
§ 238-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-23
1:401
§ 238-24. Assessment of lien. [Amended 3-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-03]
If the municipality expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation of the Property Maintenance Code on a residential
property in situations in which the creditor was given notice pursuant to
this article, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violations as
directed, the municipality shall have the same recourse against the creditor
as it would have against the title owner of the property. Additionally, the
municipality may assess a lien against a property subject to this article,
for any failure to comply with this article, to include imposition of a lien
for any unpaid fees or late charges assessed pursuant to this article. The
municipality may also assess a lien against the subject property for the
moneys expended by the municipality. The lien may be enforced and
collected in the same manner as real estate taxes are enforced and
collected, with interest to accrue at the same rate on all such liens as real
estate taxes.
C. Any person who shall violate the regulations contained herein shall be
subject to fines and penalties as listed in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of the
Lindenwold Borough Code. Each day a violation continues shall be
construed as a separate offense.
§ 238-23 LINDENWOLD CODE § 238-24
1:402
Chapter 240
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Storage of junk; emergency situations; vacant
property — See Ch. 238.
Relocation assistance — See Ch. 248.
Removal of snow, ice and weeds; maintenance
of sidewalks — See Ch. 296, Arts. II and V.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:403

ARTICLE I
General
§ 240-1. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Borough of
Lindenwold structures used for residential and nonresidential use which
are or may become substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance, and, further, that such conditions, including but not limited to
structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of the exterior
of the premises, infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities
and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and
air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the
health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and
inhabitants of the Borough of Lindenwold. It is further found and declared
that, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration,
certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions
and initiating slums; and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed,
the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same; and that, by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
enhanced, and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 240-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, conditions and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and
use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators
and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and
nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violations of this chapter;
and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use. It is intended that any inspections
and/or reports compiled in accordance herewith may be used to aid any
proceeding before any agency or court.
§ 240-3. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context. All definitions of the adopted
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:405
International Building Code issued and promulgated by the ICC, New Jersey
Edition, are hereby incorporated as if fully set forth herein.156
BUILDING — Any building or structure having a roof or partial roof
supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for human
habitation, use or occupancy, regardless of the materials of which it is
constructed, and includes accessory buildings and appurtenances belonging
thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting,
corrosion, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his servants,
agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with use or
occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more than one
kitchen or cooking facility.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or any part thereof, or any
building or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public or
any member thereof.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Open space on the premises outside any
building thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents and
vermin.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable or other organic waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOMS — Rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage
pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms, boiler rooms,
utility rooms and other rooms or spaces that are not used frequently or
for an extended period of time or that have less than 50 square feet of
superficial floor area, which shall not be considered as "habitable rooms."
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet in
any plan dimension.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
LOCAL HOUSING INSPECTOR — See § 240-18.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-3
1:406
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more dwelling units
or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling
uses or as a hotel.
NUISANCE —
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any individual, partnership or corporation and any person who,
alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to
any premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or
shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, as owner or agent of
the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate or as mortgagee in possession, regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting
or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
Any nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence or as
provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the ordinances of
the Borough of Lindenwold.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited
to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements and excavations; abandoned
iceboxes, refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound
fences or structures; and lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation,
such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove hazardous for
inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this chapter or
any other Borough ordinance or laws of the State of New Jersey.
D.
Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter or any
other Borough ordinance or laws of the State of New Jersey.
E.
Inadequate or insanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this chapter or any other Borough ordinance or laws of the State of New
Jersey.
F.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this chapter or any other Borough ordinance or
laws of the State of New Jersey.
G.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
H.
I. Fire hazards.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:407
deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility
over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the municipality, county or state relating to
health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning buildings
in the municipality.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes. (See also "garbage" and "rubbish.")
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials. (See also "garbage" and "refuse.")
UNSAFE BUILDING — A building or dwelling unit that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the building or dwelling unit by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire or because such
building or dwelling unit contains unsafe equipment or is so deteriorated,
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is
likely.
UTILITIES — Electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services, and
equipment therefor.
§ 240-4. Applicability; compliance required.
Every dwelling unit or residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy
building, and the premises on which it is situated, used or intended to
be used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which
shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises,
for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair
of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This
chapter shall also apply to mobile home parks. No person shall occupy or
rent to another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purposes of living
therein which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-5
1:408
§ 240-5. International Property Maintenance Code.
The Borough of Lindenwold hereby adopts the provisions of the 2012
International Property Maintenance Code, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures. A copy
of the Property Maintenance Code is annexed to this chapter, and three
copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
The provisions of the International Code shall be read in harmony with the
other provisions in this chapter as much as possible. Any inconsistencies
shall be handled pursuant to § 240-6 titled "Conflict with other laws." The
Code Enforcement Officer or other individual with power to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall be and hereby is entitled to cite violations
of the International Code. In writing a violation, the International Code
provision shall be cited along with a reference to the authority imposed
pursuant to this section. All references to "jurisdiction" or "municipality"
shall mean the Borough of Lindenwold. The following sections of the
International Code must be amended and/or supplemented to ensure it
applies to the Borough of Lindenwold:157
A. Section 101.1 is amended to read: "These regulations shall be known as
the International Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Lindenwold."
B. Section 103.5, dealing with fees: "The fees are determined and set forth
in Chapter 150."
C. Section 112.4 Failure to Comply. "Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of the Code of the Borough of Lindenwold."
D. Section 302.4 Weeds. "All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six inches. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property
to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall
be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as
prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply
with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to
enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property."
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:409
§ 240-6. Conflict with other laws.
The provisions of this chapter are to establish minimum standards for the
continued occupancy and the use of residential, nonresidential or mixed
occupancy buildings and dwelling units. In any case where the provisions of
this chapter impose a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinance,
proposed standard or law of the State of New Jersey, then the standards set
forth herein shall prevail. If the provisions of this chapter impose a lower
standard than any other ordinance, proposed standard or law of the State of
E. Section 304.14 Insect Screens. "During the period from May 1 to
October 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16
mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 millimeters), and every screen door
used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are
employed."
F. Section 602.3 Heat Supply. "Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to
maintain a minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Exceptions:
(1) When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating
system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in
Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
(2) In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F.
(-1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained."
G. Section 602.4 Occupiable work space. "Indoor occupiable work spaces
shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1
to maintain a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) during the period
the spaces are occupied. Exceptions:
(1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(2) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities."
§ 240-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-6
1:410
New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinance
or law shall prevail.
§ 240-7. Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any local ordinance
applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other
provision nor any official of the Borough of Lindenwold from enforcing any
such other provision.
§ 240-8. Effect upon other powers of municipality, officers and
departments.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the municipality or any officer or department thereof to enforce any
provisions of its ordinances or regulations, to prevent violations or punish
violators thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred upon the municipality
by any other law or ordinance.
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8
1:411

ARTICLE II
Minimum Standards for Exteriors
§ 240-9. Owner or operator to keep premises free of hazards,
nuisances and unsanitary conditions.
The exterior of the premises and all buildings thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions, and
any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner
and operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the
premises free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
A. Refuse: brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, wood, obnoxious
growths, filth, ashes, junk, garbage, litter, trash, refuse, rubbish and
debris.
B. Natural growth: dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth, which by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees
shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
C. Overhangings: loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice
and snow, which by reason of location above ground level constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
D. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions: holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions, broken or missing pavement, icy
conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets and other animals on
paths, walks, driveways, parking lots, parking areas and other parts of
the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the
premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired,
walks and steps replaced, and other conditions removed where
necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. This shall not exempt the
owner of any property from removing snow or ice as may be required by
any other law or ordinance.
E. Drainage. Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to
eliminate any recurrent or excessive accumulation of stormwater or
other water runoff. All natural drainage where the natural contour of
the premises has been altered and all drainage from the roofs, gutters,
leaders and side walls of the building on the premises shall be so
directed and conveyed as to prevent accumulation of such water
thereon or on the property adjacent thereto, and all such drains and
runoffs shall be kept clear and operable.
F. Sources of infestation.
G. Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:413
§ 240-10. Maintenance of exterior of premises and buildings.
The exterior of the premises, the exterior of buildings and the condition
of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and buildings shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners, including the following:
H. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and all
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally
sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all
times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas
vents or other draft-producing equipment shall be structurally safe,
durable, smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases.
I. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. Exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided
with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair and free from defect.
A. Storage of commercial and industrial material. Equipment and
materials relating to commercial or industrial uses shall not be stored
or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public
areas unless permitted under Chapter 365, Zoning, for the premises.
Storage of such materials not otherwise prohibited by law or municipal
ordinance shall be done in an orderly manner so not as to constitute a
health, safety or fire hazard.
B. Landscaping. Premises with landscaping and lawns, hedges, shrubs and
bushes, or other plant life, shall be kept trimmed and from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where the
same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property. For
commercial and industrial premises, as well as common areas of
multifamily premises, trees, shrubs, bushes or hedges or other
plantings that have fallen or died shall be replaced.
C. Reconstructed walls and sidings. Reconstructed walls and sidings of
nonresidential structures shall be of standard quality and appearance
commensurate with the character of the properties in the same block
and on both sides of the street on which the premises front, such that
the materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance under
prevailing appraisal practice and standards will depreciate the values
of the neighboring and adjoining premises as aforesaid.
D. General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair. The
same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that
the property itself may be preserved safely and fire hazards eliminated
§ 240-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-10
1:414
§ 240-11. Structural and general maintenance.
and adjoining properties protected from blighting influences. A monthly
exterminating service shall be maintained in all multiple-family
dwellings.
E. Parking of vehicles on lawns, sidewalks or median strips is prohibited.
[Amended 7-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1361]
F. Open or overflowing commercial, industrial or residential waste
disposal bins are hereby prohibited.
A. The outside building walls and foundation of any building shall not have
any holes, loose boards or broken, cracked or damaged finish that
admits rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin. All exterior
surfaces not resistant to deterioration shall be kept painted or
otherwise provided with a protective coating sufficient to prevent
structural deterioration and shall be repainted or replaced when
deteriorated.
B. Every dwelling unit shall be so maintained as to be weather- and
watertight.
C. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces shall be free of moisture resulting
from seepage, and cross-ventilation shall be required where necessary
to prevent accumulations of moisture and dampness. Areas that are
paved with stone or concrete shall be maintained at all times in a
condition so as to be smooth, clean and free from cracks, breaks and
other hazards.
D. All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent
infestation.
E. All parts of the dwelling shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of nuisance and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
F. Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rainwater conductor and roof cornice
shall be weather- and rain-tight and shall be kept in good repair.
Without restricting the generality of this section, maintenance includes
repairing of the roof and flashing, applying waterproof coatings,
installing and repairing eave troughs and rainwater piping and using
other suitable means. Dangerous accumulations of snow or ice, or both,
shall be promptly removed from the roof.
G. Every window, exterior floor and basement hatchway shall be weathertight,
watertight and infestation-proof, and shall be kept in good repair
and working condition.
H. Every outside stair, porch, balcony, landing and appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. All stairs, porches,
§ 240-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-11
1:415
§ 240-12. Maintenance of property in accordance with approved site
plan.
balconies and landings shall be provided with bannisters, railings or
other protection, properly designed and maintained to minimize the
hazard of falling.
A. Whenever any property has been the subject of a site plan review and
approval, that property shall be maintained in accordance with the
approved site plan. All parking areas shall be maintained with clearly
visible striping for parking areas, handicapped parking spaces, and fire
zones. All pavement, curbing and sidewalks shall be maintained free of
broken and uneven surfaces. The property owner shall be responsible
for making all necessary repairs. All landscaping shall be maintained in
accordance with the approved plan. The property owner shall replace
any shrubbery or trees that die within the next planting season with
shrubs or trees of a size comparable to the shrub or tree that is being
replaced.
B. Penalty. Any failure to maintain the property in accordance with the
approved site plan shall subject the property owner to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.158
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-12
1:416
ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards for Interiors
§ 240-13. Standards and regulations for multiple dwellings.
A. Janitorial service.
(1) In every multiple dwelling containing three or more dwelling units
or apartments or rooming units or combination thereof, the owner
shall provide a superintendent, janitor or housekeeper, who shall at
all times maintain the premises in compliance with this chapter,
including the responsibility for providing the receptacles for the
disposal of garbage and refuse. The person provided shall be
regularly available on the premises to perform the foregoing
duties, and in the case of complexes of 50 or more units, the person
shall reside on the premises. In the case of complexes with 500 or
more units, at least two such persons shall be provided, one of
whom shall reside on the premises.
(2) The owner or operator shall make known to all tenants or
occupants the name, address and telephone number of the person
provided to act as superintendent, janitor or housekeeper and shall
register the same with the local housing inspector, Borough Clerk
or designee. The owner or operator shall also make available and
known to all tenants or occupants the name of an alternate
individual who shall be responsible for the duties of the
superintendent, janitor or housekeeper during his or her absence.
(3) The failure of any superintendent, janitor or housekeeper to comply
with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the owner or
operator from the duties and responsibilities imposed by this
chapter.
(4) Any and all maintenance employees hired by the owner or operator,
including the superintendent, janitor or housekeeper or their
agents, shall be provided with picture identification, which they
shall keep with them at all times and produce upon request. The
responsibility for compliance with this requirement shall be that of
the owner or operator.
(5) The owner or operator shall register the name, address and
telephone number of said owner or operator with the local housing
inspector, Borough Clerk or designee.
B. Removal and storage of garbage and refuse. The owner or operator of
every multiple dwelling containing four or more dwelling units,
apartments or rooming units, or any combination thereof, shall have the
duty and responsibility to keep the premises free from filth, refuse,
rubbish and garbage and of removing garbage and refuse after its daily
collection from tenants or occupants. The owner or operator shall have
the duty and responsibility of providing storage areas or storage bins of
§ 240-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13
1:417
§ 240-14. Provision of basic utilities.
fireproof construction containing fireproof walls or partitions of at least
two hours' rating for the storage of accumulated garbage or refuse
while awaiting collection for removal from the premises. All common
areas, stairways, halls, attics, cellars and basements or other parts of
the building not under the exclusive control of the occupants shall be
kept free from filth, ashes, rubbish, refuse, junk, slop, wood, paper or
other materials.
C. Central heat and air conditioning.
(1) Premises whose lease or express or implied covenants cognizable
at common law or equity, or as provided by law, shall include air
conditioning shall provide such from May 2 until September 14
annually at a temperature not exceeding 74° F. or a temperature
not less than 15° lower than actual outside temperatures.
(2) Central heat shall be required in all residential dwelling units from
October 1 to May 1 annually at a temperature of not less than 68°
F.159
D. Elevators. All residential dwellings of four or more stories containing
elevators shall have twenty-four-hour maintenance contracts to prevent
elevators being out of service for excessive lengths of time.
A. Every dwelling unit shall meet the following minimum standards for the
provision of utility service to the dwelling unit:
(1) Water supply. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a safe
supply of potable water meeting the standards set forth in the New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 et seq.,
as the same may be amended and supplemented. The New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the local health
agency shall approve the source of the water supply. The minimum
rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or fixture
shall not be less than one gallon per minute. The supply of water
shall be provided to all plumbing fixtures freely and continuously,
pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Electrical service. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with
electrical service, circuiting and receptacles that are adequate for
the electrical load being served. If the electrical load in a building
is excessive or the electrical service inadequate to supply all
appliances contained in the dwelling unit, the service shall be
upgraded in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-13 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-14
1:418
(3) Central heating. Every dwelling unit shall have central heating
systems which are properly installed, maintained in good and safe
working condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments to a
temperature of at least 70° F. at a distance of three feet above floor
level while the external temperature is 10° F. All central heating
systems shall be of a type approved by the Fire Subcode Official.
Nonvented portable space heaters and stoves that burn solid, liquid
or gaseous fuels are prohibited.
(4) Hot water. All dwelling units shall be provided with water heating
facilities which are properly installed, maintained in safe and good
working condition and are properly connected with running hot
and cold water lines as required under this chapter and other
applicable codes. Such water-heating facilities shall be capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate
amount of water to be drawn at every sink, lavatory basin, bathtub
or shower at a temperature of not less than 120° F. All sinks,
basins, showers and baths shall have a continuous supply of hot
and cold running water.
(5) Wastewater and sewer. All dwelling units shall be provided with a
wastewater system. Every flush water closet, toilet, sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower shall be properly connected to an
approved sewer system or septic tank. The drainage system shall
be designed, constructed and maintained to safeguard against
fouling, deposit of solids, clogging and with adequate cleanouts so
arranged that the pipes may be readily cleaned.
B. No owner or operator shall cause any service, equipment or utility
which is required to be supplied herein to be removed from, shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit, except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs,
replacements or alterations are in the process of being made or during
temporary emergencies when discontinuation of service is required by
the utility company. In the event that any service or utility is
discontinued or shut off, the owner shall take immediate steps to cause
the restoration of such service or utility. Where utility or service is shut
off or discontinued as a result of nonpayment by the utility customer,
and the utility customer is not the owner or operator, the utility
customer shall take immediate steps to cause the restoration of such
service or utility. For purposes of this subsection "utility customer" shall
mean the person or entity identified in the account records of the utility
as responsible for payment of the utility bill.
C. All equipment used in the supply of utility service to a dwelling unit
shall be maintained as follows:
(1) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free
from defects, leaks and obstructions.
§ 240-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-14
1:419
§ 240-15. Basic facility requirements.
(2) All electrical outlets shall be maintained in good working order and
in a safe condition and shall be connected to the source of electric
power. No temporary wiring shall be used, except extension cords
may be used for temporary applications only. Extension cords shall
not be used as a substitute for fixed or permanent wiring.
"Temporary" generally means it is associated with a one-time job or
with a transient condition.
(3) Hot water storage tanks and hot water pipes shall be maintained
free from leaks or other defects.
(4) All chimneys, smokestacks, smoke pipes and flues, other pipes, the
heating equipment, furnaces and boilers in the dwelling unit shall
be maintained free of defects and in good operating condition at all
times and shall be so maintained and so operated that no coal, gas,
soot, smoke or noxious fumes or odors shall enter the dwelling unit
or any dwelling unit adjacent thereto.
(5) Waste and sewer lines, septic holding tanks and other sewer or
septic system fixtures shall be so installed and maintained as to
function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects to prevent structural deterioration, backflow or
backsiphonage.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its main walls the following:
(1) Lavatory facilities. A room, separated from the habitable rooms,
which affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water
closet or toilet in good order and properly connected to a water and
wastewater system. Every sleeping room shall have access to at
least one water closet or toilet and one lavatory basin without
passing through another bedroom and which shall be located no
farther than one floor above or below each sleeping room.
(2) Basin. A lavatory basin located in the same room as the required
flush water closet or toilet in good order and properly connected to
a water and wastewater system.
(3) Bathtub or shower. A room, separated from the habitable rooms,
which affords privacy to a person in the room and which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower in good order and properly
connected to a water and wastewater system, which may be
contained in the same room as the one containing the lavatory and
basin facilities.160
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-14 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-15
1:420
§ 240-16. Maintenance of interiors of premises and buildings.
The interior of the premises, the interior of buildings and the condition of
accessory structures shall be maintained to preserve the health, safety and
welfare of the occupants. Such maintenance shall including the following:
(4) Kitchen sink. A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material in
good order and properly connected to a water and wastewater
system.
(5) Cooking facilities. At least one supplied kitchen gas or electric
stove providing at least two top burners and an oven, not
necessarily in the same unit, in good order and repair and properly
connected to the appropriate utility system, as well as a suitable
space to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. All
cooking facilities shall contain ventilation sufficient to remove
odors to the exterior of the premises. Cooking facilities serving
more than one dwelling unit shall not be permitted, except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the operation of
hotels, boardinghouses, nursing homes and similar establishments
subject to licensing.
B. Sleeping rooms and bedrooms.
(1) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 75 square feet of floor area for the first person, and
50 square feet for each additional person. Closet area and hall
area, where provided within the dwelling unit, may count up to 10%
of the required floor area. No part of a room shall be included in
calculations for purposes of determining floor area that has a floorto-
ceiling height of less than five feet.
(2) Kitchens, lavatory facilities, cellars, nonhabitable spaces and
interior public areas shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes.
(3) Sleeping rooms shall not constitute the only means of access to
other sleeping rooms.
C. Ingress and egress.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall have safe and unobstructed means of
ingress and egress. Such means of ingress and egress shall not be
through any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall lead to a
safe and open space at ground level accessible to a street.
(2) A room used for sleeping purposes shall be provided with a safe
and unobstructed means of egress leading directly to an outside
area accessible to a street.
A. General. Every floor, wall, ceiling, door, window or other part of the
interior of a building shall be kept in good repair and capable of the use
intended by its design.
§ 240-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16
1:421
B. Deterioration. All interior parts subject to corrosion or deterioration,
when corroded or deteriorated, shall be repaired, painted or replaced.
Side walls, window frames, doors and other woodwork, ceilings of every
habitable room, bathrooms, pantries, laundries, foyers, halls, corridors
and closets within a dwelling unit shall be kept painted, plastered,
papered or otherwise maintained so that they shall have a clean and
washable surface. The use of any paint or pigmented liquid substance
applied to surfaces by brush, roller or spray in which the total
nonvolatile ingredients contain more than 1% lead by weight on the
interior surface of any dwelling unit or any other surface or area to
which a child residing in a dwelling unit may have access is prohibited.
C. Infestation. The owner of a dwelling unit shall maintain the dwelling
unit and premises as to prevent infestation by rodents, insects or other
vermin and shall carry out such rodent stoppage, vermin-proofing, or
other means of preventing infestations of such dwelling unit as may be
required by the local housing inspector. Whenever a dwelling unit shall
become infested with rodents, insects or other vermin, the owner shall
promptly exterminate the dwelling unit. Where the dwelling unit is
occupied by someone other than the owner, the occupant shall promptly
notify the owner of the infestation.
D. Cleanliness. No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant any vacant
dwelling unit unless it is clean and sanitary. The occupants of every
dwelling unit shall keep the dwelling unit in a clean and sanitary
condition.
E. Debris. The storage of objects or materials shall be done in an orderly
manner so as to not constitute a health, safety or fire hazard. Storage of
materials or objects shall not impair or impede the use of habitable
rooms for their intended purpose or block or obstruct any means of
egress from habitable rooms and/or sleeping rooms.
F. Common areas. Every owner of a building containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining the common areas of
the building in a clean and sanitary condition.
G. Dampness. The ceilings, walls and floors of the interior of the dwelling
unit shall be kept dry and free from dampness. Every cellar and
basement shall be ventilated where necessary to prevent dampness.
H. Garbage, rubbish and refuse. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one
container of metal or other material approved by the local housing
inspector, for the temporary storage and disposal of rubbish. In
addition, every dwelling unit shall have a watertight container, provided
with a tight-fitting cover, of metal or other material approved by the
local housing inspector, for the temporary storage of garbage or other
organic waste. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all of
his/her rubbish and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in a rubbish storage container as required herein. All garbage and any
other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, insects or
§ 240-16 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-16
1:422
§ 240-17. Compliance with fire code required.
vermin shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in a garbage disposal unit or in garbage-storing containers as required
herein. For purposes of this subsection a garbage disposal unit is an
electrical device, installed beneath a kitchen sink, which grinds up food
so that it can go into the waste pipe. Recyclable materials shall be
stored separately from nonrecyclable materials.
A. Every building covered by this chapter shall comply with the minimum
requirements for fire safety established by the State Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70.161
B. In event of a change in ownership of any multiple dwelling containing
three or more dwelling units or apartments or rooming units or
combination thereof the owner or seller of said dwelling shall have an
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or other individual with
power to enforce the provisions of this chapter to ensure each unit
complies with the National Fire Code concerning placement and
operation of smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms.162
C. See Chapter 150 for fee schedule.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-17
1:423

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 240-18. Designation of local housing inspector; general powers
and duties.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated to serve as the local
housing inspector hereunder, and all inspections, regulations, enforcement
and hearings on violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly
stated to the contrary, shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Borough Council. The local housing inspector may appoint or designate
such other local housing inspectors or employees to perform duties as may
be necessary to the enforcement of this chapter, including the making of
inspections and holding of hearings.
§ 240-19. Additional powers of local housing inspector.
The local housing inspector shall exercise such powers as may be necessary
or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of
this chapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:
§ 240-20. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The local housing inspector may, subject to approval by the governing body
by ordinances amending this chapter, adopt written rules and regulations
as he may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter nor in anywise alter, amend
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and provided
that any entrance without the permission of the occupant shall be
consistent with the laws and Constitutions of the State of New Jersey
and of the United States.
D. To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents and employees as he
deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
F. To collect on behalf of the municipality any appropriate fees properly
authorized.
§ 240-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-20
1:425
or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The local housing inspector
shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt
in his office and in the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Lindenwold. Such rules and regulations shall be ineffective until adoption
by the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold by ordinance.
§ 240-21. Inspection.
A. The local housing inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwelling units, commercial
buildings, industrial buildings and any other building or premises
located within the Borough of Lindenwold in order to perform the duty
of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of the buildings
or dwelling units and the general public. For the purposes of making
such inspections, the local housing inspector is hereby authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwelling units,
commercial buildings, industrial buildings or any other building or
premises. The owner or occupant of a dwelling unit, commercial
building, industrial building or any other building or premises shall give
the local housing inspector free access to such building or premises at
all reasonable times for the purposes of making such inspection,
examination and survey.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, commercial building, industrial
building or other building shall give the owner thereof, or his or her
agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling unit, commercial
building, industrial building, or other building or its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The local housing inspector shall inspect a dwelling unit or a rental unit
whenever there shall occur a change in occupancy in a rental unit by
change in tenant or by the execution of a new lease with a new tenant
or a change in occupancy in any other dwelling units by sale or lease,
and a new occupancy certificate shall be required.
D. The local housing inspector shall inspect a commercial building or an
industrial building whenever any change in industrial, institutional or
commercial use occurs, and a new occupancy certificate shall be
required.
E. Whenever a complaint is filed in writing with the local housing
inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the
municipality charging noncompliance with this chapter, or whenever it
appears to the local housing inspector on his own motion or upon notice
from the Police Department that there is noncompliance with this
chapter, the local housing inspector shall inspect the dwelling unit or
building charged with noncompliance after written notification to the
owner or occupant.
§ 240-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-21
1:426
§ 240-22. Inspection fees.
§ 240-23. Service of complaints, notices and orders.
F. Whenever a change set forth in Subsection C or D above shall occur, the
owner of said dwelling or premises shall notify the local housing
inspector at least seven days prior to such change in occupancy or use
and make the dwelling unit, commercial building or industrial building
and its premises available to the local housing inspector for inspection
to determine compliance with this chapter. In the event of a
cancellation or change, the property owner shall give at least 48 hours'
notice to the local housing inspector. The local housing inspector will
endeavor to have the inspection done in seven days. Occupancy of any
building that has not been inspected in accordance with this section
shall be a violation of this chapter.
G. Following each inspection, the local housing inspector shall provide a
rating of habitability for each dwelling unit, commercial building and
industrial building as follows:
(1) Unsatisfactory. This rating shall apply where the dwelling unit or
building is considered unfit for human habitation and shall cause
the dwelling unit, commercial building or industrial building to be
vacated immediately. If the local housing inspector issues this
rating, then no occupancy certificate shall be issued, and any
occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter.
(2) Conditional. This rating shall apply where the dwelling unit or
building is in violation of this chapter, but the violations do not
cause the building to be unfit for human habitation. Such a rating
shall permit occupancy, provided that the violations as cited are
corrected within a thirty-day time period. If violations continue to
exist after the expiration of 30 days from notice of a conditional
rating, court action would be instituted and a fine or penalty as
prescribed in this chapter shall be issued on a daily basis.
(3) Satisfactory. This rating shall permit occupancy for a period of one
year or until the next scheduled inspection for habitability or until
receipt of a complaint. If the local housing inspector issues this
rating, a new occupancy certificate shall be issued, provided that
all applicable fees have been paid.
A. In apartment complexes, the costs of reinspections shall not be passed
on to the tenants. The provision of this chapter requiring owners to pay
for this inspection and that owners not pass this charge along to tenants
will henceforth be fully enforced.
B. See Chapter 150 for fee schedule.
A. Complaints, notices or orders issued by a local housing inspector
pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally
§ 240-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-23
1:427
§ 240-24. Conditions constituting unfit buildings.
or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the local housing
inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the local housing
inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
printed and published in the municipality or, in the absence of such
newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulating
in the municipality in which the buildings are located. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county
recording officer of the county in which the building is located.
B. The local housing inspector shall, if an inspection discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in
that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before
the local housing inspector (or his designated agent) at a place therein
fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving
of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the local housing inspector.163
A. The local housing inspector may determine that a building or dwelling
unit qualifies for an unsatisfactory rating or is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds:
(1) The building or dwelling unit is an unsafe structure;
(2) The building or dwelling unit lacks a potable water supply;
(3) The building or dwelling unit lacks illumination, ventilation or
sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the
occupants or the public;
(4) The building or dwelling unit lacks adequate plumbing, heating
facilities, safe electrical service or any other utility or basic facility
required pursuant to § 240-14 or 240-15;
(5) A dwelling unit has an infestation of rodents, insects, vermin or
other pests;
(6) The building or dwelling unit has failed to comply with any law or
ordinance requiring installation or maintenance of smoke
detectors;
163. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 240-23 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-24
1:428
§ 240-25. Order to repair or demolish.
(7) The building or dwelling unit has walls or other vertical structural
members that list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb
line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle
third of its base;
(8) The building or dwelling unit shows, exclusive of the foundation,
33% or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting
members or members or 50% of damage or deterioration of the
nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
(9) The building or dwelling unit has improperly distributed loads upon
the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which
have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used;
(10) The building or dwelling unit has been damaged by fire, wind or
other causes so as to become dangerous or injurious to the health
or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of
neighboring buildings or other residents of such municipality;
(11) The building or dwelling unit has inadequate egress in case of fire
or panic or is one having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire
escapes or other means of egress;
(12) Conditions exist in such building or dwelling unit which are
unlawful, dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings
or other residents of such municipality, because of the degree to
which the building or dwelling unit is in disrepair or lacks
maintenance, is unsanitary, contains filth or contamination,
increases the risk of fire, accident or other calamity, or otherwise
constitutes a hazard or is likely to cause sickness or disease.
B. No person shall occupy, rent to or permit another to occupy any
dwelling unit for the purposes of living therein which has been declared
unfit for human occupancy.
A. If after such notice and hearing the local housing inspector determines
that the building or dwelling unit under consideration is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of
fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
(1) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building or
apartment to be made by the owner within a reasonable time,
which time shall be set forth in the order, and that the building or
dwelling unit be vacated and closed within the time set forth in the
order; or
§ 240-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-25
1:429
§ 240-26. Remedies for failure of owner to comply with order to
repair or demolish.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building or dwelling
unit, the local housing inspector may cause such building or apartment
to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; and the
local housing inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of
any building or dwelling unit so closed a placard with the following words:
"This building or apartment is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use; the use or occupation of this building or apartment is prohibited
and unlawful." If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the building, the local housing inspector may cause such building
to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 240-27. Municipal liens.
(2) If the building or apartment is in such a condition as to make it
dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises and the owner fails to repair, to alter or improve said
building within the time specified in the order, then the owner shall
be required to remove or demolish said building within a
reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
B. All repairs, additions, alterations or replacements in dwelling units,
commercial buildings or industrial buildings or premises to bring such
dwelling units, commercial buildings or industrial buildings or premises
into compliance with this chapter shall conform to all Borough
ordinances and the Uniform Construction Code, or other laws
governing the construction, replacement, repair or alteration of such
buildings or premises or the facilities or equipment contained therein.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
municipality, and cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The local
housing inspector shall certify the cost thereof to the governing body,
which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands; the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes. Costs for removal or demolition of a building
§ 240-25 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-27
1:430
§ 240-28. Local housing inspector as receiver of rents and
income.165
Where a property has failed to have been maintained in accordance with
this chapter, the local housing inspector may, with the approval of the
governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold by resolution, bring an action
to be appointed receiver ex officio of the rents and income of any such
property for the purpose of collecting the rents and income from such
property and expending the same for the purpose of abating the conditions
against which this chapter is directed.
shall include all costs for the closure and/or removal of any and all
underground storage tank systems which were closed and/or removed
pursuant to the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22 et seq.,
and any applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the authority
thereof and the applicable provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:14B-9.1 et seq.
B. The local housing inspector must comply with the statutory
requirements embodied at N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., both before and
after the building is removed or demolished. The property or materials
left behind following the demolition or removal shall not be sold unless
permitted by state or local statute. In the event that any property or
materials are sold, after proper notice is given and all applicable
statutory provisions have been followed, the proceeds of that sale shall
be credited to the removal or demolition costs incurred. If there are no
such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded
to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court
by the local housing inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may
be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed according to the order
or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
C. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.164
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-29
1:431
§ 240-29. Removal of brush, debris, garbage, etc.; lien against the
premises.166
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
health, safety or general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard, the Borough
Council may require the owner or occupant of a premises to remove or
destroy brush, weeds including ragweed, dead or dying trees, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after
notice to remove or destroy the same. Notice shall be made as provided
in § 240-23. In cases where the owner or occupant shall have refused
or neglected to remove or destroy same in the manner and within the
time provided above, the Borough Council may provide for the removal or
destruction of the same by or under the direction of a municipal officer;
such officer shall certify the costs thereof to the Borough Council, who
shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against said premises; the amount so charged
shall forthwith become and form part of the taxes to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes. Notice of the amount so charged as a lien against the
premises shall be forwarded to the owner by certified mail. Any owner or
party interested may, within 30 days of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court solely to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the
municipal lien certificates.
§ 240-30. Referral of violations of other ordinances.
Any violation of any ordinance other than this chapter discovered in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be reported to the local housing inspector,
who shall refer the alleged violation to the official or agency responsible for
the enforcement of such ordinance.
§ 240-31. Power to withhold strict enforcement.
The local housing inspector shall have the power to withhold strict
enforcement of this chapter upon written application therefor by an owner
or party in interest after obtaining approval of the Borough Council and
after making determination that:
A. Any variation or modification of structure use approved by the local
housing inspector will not in any material way alter the standards of
this chapter and cannot affect detrimentally the health or safety of
occupants of the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or owners of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood.
B. Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would compel
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-29 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-31
1:432
§ 240-32. Extensions.
The local housing inspector may grant extensions of time whenever he
or she shall determine that, despite diligent effort, compliance cannot be
accomplished within the time specified in the notice or under this chapter.
If, however, such extension shall be for a period in excess of three business
days or if more than one extension is sought, the local housing inspector
shall require a written application of extension stating the need for said
extension and demonstrating that the continued noncompliance will not be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the building
or dwelling unit or the public. The local housing inspector shall rule in
writing upon the extension, and such ruling shall be made part of the file.
§ 240-33. Nuisances; abatement or correction by Borough; cost as
lien.
The governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold may, by resolution, abate
a nuisance, correct a defect or put the premises in condition so as to comply
with the requirements of any municipal ordinance or state law applicable
thereto at the cost of the owner or lessor, and expend municipal funds for
such purpose, and charge the same against the premises; and the amount
thereof as determined by the governing body of the municipality shall be a
lien against the premises and collectible as provided in this chapter.
§ 240-34. Emergencies.
Whenever the local housing inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order requiring that such action be taken
as he determines necessary, applying the statutes and other provisions
of this chapter to meet the emergency, and such order shall be effective
immediately; and any person to whom such order is directed shall comply
immediately but, upon petition to the local housing inspector, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of this chapter as to
charging the costs and making them assessable as taxes shall apply to such
emergencies.
§ 240-35. Temporary housing in event of emergencies.167
In the event that a single-family home is damaged by fire or other immediate
emergency such as flood, lightning or being struck by a falling tree and,
expenditures on premises that would be substantially disproportionate
to any benefit to health, safety or welfare that might be derived
therefrom.
C. The owner, operator or occupant is without any practical or feasible
means to comply with the strict provisions of this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-35
1:433
in the opinion of the Borough Construction Code Official, the inhabitants
of the structure cannot safely continue to reside in the structure during its
repair or reconstruction, then the Construction Code Official may authorize
placement of a trailer on the site as temporary living accommodations for
the inhabitants. The Construction Code Official shall approve the type of
trailer and its location on the site and shall make sure it complies with all
other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. The Construction Code
Official shall have the authority to grant an initial ninety-day permit for
the temporary trailer and such other extensions as he deems appropriate.
However, in no event shall the temporary trailer be permitted to remain
on the site for longer than nine months. Nothing in this section shall
permit use of a temporary trailer on a site where the structure has become
uninhabitable due to neglect and/or failure to repair and maintain the
structure.
§ 240-36. Coordination with Police Department.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the local housing inspector
to coordinate their efforts for purposes of enforcing this chapter. Any
violations found by proper representatives of the Police Department shall
be immediately forwarded to the local housing inspector (not more than 48
hours from said noted violation), and the Police Department representatives
designated by the Chief of Police shall assist the local housing inspector
and/or his representatives in obtaining legal entrance into a dwelling unit,
building or premises in order to effectuate enforcement of this chapter.
§ 240-37. Violations and penalties.
A. Where any person fails to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this
chapter, such a person or entity shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided herein, and each
day of noncompliance with said notice shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or any person who aids, assists or abets in the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties provided herein, and each violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter for each day the same is violated shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense. A summons may be issued
from Municipal Court for such violation, but nothing contained herein
shall limit further action under the criminal and civil laws of this state
through any court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to
remove or abate any nuisance.
B. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, each violation shall be subject to
the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. All penalties
and money collected under any provision of this chapter or the code
established herein shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough of
Lindenwold.168
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-35 LINDENWOLD CODE § 240-38
1:434
§ 240-38. Statutory authority.169
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the following New Jersey statutes:
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14; 40:48-1, Subdivision 15; 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12;
40:48-2.12a through 40:48-2.12g; 40:69A-30; and/or N.J.S.A. 2A:42-74
through 2A:42-78 and the municipality's general police powers.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-38
1:435
Chapter 242
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 242-1. Requesting public records.
The use of the Government Records Request Form for any correspondence
which requests records under the state's Open Public Records Act is hereby
adopted.
Chapter 248
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance code — See Ch. 240. Rental registration — See Ch. 250.
§ 248-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which are occupied or intended, arranged or designed to
be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his servants,
agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with use or
occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more than one
kitchen or cooking facility.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, limited liability company, partnership, association or trust who
owns or purports to own, operates or exercises control over or is in charge
of one or more rental units or any building, project or structure containing
one or more rental units.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is used, occupied or offered for
occupancy by lease, rent or otherwise to persons other than the owner.
Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental facility, dwelling,
commercial unit or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied. For purposes of
this chapter, any dwelling unit where the dwelling unit is occupied by a
person or persons other than the owner, even if rent or other consideration
is not being charged or collected, shall be considered a rental unit.
TENANT — The occupant of a rental unit whose occupancy is recognized
by the owner and is not the result of trespass or unauthorized sublease or
assignment.
§ 240-38 LINDENWOLD CODE § 248-2
1:436
§ 248-2. Revolving relocation assistance fund.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1a, upon passage of this chapter the Borough
of Lindenwold shall create a revolving relocation assistance fund. Monies
appropriated from the fund shall be used by the Borough of Lindenwold
to provide relocation assistance pursuant to the Relocation Assistance Act,
N.J.S.A. 20:4-1 et seq. The revolving relocation assistance fund shall receive
deposits from the following actions, less any money required to be repaid to
the State of New Jersey:
§ 248-3. Illegal occupancy; displaced tenants.
A. Any relocation costs and interest thereon paid to the Borough of
Lindenwold pursuant to § 1 of P.L. 1983, c. 536 (N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1) by an
owner of real property who has been held liable for a civil or criminal
penalty in the case of any displacement of persons by housing or
construction code enforcement;
B. Any sums realized by the Borough of Lindenwold upon enforcement of
municipal liens or liquidation of any property acquired by virtue of
enforcement pursuant to § 1 of P.L. 1983, c. 536 (N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1);
C. Any sums realized by the Borough of Lindenwold in relation to any
relocation cost and interest thereon upon enforcement or liquidation of
any property acquired by virtue of enforcement and collection pursuant
to § 1 of P.L. 1984, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.2);
D. Any relocation costs and interest thereon repaid to the Borough of
Lindenwold by the owner of a structure who has given a tenant a notice
of eviction pursuant to § 3 of P.L. 1974, c. 49 (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2) as a
result of zoning or code enforcement activity for an illegal occupancy;
E. Any sums realized by the Borough of Lindenwold upon enforcement of
§ 248-5 of this chapter; and
F. Any other sums required by law to be deposited in the revolving
relocation assistance fund.
A. Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.2 that results from zoning or code enforcement activity for an
illegal occupancy as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g shall be
considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation
assistance for the household as a single unit in an amount equal to six
times the monthly rent paid by the displaced person. The owner of the
rental unit from which the tenant is displaced shall be liable for the
payment of relocation assistance pursuant to this section. This payment
shall be made by the owner directly to the tenant prior to or upon the
effective date of the notice to vacate the rental unit.
B. No tenant shall be eligible for relocation benefits if the illegal
occupancy or code violation was primarily caused by the tenant's
conduct and not by factors for which the owner is liable.
§ 248-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:437
§ 248-4. Relocation costs incurred by Borough; restitution to
Borough.
§ 248-5. Violations and penalties.
A. The Borough of Lindenwold may, but shall not be required to, pay
relocation assistance from the Borough's revolving relocation
assistance fund to any displaced person that has not received the
required payment under § 248-3 of this chapter from the owner of the
rental unit at the time of eviction or displacement.
B. All relocation assistance costs incurred by the Borough of Lindenwold
pursuant to this section shall be repaid by the owner of the rental unit
to the Borough in the same manner as relocation costs are billed and
collected under N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1 and 20:4-4.2. These repayments shall
be deposited into a revolving relocation assistance fund in accordance
with § 248-2 hereof.
A. In addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner-landlord of the
structure for relocation assistance paid by the Borough to a displaced
tenant, the owner shall be liable for an additional fine for zoning or
housing code violations for an illegal occupancy in an amount equal to
six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person to be paid to
the Borough by the owner-landlord of the structure pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g(c).
B. In addition to any penalty imposed by this section, for a second or
subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, the Borough may impose
upon the owner a fine equal to the annual tuition cost of any resident of
the illegally occupied unit attending a public school, which shall be
recovered in a civil action by a summary proceeding in the name of the
Borough pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. The tuition cost shall be determined in the manner
prescribed for nonresident pupils pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:38-19, and
the payment of the fine shall be remitted to the appropriate school
district. For purposes of this subsection, a "second and subsequent
violation for an illegal occupancy" shall be limited to those violations
that are new and are a result of a distinct and separate zoning or code
enforcement activity and shall not include continuing violations during
the period required for summary dispossession proceedings if the
owner has initiated eviction proceedings in a court of proper
jurisdiction.
§ 248-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 248-5
1:438
Chapter 250
RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-42.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Noise — See Ch. 205.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 229.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 238 and
240.
Relocation assistance — See Ch. 248.
§ 248-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-5
1:439

ARTICLE I
Landlord Responsibility
§ 250-1. Responsibilities of landlords and owners.
A. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, any owner may be
subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued hereunder
upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection A(15) herein.
(3) Continuing, after notice, to rent the unit or units to a tenant or
tenants who are convicted of a violation of the noise and/or
nuisance codes of the Borough, unless the owner has taken legal
action to have the conduct ceased and/or to evict the tenant.
(4) Continuing, after notice, to permit the rental unit to be occupied by
more than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this
article unless the owner has taken legal action to have the conduct
ceased and/or to evict the tenant.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit(s) is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
(6) Failing to pursue eviction of lessee or tenant for good cause as
defined by N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g which includes a tenant or lessee
who:
(a) Has continued to be, after written notice to cease, so
disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the occupants
or other tenants residing in said house or neighborhood; or
(b) Has willfully or by reason of gross negligence caused or
allowed destruction, damage or injury to the premises; or
(c) Has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially
violate or breach any of the landlord's rules and regulations
governing said premises which have been accepted by tenant
or made a part of the lease at the beginning of a lease term; or
(d) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense, or if a
juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act
which committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
the Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1
et seq.) involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing
or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled
dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the
meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-1
1:441
building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto
and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense
either successfully completed or been admitted to and
continued upon probation while completing, a drug
rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-14; or, being
the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly
harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so
convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted
such a person to occupy those premises for residential
purposes, whether continuously or intermittently; or
(e) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act, which if
committed by an adult, would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 or N.J.S.A. 2C:12-3 involving assault, or
terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the
landlord's family or an employee of the landlord; or being the
tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or
harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so
pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to
occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether
continuously or intermittently; or
(f) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if
committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-1 involving theft of property from the landlord,
the leased premises or other tenants residing in the same
building or complex; or, being the tenant or lessee of such
leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a
person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or
otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those
premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or
intermittently; or
(7) False or misleading information given or provided in connection
with the inspection application or renewal; or
(8) Failure to correct violations in the time period prescribed; or
(9) Failure to permit lawful inspections; or
(10) Failure to pay any fee herein provided for; or
(11) Violation of the provisions of this article or any other code or law
pertaining to the use of the property.
B. The landlord/owner of any such property located within the Borough of
Lindenwold shall be responsible and liable for the conduct and actions
of any tenant, invitee, guest or any other person who is in, on or about
the premises and/or property with the permission, either express or
implied, of the landlord, owner, tenant, guest or invitee, if the landlord/
§ 250-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 250-1
1:442
§ 250-2. Notice of violation; subsequent violations.
owner has notice of such conduct and fails to take necessary,
reasonable, and appropriate action to address or respond to same, as
permitted and authorized by New Jersey law.
A. Upon the occurrence of any violation of this article, the landlord or
owner of the property shall be put on notice by receiving written
notification of said violation from the person so designated by the
Borough Council to forward said notice. Said notice shall generally
inform the landlord and/or owner of the nature of the violation and the
date upon which said violation occurred. Said notice shall also state
that any subsequent violation of this article may result in said landlord
and/or owner being cited and otherwise charged with a violation of said
article, which may result in a hearing on said violation pursuant to
Article II, § 250-12 of this chapter.
B. If any violation of this article occurs subsequent to written notification
being sent to said landlord and/or owner in accordance with the above
provisions, then said landlord and/or owner shall be cited for violation
of this article and noticed for a hearing pursuant to Article II, § 250-12
of this chapter.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2
1:443

ARTICLE II
Inspection of Rental Property
§ 250-3. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner by this article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room
or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse or other dwelling unit, consisting of
one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building,
whether designed with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling
purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for
residence, for office or the operation of any industry or business or for any
other type of independent use. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more
than one kitchen or cooking facility.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
including, but not limited to, the owner thereof or any of his servants,
agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvement connected with use or
occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more than one
kitchen or cooking facility.
INSPECTION YEAR — The year beginning on the date that the certificate of
inspection is issued and continuing for the calendar year.
LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION ITEMS — Shall constitute the following: smoke
detectors, lint, mold, heater mechanical malfunctions, roach and/or insect
infestation, carbon monoxide detectors, chain locks, tripping hazards, hot
water pressure valves, automatic door closures, Romex connectors,
electrical receptacles, electrical hazards, railings, exhaust flu pipes, dryer
exhaust pipes, and stoves, if applicable and/or required under applicable
building/construction codes. Exterior life safety inspection items shall
include trip hazards on steps, sidewalks, and/or sink holes on the property,
railings, building identification numbers and/or letters, electrical hazards,
environmental hazards and/or spills, broken windows, dead or dying trees,
and roofs.
LOCAL HOUSING INSPECTOR — See Chapter 240, § 240-18.
§ 250-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3
1:445
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership association or trust who owns, operates, exercises
control over, or is in charge of a rental facility. This includes a condominium
association in which any rental facility exists.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial
unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner
makes his primary residence therein. A person may have only one primary
residence in the Borough.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENT or RENTED — Occupied by any person or persons other than the
owner, regardless of whether there is a written or oral agreement and
regardless of whether the owner receives consideration for the occupancy.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or condominiums
or a portion thereof consisting of more than three dwelling units kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where living
accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay or
other consideration for one or more individuals.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is used, occupied or offered for
occupancy by lease, rent or otherwise, to persons other than the owner.
Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental facility, dwelling,
commercial unit or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied. For purposes of
this article, any dwelling unit where the dwelling unit is occupied by a
person or persons other than the owner, even if rent or other consideration
is not being charged or collected, shall be considered a rental unit.
TENANCY — Occupancy of the unit by one or more tenants.
TENANT — Occupant in a unit other than the owner.
§ 250-4. Inspection application forms; filing; contents.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units and rental facilities shall be inspected, as provided
herein. Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or designee of the
Borough of Lindenwold, or such other person as designated by the Borough
Council, an inspection application form for each unit contained within a
building or structure, and for each rental facility on a form as proscribed by
the Construction Official.
§ 250-5. Inspection application form; indexing and filing; public
inspection; fee.
Upon receipt of a completed inspection application form complying with
the requirements of § 250-4 above, the Borough Clerk or designee shall
index and file the inspection application forms. The owner shall post the
certificate of inspection in a conspicuous place on the premises of the rental
unit.
§ 250-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 250-6
1:446
§ 250-6. Inspection application form; amendments; filing.
Every person required to file an inspection application form pursuant to
this article shall file an amended inspection form within 20 days after any
change in the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be
required for the filing of an amendment, except where the ownership of the
premises is changed.
§ 250-7. Periodic inspections.
A. Each rental unit and rental facility shall be inspected at least once every
year, except as set forth in Subsection F. Each rental unit shall be
inspected before every initial occupancy, and/or change in occupancy,
and the owner shall be required to obtain a certificate of inspection in
accordance with this section before any occupancy shall be permitted.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of Lindenwold and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Borough of
Lindenwold shall not be used as a valid substitute.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning code
compliance, and to the extent applicable, compliance with this article,
the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform Construction
Code, Housing Code and/or Building Code and/or Uniform Fire Safety
Act. Inspections will be done on all interior, exterior, grounds, roads and
driveways of all rental properties to ensure public health, safety and
welfare of all occupants and the general public. Inspections will be for
enforcement of the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, the
International Code Council Property Maintenance Code (I.P.M.C.),
Existing Building Code (I.E.B.C.) and the Regulation for Maintenance of
Hotels and Multiple Dwellings Code, with references to all International
Code Council Model Codes, The National Electric Code and National
Standard Plumbing Code. In addition to the above, the owner of a rental
unit shall comply with the following:
(1) All carpeting, where provided or installed by the owner, shall be
kept in good repair, properly attached to the floor surface which it
is covering, and shall be steamed cleaned or cleaned by other
means acceptable to the Local Housing Inspector, prior to
occupancy by tenants or a change in tenants. Carpeting which is
worn, damaged or becomes a trip hazard shall be properly repaired
or replaced.
(2) All appliances which are provided or installed by the owner,
including but not limited to, stoves, ovens, refrigerators, washers,
dryers, freezers, and light fixtures, shall be maintained in proper
working order at all times, and promptly repaired or replaced
whenever necessary.
§ 250-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:447
Where the inspection of the rental unit results in a satisfactory
inspection, the inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection for
the rental unit. The certificate of inspection shall state the
maximum number of occupants for the rental unit, as determined
by the inspection. An inspection shall be considered satisfactory or
unsatisfactory based upon life safety issues defined in this chapter.
D. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, a certificate of
inspection shall not be issued, and the owner of the property or his
agent shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant occupy
the property, until the necessary corrections have been made to bring
the property and rental unit into compliance with the applicable code,
and the property is thereafter subsequently inspected. In the event that
the property is occupied when such conditions are discovered, all such
corrections shall be made within 30 days, unless the nature of the
deficiency and the applicable law upon which the inspection is made
mandates a shorter time for repairs, in which event the shorter time
shall govern. In the event that the conditions are not corrected within
the thirty-day time period, or sooner where required, the owner shall be
deemed in violation of this article, and, every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to
the penalty provisions of this chapter. The owner, however, shall be
permitted to apply for an extension of time to make repairs or
corrections so as to comply with this article, for good cause shown.
Where the applicable law upon which the inspection is made mandates
that the property be vacated, the owner or its agent shall cause the
rental unit to be vacated and any such failure to do so shall be a
violation of this chapter. Chapter 248, Relocation Assistance, shall also
apply to any removal of a tenant due to a violation of this chapter.
E. Multiple inspections. It is the intent of this ordinance that each rental
unit be inspected at least once a year but not necessarily more than
once a year, except as set forth in Subsection F. In those instances
where a unit is inspected for a reason other than the annual inspection
under this ordinance, either through a certificate of occupancy
inspection or a New Jersey DCA inspection occurring within the
preceding twelve-month period, that inspection shall count as the
annual inspection under this ordinance provided the same is permitted
by the Administrative Code of the State of New Jersey. The owner shall
be responsible for providing proof to the Local Housing Inspector that
said inspection(s) was made and for obtaining written confirmation
from the Borough that said inspection(s) satisfies the requirements of
this chapter. The owner shall provide written proof of any New Jersey
DCA inspection to the Housing Inspector, including the results of the
DCA inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the
Borough of any rental units that have been inspected, by either the
Borough or State of New Jersey, within the preceding 12 months. The
owner shall notify the Borough in writing, of the previous inspections,
for which the owner is seeking exemption under this provision, within
§ 250-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 250-7
1:448
§ 250-8. Access for inspections; repairs.
10 calendar days of the scheduled inspections. Failure on the part of
the owner to provide written notice of the previous inspections shall be
construed as a waiver of any exemption, and the Borough shall have
the right to inspect all rental units, pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance.
F. Waiver of annual inspection: If 85% of the units in a complex are issued
a satisfactory rating following the Borough's annual inspection as to life
safety inspection items, for two consecutive calendar years all units
within the complex shall be exempt from the Borough's annual
inspection in the next subsequent year. In the event the owner is
entitled to a waiver under this paragraph for maintaining two
consecutive years with a satisfactory rating of 85% or more, and the
owner is subject to the DCA inspection in the following year, the waiver
as provided in this paragraph shall carry to the following year, and the
owner may utilize the waiver under this section, in the next calendar
year subsequent to the DCA inspection. This waiver is not absolute and
the Borough reserves the right to inspect before every initial
occupancy, or change in occupancy, and/or or upon a complaint from a
tenant.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and rooming/
boardinghouses, in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boardinghouses and of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boardinghouses at all
reasonable times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boardinghouse shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boardinghouse at
all reasonable times, for the purpose of such inspections, examinations
and surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit
and rooming/boardinghouse access to any part of such rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boardinghouse at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations, as are necessary, to
effect compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this article, an inspecting officer shall conduct an inspection
as hereinbefore provided.
D. In the event that the owner and/or occupant of a unit subject to
inspection under this ordinance refuses access to an inspection officer,
that officer shall make application to the Lindenwold Municipal Court,
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8
1:449
§ 250-9. Prohibitions on occupancy.
§ 250-10. Issuance of certificate of inspection.
Upon the filing of a completed inspection application, payment of the
prescribed fee set forth in § 150-42, and a satisfactory inspection, the owner
shall be entitled to the issuance of a certificate of inspection commencing on
the date of issuance and expiring on the same day of the next calendar year,
at which time a new inspection shall be required. An inspection application
form shall be required for each rental unit, and a certificate of inspection
shall be issued to the owner for each rental unit, even if more than one
rental unit is contained in the property. In the event that a property is sold,
assigned or transferred during the year, the certificate of inspection shall
be transferrable to the new owner.
§ 250-11. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the inspection application form, and, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of inspection, the owner or agent of the owner must
pay a fee in accordance with the fees as listed in § 150-42.
with notice to the objector, for an administrative search warrant which
the Court will issue if the Court concludes that the reason for the
proposed inspection is the enforcement of the ordinance.
A. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner
permit occupancy of any rental unit within the Borough of Lindenwold
which is not inspected in accordance with this article.
B. No owner, agent, broker or person shall purchase, sell, rent, lease or
use in such a manner as to result, permit or allow any person(s) to
occupy or live in, as occupant, tenant or otherwise, any dwelling unit or
rental unit or other structure, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
first have been obtained.
C. An landlord/owner who places a tenant in a rental unit which has not
been inspected and who does so in good faith and without knowledge of
the requirement that such rental unit must be inspected and who is
supplied a written warning advising of the requirements of this article,
shall have a period of three business days to cause the rental unit to be
inspected in accordance with this article or, failing to do so, shall vacate
said premises or otherwise be subject to the penalty provisions herein.
A. Late Charges. For any fee paid more than 30 days after its due date
there shall be a late fee imposed of 5% per month, each month, of all
fees due, pursuant to this ordinance.
B. No certificate of inspection shall be issued without payment in full of all
fees required in this article.
C. Fees will not be charged pursuant to this chapter for units inspected for
a change in occupancy within the previous 12 months, or where the
§ 250-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 250-11
1:450
§ 250-12. Maximum number of occupants.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant or
registered tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than permitted by
law to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental unit for a period exceeding
29 consecutive days. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
the penalty provisions § 1-1, except that the owner may only be subject to
penalty if, after receiving notice of said occupancy, the owner fails to take
legal action to have the conduct ceased and/or to evict the tenant.
§ 250-13. Occupant(s) standards.
§ 250-14. Revocation of certificate of inspection; procedure.
property has been inspected by the State of New Jersey within the 12
previous months, or where the property is exempt from inspections
pursuant to § 250-7F.
A. Nuisance prohibited. No rental unit or rental facility shall be used,
operated or maintained in a manner which shall result in any
unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the surrounding properties
and property owners or of the public in general, such that it shall
constitute a nuisance, as defined in the Codes of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
B. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental units and
rental facilities and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by
occupants and their guests shall at all times be in full compliance with
all applicable codes and regulations of the Borough of Lindenwold, and
with all applicable state and federal laws.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the certificate of
inspection issued hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the
following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to this section.
(3) Continuously renting the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of any Borough Codes.
(4) A pattern of permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more than
the maximum number of occupants as defined in this article.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
§ 250-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14
1:451
(6) A false, misleading or fraudulent statement made in connection
with the inspection, licensing or inspection of a rental unit or rental
units.
(7) Maintaining a rental unit or rental units, or the property in which
the rental unit is located in such a way as to create a nuisance, as
defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.
(8) A pattern of failing to maintain a rental unit or rental units, as
evidenced by three or more unsatisfactory inspections pursuant to
§ 250-7 above. It need not be shown that the unsatisfactory
inspections were during any single license term. For this section, a
satisfactory inspection shall be defined as where 65% or more of all
units of an apartment complex are determined to pass based upon
life safety issues. In the event less than 65% of all units of the
complex are satisfactory, the inspection shall be deemed
unsatisfactory. The pattern of unsatisfactory inspections shall be
defined in this section as where an owner's inspection is
determined to be unsatisfactory on any three inspections within
any given five-year consecutive period.
(9) Failing to pay any fee or fine required under this chapter or any
other municipal code when due, or failing to pay municipal taxes,
water and sewer charges or any other municipal assessments, on a
current basis.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a certificate of
inspection may be filed by any one or more of the following:
Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code
Official, Local Housing Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
any other persons or office authorized to file such complaint. Such
complaint shall be in writing and filed with the Borough Clerk or
designee. The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to
apprise the owner of the charges, so as to permit the owner to
present a defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do so
on the basis of information and belief, and need not rely on
personal information.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough, and a date for a
hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner than 10 nor
more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough Clerk or designee shall
forward a copy of the complaint and a notice, as to the date of the
hearing, to the owner and the agent, if any. Service upon the agent
shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Borough governing body, unless, in its discretion, the Borough
determines that the matter should be heard by a Hearing Officer,
who shall be appointed by the Borough. If the matter is referred to
§ 250-14 LINDENWOLD CODE § 250-14
1:452
§ 250-15. Severability.
If any section, subsection, part, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be
declared invalid by judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
section, subsection, part, clause or phrase shall be deemed to be severable
from the remainder of this ordinance.
§ 250-16. Inconsistencies.
All ordinances or portions thereof inconsistent with this chapter are
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
a Hearing Officer, such officer shall transmit his findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the Borough within 30 days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The Borough shall then review the matter and
may accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the Hearing
Officer based on the record before such Hearing Officer. In the
event that the matter is not referred to a Hearing Officer and is
heard by the Borough, then the Borough shall render a decision
within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the
hearing, a decision shall be rendered dismissing the complaint,
revoking or suspending the certificate of inspection, or determining
that the certificate of inspection shall not be renewed or reissued
for one or more subsequent license years.
(4) A stenographic transcript may be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Borough Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a certificate of
inspection license that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving
rise to the revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the
institution of legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests
for recovery of the premises, or eviction of the tenant(s) or other
enforcement action. The burden of proving such defense shall be on the
owner.
§ 250-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:453

ARTICLE III
Violations; Penalties; Severability
§ 250-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 250-18. Severability and enforceability.
In the event any court determines any section or portion of this chapter to
be unenforceable, the remaining sections of this Chapter shall survive and
be enforceable.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold, or
such other court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine as listed in § 1-1.
Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation, subject to the penalty provisions of § 1-1. Each separate
rental unit that fails to conform to this chapter shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation for each day that the violation occurs
within the particular rental unit.
B. The municipality, in its discretion, may in addition to any other penalties
set forth herein, assess a lien against the subject property for any
failure to comply with this chapter, to include imposition of a lien for
any unpaid fees and late charges assessed against the owner of the
subject property pursuant to this chapter. Any lien assessed pursuant to
this chapter may be enforced and collected in the same manner as real
estate taxes are enforced and collected, with interest to accrue at the
same rate as real estate taxes on all such liens. [Added 3-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-04]
§ 250-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:455
Chapter 253
RESOURCE EXTRACTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-43.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Soil removal — See Ch. 273.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 253-1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known as and cited by the short form title "Resource
Extraction Regulation and Licensing Ordinance of the Borough of
Lindenwold."
§ 253-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining
and quarrying of sand, gravel or minerals for commercial purposes, not
including, however, the private or agricultural extraction and use of
extracted material by the landowner for personal use or extraction for the
purposes of home building or pool construction.
§ 253-3. Licensing requirements; application.
A. In any area, district or zone of the Borough of Lindenwold, no sand,
gravel, rock, earth, minerals, clay or overburden or other resource shall
be extracted for resource extraction purposes until approval has been
granted by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Lindenwold as evidenced by the issuance of the license for such work.
B. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing and shall contain
the following information and meet the following requirements:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
§ 250-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 253-3
1:456
§ 253-4. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
(6) A USGS quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the
municipal tax map sheet on which the boundaries of the subject
property and zoning designation are shown.
(7) A topographic map at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing
the proposed dimensions, location and operations on the subject
property.
(8) The location, size and intended use of all buildings.
(9) The location of all points of ingress and egress.
(10) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing all streams,
wetlands and significant vegetation, forest associations and wildlife
habitats.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way,
including railroad rights-of-way.
(12) A soils map.
(13) A rehabilitation plan, which includes:170
(a) Method of stockpiling topsoil and overburden.
(b) Proposed grading and final elevations.
(c) Topsoil material application and preparation.
(d) Type, quantity and age of vegetation to be used.
(e) Fertilizer application, including method and rates.
(f) Planting method and schedule.
(g) Maintenance requirements schedule.
(14) A signed acknowledgment from both the owner and the applicant
that they are responsible for any resource extraction activities
which are contrary to any provision of this chapter or of the
approved resource extraction plan done by any agent, employee,
contractor, subcontractor or any other person authorized to be on
the parcel by either the owner or the applicant.
A. Prior to the issuance of any permit, certificate of occupancy or license
for land mining operation, the owner or operator shall file with the
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-4
1:457
§ 253-5. Operational regulations.
Resource extraction operations shall be approved for a maximum of twoyear
periods and only if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed
resource extraction operation:
Borough Clerk a performance guaranty. The guaranty shall be for an
amount equal to the cost of restoration of the area to be excavated
during the two-year duration of any approval which is granted.
B. Such bond or security shall be accompanied by an agreement signed by
the applicant and landowner, if a different individual, granting the
Borough the right of access to make inspections to ensure compliance
during periods of operation and to perform all necessary rehabilitation
of bonded property in the event of forfeiture of the performance
guaranty.
C. In the event of default, forfeiture shall be made by the Borough Council
after public hearing on not fewer than five days' written notice made to
the principal and the surety at their last known post office address,
which notice shall be complete upon mailing.
D. The performance guaranty may be released upon satisfactory
restoration of the complete project area, or portions of the guaranty
may be released as proportional stages of restoration are accomplished
in accordance with all operating and restoration standards contained in
this chapter as well as any approved rehabilitation plan. As a
performance guaranty is released, it shall be replaced by a
maintenance guaranty for a period of two years thereafter.
A. Is designed so that no area of excavation, sedimentation pond, storage
area, equipment or machinery or other structure or facility is closer
than:
(1) One hundred feet to any property line.
(2) Two hundred feet to any residential or non-resource-extractionrelated
commercial use which is in existence on the date the
license is issued.171
B. As an integral part of each resource extraction operation, sufficient
arable topsoil shall be stored on site for restoration. Such topsoil
stockpiles shall be treated, planted or graded to protect the same from
wind or water erosion.
C. Fencing.
(1) Is fenced or blocked so as to prevent unauthorized entry into the
resource extraction operation through access roads.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 253-5
1:458
§ 253-6. Standards.
The following standards and regulations shall be met in connection with
production and processing of extracted resources:
§ 253-7. Restoration of land.
All parcels of land which are used for resource extraction operations shall
be restored as follows:
(2) Fencing shall be provided at the perimeter of the tract to be used
for resource extraction. Fences shall be constructed of chain link
and be a minimum of six feet high.
D. Provides ingress and egress to the resource extraction operation from
public roads by way of gravel or porous paved roadways watered or
otherwise treated to minimize dust.
E. Is designed so that surface runoff will be maintained on the parcel in a
manner that will provide for on-site recharge to groundwater.
F. Will not involve excavation below the seasonable high-water table,
unless the excavation will serve as a recreational or wildlife resource or
a water reservoir for public, agricultural or industrial uses or for any
other use authorized in the area in which the site is located, provided
that in no case shall excavation have a depth exceeding 65 feet below
the natural surface of the ground existing prior to excavation unless it
can be demonstrated that depth greater than 65 feet will result in no
significant adverse impact relative to the proposed final use of off-site
areas.
G. Will be carried out in accordance with an extraction schedule which
depicts the anticipated sequence, as well as anticipated length of time
that each unit or parcel proposed for extraction will be worked.
H. Will involve restoration of disturbed areas at the completion of the
resource extraction operation.
I. Will not involve clearing adjacent to ponds in excess of five acres or an
area necessary to complete scheduled operations or will not involve
unreclaimed clearing exceeding 100 acres or 50% of the area to be
mined, whichever is less, for surface excavation at any time.
A. All equipment used for mining shall be constructed, maintained and
operated in such manner as to reduce, as far as is practical, noise,
vibration or dust.
B. No extraction operation shall accumulate or discharge beyond the
property lines any waste matter.
A. Restoration shall be a continuous process, and each portion of the
parcel shall be restored such that the ground cover is established
§ 253-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-7
1:459
§ 253-8. Waiver.
Waivers from strict compliance from the provisions of this chapter can be
granted when said waiver will not impair or reduce the Borough Council's
ability to adequately review plans in connection with information or details
to be provided in an application or adversely affect the environment,
neighboring properties or the intent of the Borough Master Plan in the case
of operation and rehabilitation standards.
§ 253-9. Security; financial responsibility.172
The application for a license or the renewal of a license shall be
accompanied by a promise from the applicant to faithfully perform and
within two years and tree cover established within three years after
resource extraction is completed for each portion of the site mined.
B. All restored areas shall be graded so as to conform to the natural
contours of the parcel to the maximum extent practical; the slope of
surface of restored surfaces shall not exceed one foot vertical to three
feet horizontal.
C. Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality and quantity
as existed at the time resource extraction operation was initiated.
D. Drainage flows, including direction and volume, shall be restored to the
maximum extent practical to those flows existing at the time the
resource extraction operation was initiated, but in no case shall the
finished final condition of the area permit stagnant water to collect.
E. Any body of water created by the resource extraction operation shall
have a graded shoreline with a slope not to exceed one foot vertical to
five feet horizontal.
F. All equipment, machinery and structures, except for structures that are
usable for recreational purposes or any other use authorized for the
area, shall be removed within six months after the resource extraction
operation is terminated and restoration is completed.
G. Reclamation shall, to the maximum extent practical, result in the
reestablishment of the vegetation association which existed prior to the
extraction activity and shall include:
(1) The planting of a minimum of 1,000 one-year-old pitch pine
seedlings or other native tree species per acre.
(2) Stabilization of exposed areas by establishing ground cover
vegetation with native grasses, such as Andropogon gerardii,
Panicum virgatum, Panicum amarum (and var. amarulum), planted
at 18 inches on center.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 253-9
1:460
comply with all applicable standards set forth in this chapter, its
amendments or supplements or any other ordinance of the Borough which
has a bearing upon resource extraction. In the event that the Mayor and
Borough Council have reasonable doubt about the applicant's financial
responsibility to perform the promise, they may request the applicant to
submit reasonable satisfactory evidence of financial responsibility, which
will be reviewed on a confidential basis and not made public in any manner.
In the event that there is not reasonably satisfactory evidence of the
applicant's financial responsibility to perform the promise, the Mayor and
Borough Council may require, as a condition of the granting of the license,
the applicant to deposit, pledge or place in escrow or in some other fashion,
including the possible use of a surety bond, certain reasonable amounts
of security with rights of substitution for the faithful performance of the
compliance with all of the performance standards set forth in this chapter or
any other applicable ordinances of the Borough. In the event that security is
required, no security shall be required in excess of an amount equal to $500
multiplied by the number of acres to be rehabilitated as designated within
the license area, but not less than $10,000. Any security required shall be
held or continue for the term of the license while the land is rehabilitated or
until adequate evidence of financial responsibility is presented. Any promise
of security required herein shall be terminated 15 days after the applicant
or others on his behalf have delivered to the Mayor and Borough Council
the certificate of a registered professional engineer or licensed surveyor or
professional planner setting out that the area upon which release of the
security is sought has been rehabilitated in substantial compliance with
the requirements of the rehabilitation plan or some amended or alternative
plan satisfactory to the Mayor and Borough Council. Any security shall be
placed so that, if the license expires as provided herein and the site is not
rehabilitated within 18 months thereafter, the security shall be forfeited to
pay for the rehabilitation of the site according to the rehabilitation plan.
§ 253-10. Additional information from applicant.
The Mayor and Borough Council may also require additional information
from the applicant when necessary because of the specific nature of the
lands to be mined, any unusual request made by the applicant or because
of surrounding property use and condition, including but not limited to
environmental impact statements, wetlands information, surrounding
property use and traffic management and flow. The information received
when requested shall be taken into consideration by the Borough Council
and shall be used to determine the applicability of the property in question
for use as a mining site or may be used in placement of conditions upon any
mining license granted.
§ 253-11. Issuance of license; term; renewal.
If the applicant complies with this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances as set forth, a license shall be issued. The license shall be
valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance thereof. Such
license shall be renewed by the Borough Council for succeeding two-year
§ 253-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-11
1:461
periods, provided that an application accompanied by either the promise of
the applicant or such reasonable security as may be required, as provided
above, is received from the applicant, and provided that the applicant meets
all terms and conditions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinances
of Lindenwold or their amendments or supplements thereto. The application
for renewal of the license shall be filed within 60 days after receipt of
written notice from the Borough of Lindenwold of the expiration of the
license but not more than four months before the expiration of the license,
and provided that the applicant is carrying out the requirements of the
original license as evidenced by the absence of a judicial determination
at said time to the contrary. Issuance of a license commits the applicant
and the applicant's successors and assigns to faithful compliance with the
rehabilitation plan and the provisions of this chapter, its amendments or
supplements.
§ 253-12. License fee.173
Each applicant/licensee shall pay to the Clerk of the Borough of Lindenwold
the fee as established in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule,
§ 150-43, to cover the mining license. The payments shall be made prior
to the issuance of the license to the applicant/licensee. The license fee
shall be used by the Borough Council to offset the costs of the Borough for
review, issuance and monitoring of said mining license and rehabilitation
plan provided by the applicant/licensee. If the actual cost to the Borough
for review, issuance and monitoring of any particular mining license shall
be higher than the license fee, then in that event the Mayor and Borough
Council may assess the actual costs incurred by the Borough as an
additional licensing fee upon the applicant/licensee upon notice of such
higher costs to the applicant/licensee.
§ 253-13. Violation and penalties.174
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any terms or
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance applicable to resource
extraction in Lindenwold Borough or any rule or regulation of the Borough
shall constitute a separate offense.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 253-13
1:462
Chapter 260
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer services — See Ch. 57.
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-33.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 164.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
390.
§ 253-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-13
1:463

ARTICLE I
Sewer Utility; Connections
§ 260-1. Creation of Department of Sewer Utility; Superintendent.
§ 260-2. Scope.175
It is the purpose of this chapter to empower the Borough of Lindenwold
through the Sewer Utility to perform all such reasonable and necessary
functions in connection with the providing of sewage disposal and treatment
as afforded to the Borough by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.,
without limitation, and the collection of fees therefor. The provisions of this
chapter are subject to the ability of the Borough of Lindenwold to provide
sewage service to the extent permitted by law and in accordance with the
terms and conditions of any existing contracts which are not legally binding
upon the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 260-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — The party contracting for sewer service.
LICENSED OPERATORS — Those employees of the Sewer Utility who shall
be properly licensed and qualified by the State of New Jersey to perform the
necessary functions attendant to this position.
PHYSICAL CONNECTION — Any connection, cross connection, bypass,
valve, pipeline or any like device which permits or may permit any flow of
waste from any source into the sewerage system operated by the Utility.
A. A Department of Sewer Utility ("Department") is hereby created in and
for the Borough of Lindenwold, which Department shall be under the
control and supervision of the Borough.
B. The Borough Council shall appoint a Superintendent of the Sewer
Utility ("Superintendent"). The Superintendent shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Borough Council, who may remove or
replace such Superintendent.
C. In the event that the position of Superintendent of the Department
becomes or remains vacant through removal, resignation, retirement or
otherwise, then in that event the Deputy Director of the Department of
Public Works of the Borough of Lindenwold shall assume all duties and
obligations of the office of Superintendent until a replacement is
appointed. The Superintendent shall perform all duties and functions
and shall be accountable to the Borough Administrator and Mayor and
Council as set forth in the general ordinances of the Borough which
pertain generally to the administrative procedures of the Borough.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:465
SEWAGE — The water-carried wastes created in and carried, or to be
carried, away from residences, hotels, apartments, schools, hospitals,
commercial establishments, office complexes, industrial establishments or
any other public or private building, together with such surface water or
groundwater and industrial wastes as may be present.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — The plants, structures and other real and personal
property acquired, constructed or operated, or to be acquired, constructed
or operated, by the Sewer Utility, including sewers, conduits, pipelines,
mains, pumping and ventilating stations, plants and works, connections,
outfalls, compensating reservoirs and any other plants, conveyances and
other real and personal property, and rights therein, and appurtenances
necessary or useful and convenient for the collection, treatment,
purification or disposal in a sanitary manner of any sewage, liquid or solid
waste, night soil or industrial waste.
SEWER UTILITY — A utility fund of the Borough operated pursuant to the
direction of the Borough through its elected officials and performing all
functions pertaining to the treatment of sewage heretofore performed by
the Lindenwold Borough Municipal Utilities Authority (LBMUA).176
SUPERINTENDENT — The duly appointed Superintendent of the
Department of Sewer Utility or, in the absence of such Superintendent,
the Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
UTILITIES COLLECTOR — The duly appointed employee of the Borough
authorized to collect fees and charges and to process applicants for sewer
service.
§ 260-4. Authorization to adopt rules and procedures.177
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Lindenwold are hereby
empowered to adopt, by resolution, such portions of the current rules
regulating the Lindenwold Sewer Utility as they deem proper and necessary
in order to enable the Department to perform the purposes enumerated
herein and any additional rules. In addition, the Borough is hereby
empowered to retain the professional services of such sanitarian, engineer
or other expert as the Borough shall determine to be necessary for the
purpose of establishing appropriate rules and regulations effecting the
installation, maintenance, repair and control of plumbing and drainage of
buildings and the connections thereof to the facilities of the Sewer Utility.
These rules and regulations may be adopted by the Borough by resolution
and may, by reference, incorporate other codes, statutes and/or regulations
as appropriate.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-5
1:466
§ 260-5. Transition period.178
There is hereby established a transition period of 75 days' duration during
which time the Superintendent of the Department shall assume the
operation of the Sewer Utility functions heretofore carried out by the
Lindenwold Borough Municipal Utilities Sewer Department. During such
transition time, which may be extended by resolution of the Borough for
such reasonable time as it deems proper and just, the Superintendent
of such Department/Utility shall utilize the rules and procedures as
established by the LBMUA which, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.1, are annexed to this chapter and which have been and are now
filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Lindenwold and which will
remain on file there for the use and examination of the public, except where
such rules and procedures are inconsistent with the provisions within this
chapter.
§ 260-6. Reservation of powers.179
To the extent not specifically set forth herein, the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Lindenwold specifically reserves unto itself all those
certain powers, rights and responsibilities as set forth at length in N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:62-1 et seq., which provisions may be
deemed by the Borough necessary for the operation of the Sewer Utility
created hereby.
§ 260-7. Right of access.
The Borough shall have a right of access to any customer's premises and
to all equipment and property of the Borough at reasonable times for
the purposes of inspecting, repairing or replacing equipment used in
connection with the supplying of sewer services, or for the purpose of
inspecting, repairing or replacing equipment used in connection with
supplying of sewer services, or for the removal of equipment or property.
The customer shall obtain for the Department all necessary permission from
tenants or others for access to equipment or property. Customers shall not
permit access to Department property except by authorized employees of
the Department or other authorized state or local inspectors.
§ 260-8. Violations and penalties.180
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter or
any succeeding ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the subject matter
of this chapter which might be enacted or adopted shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each and every day
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:467
that any violation continues shall be deemed to be and shall be a separate
offense, separately punishable as aforesaid.
§ 260-9. Collection of charges; lien; interest.
All connection, user and other fees and charges set forth in this chapter
shall draw the same interest from the time that they became due as taxes
upon real estate in the Borough and shall be a lien upon the premises
connected until paid. The Borough shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties, as it has for all
collection of taxes upon real property.
§ 260-10. Bond required; work to be guarded; restoration of
property.
§ 260-11. Permit required for connection to public sewer.
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto without first
obtaining a written permit from the Borough.
§ 260-12. Application for sewer service. [Amended 4-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 993]
A. Each contractor or other person performing work on Borough public
property for the purpose of installing sanitary sewer connections shall
post a bond acceptable to the Borough.
B. All work shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other
measures for protection to the public from hazard.
C. Streets, sidewalks, curbs and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Borough.
A. The applicant shall submit the application on forms provided by the
Borough of Lindenwold Sewer Utility. The Superintendent of the
Borough of Lindenwold Sewer Utility shall be given the authority to
issue the permits once all requirements are met. In the case of disputes,
the Mayor and Council shall be the final authority.
B. The connection fee shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article
I, Fee Schedule, § 150-33. [Amended 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303181]
C. A letter from the Borough of Lindenwold Joint Land Use Board
confirming that the parcel in question complies with the land use
regulations of the Borough of Lindenwold for the purpose intended
shall accompany the application, along with copies of any resolutions
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-12
1:468
§ 260-13. Approval of application.
Approval of an application for a sewer connection can only be made if it has
been determined that a sewer main approved by the Sewer Utility exists in
front of the applicant's property or in the public right-of-way. The main shall
extend the length of the applicant's property, and if it does not so extend, it
shall be extended at the applicant's expense in accordance with the Sewer
Utility specifications.
§ 260-14. Tampering with Utility property.
No person or persons shall, in any manner, without permission, connect or
disconnect or tamper or interfere with any property of the Sewer Utility
of the Borough of Lindenwold such as pipes or conduits, meters, valves,
instruments or other accessories or property.
§ 260-15. Refusal to connect; inadequate sewer service.
and/or subdivisions from the Borough. [Amended 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 1331]
D. The permit shall expire one year from the date of the issuance, and all
fees shall be forfeited if a physical connection to the system of the
Borough of Lindenwold Sewer Utility is not made within that time. The
expiration date shall be indicated on the permit, and the permit is void
thereafter.
E. At the option of the permit holder, rather than forfeit the connection
permit he may pay the annual sewer rental to retain the permit.
F. In no event shall fees be refunded once a permit has been issued unless
proof of extraordinary circumstances exist. Only then, at the discretion
of the Borough of Lindenwold Sewer Utility, will refunds be considered.
A request to review extraordinary circumstances must be submitted in
writing within 30 days of the permit being issued.
G. Permits shall remain with the property and are not transferable.
A. The Sewer Utility may refuse to connect any customer's piping system
or to supply sewer services to a system if said system has not been
designated or installed in accordance with the applicable regulations or
if any parts of the piping system have not been installed at sufficient
depth to prevent freezing.
B. The Borough shall not be responsible for any inadequacy for sewer
service should the customer make alterations, changes or additions to
an existing system without notifying the Borough in advance of any
proposed alterations, changes or additions. In case of defective service,
the customer shall not interfere with property of the Department but
shall immediately notify the Borough.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:469
§ 260-16. Complaints.
Complaints concerning the character of the service furnished or the reading
of meters or bills rendered shall be made at the Department office to the
Collector or the Superintendent of the Department in writing. A record of
such complaints will be maintained by the Department to show the names
and addresses of the complainants, dates and nature of the complaints and
the action take thereon.
§ 260-17. Self-liquidating utility established.
The existing publicly owned and operated sanitary sewer system of the
Borough, previously operated by the LBMUA, is hereby declared to be a selfliquidating
utility of the Borough of Lindenwold. This self-liquidating utility
shall hereafter be referred to as the Sewer Utility ("the Utility"), which shall
be operated by the Department of Sewer Utility ("Department") under the
control of the Borough.
§ 260-18. Sewer Utility Fund.
It is the obligation and intent of the Borough Mayor and Council and
Borough administration to establish a self-liquidating utility in accordance
with state statutes. All future revenue and accounting therefor from said
Sewer Utility shall be on a dedicated utility basis in conformance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35. All moneys derived from the operation of
said Sewer Utility and any other moneys applicable to its support shall be
segregated and kept in a separate fund, which shall be known as the "Sewer
Utility Fund," and all disbursements for the operation and maintenance of
said Sewer Utility shall be taken from said Sewer Utility Fund.
§ 260-19. Budget.
The dedicated budget of this Sewer Utility shall include appropriations for
operating expenses, capital improvements, debt service and for the portion
of all other deferred charges and statutory expenses as may be required.
§ 260-20. Connection to public sewer required.
The owners of all houses, buildings and properties constructed after the
enactment of this chapter, situated within the Borough of Lindenwold and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Borough, are
hereby required at their expense to connect all sanitary and other plumbing
facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with all of the
pertinent ordinances of the Borough, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 260-21. Connection of existing facilities; time limit.
The owners of all houses, buildings and properties existing at the time
of the enactment of this chapter and having approved private sanitary
§ 260-16 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-21
1:470
facilities will be required at their expense to connect all available sanitary
and other plumbing facilities directly with the proper public sewer where
such connections are considered necessary in accordance with the rules,
regulations and ordinances of the Borough and of the County Board of
Health. Such connections shall be made in accordance with all the pertinent
ordinances of the Borough within 180 days of the date of the official notice
to do so.
§ 260-22. Unlawful connections and uses.
§ 260-23. Sewer user charges.182
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to establish, from time to time,
the charges and fees for sewer and incidental services to be provided
by the Sewer Utility. The Schedule of Charges shall be and the same is
hereby fixed and established for the collection, disposal and treatment of
sanitary sewage material collected in public sanitary sewers located within
the Borough of Lindenwold to be charged to all customers of the Sewer
Utility and property served by the public sewage collection system located
within the Borough of Lindenwold, said charges as set forth on the Schedule
of Charges annexed hereto and made a part hereof.183
A. Sump pumps. It is a violation for any person or user of this system to
connect or discharge by any means into the system any materials,
chemicals or drainage other than sanitary sewage. The Borough shall
serve notice to such persons or users to remove such discharge
immediately.
B. Broken lines. The Borough shall also serve notice to users of the Utility
having broken service lines that cause infiltration into the system to
repair the same no later than 10 days from the said service of notice
pertaining to such violation.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
183. Editor's Note: See § 260-45, Schedules of rates.
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-23
1:471

ARTICLE II
Rules Applicable to Sewerage Service Application for Service184
§ 260-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — The owner of real property with regard to which sewer
service is or shall be furnished.185
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The normal waterborne fluid wastes from
residences, commercial establishments, institutions and industrial
establishments, limited to the wastes from kitchens, bathrooms, water
closets, lavatories and laundries.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
MAIN — The Sewer Department-owned or -leased piping and
appurtenances, in or along public highways and streets or along privately
owned rights-of-way, used for the collection of domestic sewage or
industrial wastes from its customer.
§ 260-25. Application for service connection.
A. New sewerage service connections will be made only upon written
application signed by the property owner or his properly authorized
agent and delivered to the Sewer Department office. Blank forms for all
applications will be furnished by the Sewer Department, and all
applications must receive the approval of the Sewer Department before
the property owner makes the connection to the Sewer Department
main in the street or service furnished.
B. The accepted application shall constitute a contract between the Sewer
Department and the applicant, obliging the applicant to pay the Sewer
Department its rates as established from time to time and to comply
with its rules and regulations.
C. Applications for service connections will be accepted, subject to there
being existing mains in streets or rights-of-way abutting the premises to
be served.
D. A new application must be made and approved by the Sewer
Department upon any change in ownership of the property or in the
character of the service, as described in the application, but failure to
make such new application shall not affect the customer's liability to
pay for service rendered after the change of ownership or character of
the service.
184. Editor's Note: These rules were appended to Ord. No. 981, adopted 10-11-1995, which is
included as Art. I of this chapter.
185. Editor's Note: The definition of "Authority," which immediately preceded this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 260-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:473
§ 260-26. Payment of sewer service charges; meter readings.186
§ 260-27. Delinquent bills.
If a sewer service charge shall not be paid within one month after the
billing date, irrespective of whether or not a bill for such service shall have
been received by the customer, then interest shall accrue and be due to
the Sewer Department on the unpaid balance at the rate of 1% per month
until such service charge, and the interest thereon, shall be fully paid to
the Sewer Department, and the real property with regard to which such
service charge was incurred shall be subject to the lien imposed by N.J.S.A.
40:14A-21, to be enforced as therein provided, and the Sewer Department
E. Industrial establishments.
(1) Industrial establishments making application for sanitary sewerage
service, in addition to making written application for such service,
shall furnish a detailed description of the type and size of buildings,
the nature of the business to be conducted in each structure, the
number and type of fixtures to be served, and the type, volume and
chemical characteristics of the waste to be discharged. Such
applicants shall also the furnish the Sewer Department four copies
of plans prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer
showing:
(a) The boundaries of the property.
(b) The location within the property of the structures to be served.
(c) The location and profile, with respect to finished grade, of the
services.
(d) Details of the proposed connections to the sewerage system
and arrangement and details of meter installations.
(2) All such data submitted shall be reviewed by the Sewer
Department Engineer, and he shall make recommendation to the
Sewer Department within a reasonable period of time.
A. All charges for sewer service shall be payable in advance at the
Lindenwold Borough Tax Office, quarterly, on January 1, April 1, July 1
and October 1, which shall be the billing dates.
B. Regular meter readings, when required, will be made quarterly on or
about January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1, and bills for metered
service will be rendered as soon as practicable after the reading of the
respective meters. All bills for metered service shall be due when the
bill therefor is dated and shall be payable at the Lindenwold Borough
Tax Office.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-25 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-27
1:474
shall have and may pursue the other remedies for the collection of such
service charge, and interest thereon, as provided in said N.J.S.A. 40:14A-21,
all of the provisions of which are by reference incorporated in and made a
part of these rules and regulations.
§ 260-28. Continuing obligation to pay service charge.
Upon connection of an improved property to a sewer, the obligation to pay
the applicable annual service charge shall continue, despite the failure to
occupy the property or to use the sewer facilities, so long as the building or
structure on the property is available for use and the sewer facilities remain
available.
§ 260-29. Local and state requirements.187
The owner of any property located along the line of any sewer in the
Borough on which a building or other structure for use by people is now
or shall hereafter be erected shall comply with all the requirements of the
Borough of Lindenwold, the County Board of Health and the State of New
Jersey, now or hereafter in effect, in respect to the disposal of sewage
and waste from such property through sanitary sewers, and all of such
requirements are hereby adopted by the Sewer Department and made part
of its rules and regulations.
§ 260-30. Sewer extensions.
A. An applicant for a main extension to serve a new subdivision, tract,
housing project, industrial development or organized service district
shall be required to construct and convey to the Lindenwold Sewer
Department a sewer line from the nearest existing main capable of
taking the additional flow and at least equal in size to the main required
to serve such development, including necessary service stubs or service
pipelines, fittings, valves and housing therefor, manholes and other
appurtenances. If additional facilities are required specifically to
provide treatment or pumping facilities exclusively for the service
requested, the cost of such facilities must be paid by the applicant.188
B. The Sewer Department Engineer shall review all plans and
specifications submitted for approval on any extension and make
recommendations to the Sewer Department concerning the same. All
construction is subject to the inspection of the Sewer Department
Engineer. All engineering fees shall be paid by the developer to the
Sewer Department.
C. Operation or use of any sewage disposal plant, pumping stations, lines,
mains or other sanitary sewer accoutrements shall be prohibited until
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30
1:475
§ 260-31. Complaints.
Complaints with respect to the character of the service furnished or of the
bills rendered must be made at the Sewer Department's office, in writing,
and a record of such complaint will be kept by the Sewer Department,
noting the name and address of the complainant, the date, the nature of the
complaint and the remedy.
§ 260-32. Reasonable access.
The properly identified authorized agents of the Sewer Department shall
have the right of access to the premises served at all reasonable hours, but
only in the presence of the owner, tenant or agent of owner, for any purpose
which is proper and necessary in the conduct of the Sewer Department's
business.
said plant or system or portion of system has received certification of
the Sewer Department Engineer to the effect that said plant, system or
portion thereof has been erected, constructed and installed pursuant
to the requisite requirements and specifications and is ready for use.
Upon the issuance of said certificate, the title to said plant, station,
system or part thereof and easements shall be conveyed to and become
a part of the system of the Lindenwold Borough Sewer Department.
However, the Sewer Department retains the right to require of any such
owner the execution of any document or instrument to further effect
such conveyance or transfer if the Sewer Department deems the same
necessary for its purposes. Upon the Sewer Department's demand, said
documents or instruments shall be executed.189
D. Prior to the issuance of said certification, the Sewer Department shall
demand and receive from said applicant, if a plant or station is involved,
said applicant's guaranty to maintain and repair said plant or station for
a period of one year, to be secured by an appropriate bond of a surety
approved by the Sewer Department as to amount, form and surety.
Prior to the issuance of said certification, the Sewer Department shall
demand and receive from said applicant, if lines, mains or systems are
involved, said applicant's guaranty to maintain and repair said lines,
main and system for a period of time, commencing with the issuance of
said certificate, and during that period of time said applicant is
responsible to the Borough of Lindenwold for the maintenance and
repair of any streets, ways, easements, courts, drives or avenues situate
in the land area in question. Said guaranty shall be secured by an
appropriate bond of a surety approved by the Sewer Department as to
form, amount and surety.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-30 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-33
1:476
§ 260-33. No oral agreements.
No agent or employee of the Sewer Department has authorization to bind
it by any promise, agreement or representation not provided for in these
rules. The Sewer Department reserves the right to change, take from or add
to the foregoing rules and regulations.
§ 260-34. Changing of rules and regulations by Sewer Department.
The Sewer Department reserves the right to change or amend, from time to
time, these rules and regulations and the rates for sewer service.
§ 260-35. Sewer Department service line; connection to main.
The Sewer Department will permit connections to its mains, upon proper
application and payment of fees. Where said mains are located in streets,
the Sewer Department will be deeded and will maintain all service laterals
from the main to a point at the curb, all of which service lateral shall remain
the sole property of the Sewer Department and shall not be trespassed on
or interfered with in any respect. Where the Sewer Department's main is
located in a right-of-way, the Sewer Department will permit the connection
tap between the service laterals and the Sewer Department's main upon
proper application and payment of fees. The applicant shall pay a
connection charge for each such service lateral or connection permitted by
the Sewer Department, as listed in Schedule of Rates.190 In addition to the
charge stated above, the applicant shall also secure a permit for and pay
any municipal, county or state permit fee or other charge for opening and
restoration of street, highway or sidewalk paving.
§ 260-36. Separate trench for service lateral.
No service lateral shall be laid in the same trench with any gas pipe, water
service or any other facility of any public service company, nor within three
feet of any open excavation, vault or meter pit; nor shall the location be
beneath any sidewalk or driveway running from the street to the front of the
building.
§ 260-37. Renewal of service lateral.
Where the renewal of the service lateral from the main to the curb is
found to be necessary, the Sewer Department will renew the service in the
location as previously used. If the property owner for his own convenience
desires the new service lateral at some other location, and agrees to pay all
expenses of such relocation in excess of the cost of laying the service lateral
in the same location as previously used and cutting and disconnecting the
old service lateral, the Sewer Department will lay the new service lateral at
the location desired.
190. Editor's Note: See § 260-45, Schedules of rates.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-38
1:477
§ 260-38. Maintenance by customer.
All connections, service laterals and fixtures installed or furnished by the
customer shall be maintained by him in good order, and all piping and
connections furnished and owned by the Sewer Department and on the
property of the customer shall be protected properly and cared for by the
customer. All leaks in the service lateral or any other pipe or fixture in or
upon the premises served must be repaired immediately by the owner or
occupant of the premises. The customer shall be responsible for notifying
the Sewer Department of the party engaged by said customer to do any
maintenance work in the customer's service lateral prior to the work being
commenced. Any work not acceptable to the Sewer Department shall be
immediately removed and replaced by work which is acceptable.
§ 260-39. Sewer Department not responsible for maintenance of
service lateral.
The Sewer Department shall in no way be responsible for maintaining any
portion of the service lateral owned by the customer, or for damage done
by sewage escaping therefrom, or for lines or fixtures on the customer's
property, and the customer shall at all times comply with applicable
municipal regulations with respect thereto and make changes therein
required by reason of changes of grade, relocation of mains or otherwise.
§ 260-40. Property served by single service lateral; additional
service laterals.
A service lateral from the main to a property shall not serve more than
one property, but any such property upon proper application of the owner
may be served by two or more service laterals, each of which, for billing
purposes, shall be considered as being one customer account.
§ 260-41. Prohibited connections.
Under no circumstances will any of the following be connected to the
sanitary sewers, either directly or indirectly:
A. Floor drain, area drain or yard drain.
B. Rain conductor or downspout.
C. Grease pit.
D. Air-conditioning equipment, except condensate which will be permitted
under conditions approved by the Sewer Department.
E. Stormwater inlets or catch basins.
F. Drains from piece of equipment or manufacturing process except when
specifically authorized under the provisions of § 260-44 of these rules
and regulations.
§ 260-38 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-42
1:478
§ 260-42. Detailed plans for service laterals to certain buildings.
Service laterals to public buildings, churches, apartment houses,
commercial establishments and industrial establishments shall be installed
to conform to detailed plans and specifications submitted to the Sewer
Department by the applicant and only after review and approval of those
plans and specifications by the Sewer Department Engineer.
§ 260-43. Special precautions in wet ground.
Where groundwater is normally above the invert elevation of the service
lateral, wedge-lock-type O joints or approved equal, or otherwise cast-iron
soil pipe, with properly caulked lead joints, shall be used in construction of
service laterals. Where the trench bottom is soft and yielding, the Sewer
Department may require that the service be laid in partial or total concrete
encasement. Junctions of two different types of pipe may, at the option of
the Sewer Department Engineer, be required to be encased in concrete of
mix determined by the Sewer Department Engineer.
§ 260-44. Industrial wastes.
A. Agreement required. The Sewer Department will accept industrial
wastes into the sanitary sewerage system, upon execution of a formal,
written agreement and under and subject to the provisions appearing in
said agreement and these rules and regulations. The agreement will set
out in detail the characteristics of the wastes, the flow conditions which
shall govern and the conditions with respect to the physical connection
or connections. It will be the policy of the Sewer Department to
consider each application on its own merits and to establish specific
conditions applicable to the particular situation for each agreement. No
connection shall be made prior to execution of the agreement.
B. Special application. Prior to approving an application for a connection
involving the acceptance of industrial wastes, the applicant shall submit
complete data with respect to the following:
(1) Average, maximum and minimum rates of flow to be expected daily
and seasonally.
(2) Flow diagram, showing points of application of chemicals, type and
quantity of each chemical used per day and per shift, a schedule of
operations, expected chemical characteristics of the untreated
wastes, the point or points of connection to the sewerage system
and any other data required by the Sewer Department Engineer to
properly determine the merits of the application. The normal
situation will require the separation of and separate points of
connection for domestic sewage and industrial wastes from each
industrial establishment.
C. Prohibited wastes. Wastes containing the following substances or
possessing the characteristics listed below will not be accepted:
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-44
1:479
(1) Any vapors or steam.
(2) Any fluids with temperatures in excess of 150° F.
(3) Any fluid wastes which contain in excess of 100 parts per million of
fat, oil or grease, whether animal, vegetable or mineral.
(4) Any volatile, explosive or flammable substances such as benzene,
gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil or similar substances.
(5) Any solids or viscous matter which may cause any interference with
the flow of sewage, such as ashes, cinders, concrete, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
manure, hair or similar substances. Equipment or trucks carrying
such materials shall not be washed and this water discharged in the
system.
(6) Any fluid wastes having a pH value less than 5.5 or in excess of 9.0
or possessing other properties capable of causing damage or
hazard to sewers, structures, treatment process, equipment or
operating personnel.
(7) Any wastes containing toxic, poisonous or other substances in
sufficient concentration to interfere with the sewage treatment
process, to cause injury to animals or persons, or to create an
unacceptable condition in the receiving streams.
(8) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substances which are capable of
causing a public nuisance.
D. Grease, oil, sand and line separators. When, in the opinion of the Sewer
Department Engineer, grease, oil, sand and line interceptors or oil
reclaimers are required, they shall be provided and maintained at the
expense of the owner in continuously efficient operating condition.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be watertight, substantially constructed and
equipped with readily removable access covers. Where deemed
necessary, cold-water sprays shall be installed. The design and
pertinent data shall be submitted to the Sewer Department Engineer
for review and approval by the Sewer Department prior to construction
or installation. Separators must be constructed entirely on the property
of the owner.
E. Preliminary treatment. The Sewer Department reserves the right to
require preliminary treatment where the chemical characteristics of
the proposed industrial wastes, in the opinion of the Sewer Department
Engineer or by the requirement of the State Health Department or
County Board of Health, make such preliminary treatment desirable or
mandatory. Some of the characteristics which may dictate preliminary
treatment are listed below:191
§ 260-44 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-44
1:480
(1) Five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of 300 parts
per million (ppm).
(2) Suspended solids in excess of 350 ppm.
(3) Average daily flow in excess of 2% of rated capacity of the
treatment plant.
(4) Presence of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride, chromium, copper,
cyanide, fluoride, iron, lead, magnesium, manganese, nickel,
nitrate, selenium, sulfate, zinc or pH values outside the acceptable
limits, described in Subsection C(6) of this section.
F. In such instances where it is agreed that the industrial waste will be
received following preliminary treatment, drawings and specifications
shall be submitted for approval of the Sewer Department Engineer
showing all pertinent details of the construction proposed to
accomplish the treatment, to include details of the indicator recorderregister
type of fluid meter and housing to be used to meter the flow of
industrial wastes and also details of the control manhole to be
constructed on the industrial wastes connection within the sidewalk
area. The control manhole shall be provided with adequate access
manhole covers of approved type, through which access shall be
possible to Sewer Department personnel at all times. Drawings,
specifications, reports, etc., shall be submitted in quadruplicate and
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer.
G. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required, they shall be
provided and continuously maintained in an effectively operating
condition at all times at the expense of the industry.
H. Each industry connected shall be responsible for maintaining a quality
of effluent from its premises which conforms to the provisions
established in its agreement with the Sewer Department. Sampling and
analysis shall be done to conform to accepted practice and in
accordance with the current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.192
I. The cost of preparing and submitting this data for consideration by the
Sewer Department shall be borne by the industry. Likewise, the cost of
sampling and analysis to determine compliance with the terms of the
agreement shall be borne by the industry, although conducted by the
Sewer Department or its duly authorized representative.
J. Control manhole. Industries permitted to connect to Sewer Department
sewers even though not initially being required to provide preliminary
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-44
1:481
§ 260-45. Schedules of rates.
treatment may be required to provide a control manhole and/or meter
as described in Subsection F above.
A. Charges for sewer service are:
(1) Annual rates shall be as established in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I,
Fee Schedule, § 150-29. [Amended 6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1014;
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 1111; 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1145;
2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1179; 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 1247;
3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1250; 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 1281;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1303193]
(2) Schedule 1, Schedule of Domestic Consumer Units, is as follows:
Schedule 1
Schedule of Domestic Consumer Units
Type of Structure
Number of
Domestic Consumer
Units
Single-family homes 1
Rented rooms (for each room available for
rent)
1/2
Single-family home with place of business 2
Hotel or apartment house (for each living
unit)
1
Motel (for each living unit) 1
Apartments (each living unit) 1
Schools (for each 30 pupils and faculty or
fraction thereof)
1
Churches 1
Clubs, societies, service organizations 1
With bar and/or restaurant facilities 2
Gymnasiums in schools, etc. 2
Public buildings 2
Service stations without car washing
facilities
1
Service stations with car washing
facilities
2
Diner, tavern or restaurant
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-44 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-45
1:482
Schedule 1
Schedule of Domestic Consumer Units
Type of Structure
Number of
Domestic Consumer
Units
Seating capacity of 1 to 50 3
Seating capacity for each additional 15
or fraction thereof
1
Soda fountain and/or luncheonette
Seating capacity for first 10 1
Each additional 20 seats or fraction
thereof
1
Laundromat or self-service laundry
For each washer of not more than
12-pound capacity
1/2
For each washer over 12-pound
capacity
1
Residential garbage disposal units $14 per unit
additional
Supermarkets (for each 5 employees) 1
Drive-in restaurants
Seating capacity under 10 3
Seating for additional 15 seats or
fraction thereof
1
Business establishment, not otherwise
classified, whether part of a dwelling or
not (for each 15 employees or fraction
thereof)
1
Industrial plant (for each 5 employees or
on a contract basis)
1
Bakery (with baking facilities, whether
part of a dwelling or not)
2
(3) The domestic consumer unit (a unit of measure for note and billing
purposes) shall be the basis for billing at the annual rate of $64 per
domestic consumer unit.
(4) The connection fee for the minimum six-inch lateral connection
shall be $1,213.
B. Garbage disposal.
(1) The Sewer Department will permit the use of domestic garbage
disposal units; however, a special permit will be required, and there
§ 260-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:483
will be a charge of $14 per year over and above the annual rate for
a domestic consumer unit. This extra charge will be billed quarterly
with the domestic unit. If a disposal unit is in use without a permit
being issued, the Sewer Department will render a bill at the rate of
$14 per year for each year since the initial sewer connection was
made.
(2) When, in the opinion of the Sewer Department, a contract payment
method for sewer service for industrial users is in the best interest
of the Sewer Department, annual service charges for the discharge
of industrial wastes or waters other than sanitary sewage into the
sewerage system of the Sewer Department and annual service
charges with respect to types of property not included above in this
schedule shall be established between the Sewer Department and
the persons contracting for such discharge and use of said system
and the owners of such property on the basis of the quantity of such
discharge or use and the character of such sewage and the cost of
treatment and disposal thereof.
C. Schedule 2, Schedule of Rates for Commercial and Industrial Sanitary
Sewerage Service, is as follows:
(1) Each commercial or industrial user of the sewer system shall pay a
quarterly sewer rental according to Schedule 1194 or on a contract
basis in accordance with the following subsections of Schedule 2 or
Schedules 3 and 4.195
(2) In cases where users using the sewer system have sources of water
supply other than, or in combination with, water supplied through
an approved metered source, such dwellings and establishments
shall provide a meter on the other sources of supply. The total
amount of water consumed, as shown by the sum of all meter
readings, shall be used as the basis for computation of the sewer
rent pursuant to Schedule 3.
(3) In cases where industrial users using the sewer system use water
supplied from any source, and the water so supplied is not entirely
discharged into the sewer system, the amount of water consumed,
to be used as a basis for the computation of the sewer rent
pursuant to Subsection C(1) and applicable use of Schedule 1, shall
be determined by any of the following methods:
(a) The industrial user, at his own expense, shall install a meter or
measuring device approved by the Sewer Department on his
sewer connection with the sewer system, and the readings
from this meter or measuring device shall be used in
computing the sewer rent.
194. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included in § 260-45A(2).
195. Editor's Note: Schedules 3 and 4 are included in § 260-45D and E.
§ 260-45 LINDENWOLD CODE § 260-45
1:484
(b) The industrial user, at his own expense, shall install a meter or
measuring device approved by the Sewer Department on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system, and the
readings from this meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the readings of all water meters, and the
remainder shall be used in computing the sewer rent.
(c) If the Sewer Department shall decide it is not practicable to
install a meter or measuring device to determine the quantity
of water not discharged into the sewer system, the Sewer
Department will determine in such manner and by such
method as it may prescribe the percentage of metered water
discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity of water
used to compute the sewer rent shall be that percentage so
determined of the total quantity measured by the water meter
or meters.
D. Schedule 3, Additional Charge for Treatment of Industrial Wastes. The
sewer rent for collection and treatment of industrial wastes discharged
into the sewer system shall be based upon a premium charge for extrastrength
waste applied as a factor against the charges for sanitary
sewerage. The premium charge is to be based on the strength factor
determined according to the following formula:
Factor % = 44 +
23
(BOD in ppm)
300
+ 31
(SS** in ppm)
350
+ 2
(Chlorine demand in
ppm*)
15
NOTES:
* Where these figures are less than 300 ppm in BOD or 350 ppm in
suspended solids or 15 ppm in chlorine demand, the value in the
parenthesis shall be equal to "1."
** In case where the suspended solids, in the opinion of the Sewer
Department, do not represent the true characteristics of the solids
loading, the Sewer Department reserves the right to use total
solids instead of suspended solids.
E. Schedule 4. Discharge of water from swimming pools will not be
allowed unless a permit is issued by the Sewer Department. Written
application should be made to the Sewer Department, including
sufficient data for review by the Sewer Department Engineer. A rate
schedule will then be established by the Sewer Department. Swimming
pools shall be emptied at off-peak periods unless specific permission to
the contrary is given.
§ 260-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:485
Chapter 264
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY
[The residency of convicted sex offenders within the Borough of
Lindenwold is regulated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq. (Megan's
Law).]
Chapter 273
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Resource extraction — See Ch. 253.
§ 273-1. Permission required.
Hereafter, no person, firm or corporation shall excavate on or remove soil
from any premises in the Borough of Lindenwold, except in connection with
the constructing or alteration of a building or structure on such premises
when excavation, grading or soil removal is incidental thereto, unless
permission is first obtained for such purpose from the Mayor and Borough
Council and also except as such restriction may be further modified or
limited by the provisions of § 273-6 hereof.
§ 273-2. Application for permission.
In order that any person, firm or corporation may remove soil from any
premises within the Borough, the owner thereof shall first file an application
with the Borough Clerk requesting permission so to do, which application
shall be accompanied by maps or plans of the premises showing the existing
contour lines thereof and the contour lines as they would exist after the
removal of such soil, and the maps or plans so submitted shall be subject
to inspection and approval thereof by the Mayor and Borough Council. No
such permission shall be granted until the application, together with the
plans or maps aforesaid, has been approved as aforesaid.
§ 273-3. Hearing; standards; granting permission.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to have a hearing on its
application made to the Mayor and Borough Council may request an
opportunity to be heard thereon, and such request shall be granted
within 30 days thereafter; and the Mayor and Borough Council, in
considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its
decision, shall be guided by and shall take into consideration the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following circumstances:
§ 260-45 LINDENWOLD CODE § 273-3
1:486
§ 273-4. Standards of operation.
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted as aforesaid, the owner
of the premises from which such soil is to be excavated or removed shall
see to it that the operation shall be so conducted that there shall be no
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and such operation must be conducted
in such manner that the area shall be properly leveled, cleared of debris
and graded to conform to the contour lines and grades as approved by the
Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 273-5. Bond required.
If the Mayor and Borough Council shall approve the application for
excavation or removal of soil as aforesaid, then the owner of the premises
to be affected by such application shall file with the Mayor and Borough
Council a bond in such amount, in such form and with such surety as is
acceptable to the Mayor and Borough Council in order to ensure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the permission
granted by the Mayor and Borough Council and in accordance with the
application and the maps or plans accompanying it and in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 273-6. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, it shall not apply to:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
B. If after examining the application and the map or plans filed as provided
for in § 273-2 of this chapter and after a hearing thereon, if a hearing
has been requested as aforesaid, the Mayor and Borough Council shall
be of the opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create
conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety of the
community and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities,
pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land
values, nor create any drainage or sewerage problems or other
conditions of danger, then permission to remove the soil may be
granted.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which has acquired or obtained
or may in the future acquire or obtain soil with the intention of
§ 273-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-6
1:487
§ 273-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 276
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-35.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 381.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 386.
stockpiling it until it or any part thereof has been sold, given or
otherwise transferred to other persons for the purpose of removing it
from the land on which it is so stored or stockpiled.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who or which is operating any sand or
gravel pit in the Borough of Lindenwold; provided, however, that such
person, firm or corporation operating a sand or gravel pit shall obtain a
license for such purpose as provided by Chapter 253, Resource
Extraction, of the Code of the Borough of Lindenwold.196
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1,
of this Code. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587197]
B. Each and every violation of this chapter and every nonconformance or
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, or each day that any
provision of this chapter shall have been violated, shall be construed as
a separate and distinct offense and as a violation hereof.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). Original § 178-7, Operation of sand or gravel pit; § 178-8, Number of licenses
restricted; and § 178-9, License renewal, of the 1981 Code, which immediately followed
this subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 273-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 273-7
1:488
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste and Recyclables General Provisions
§ 276-1. Adoption of statute and Code by reference.
Law and regulations regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored,
collected, transported and disposed of declaring and defining certain
conditions as nuisances; fixing the duties and responsibility of persons
storing, collecting or disposing of refuse and recyclables, regulating the
municipal disposal, collection and bidding procedure for solid waste
collection, and other such laws and regulation as defined within the "Solid
Waste Management Act," N.J.S.A. 13:1E1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.1 et
seq. are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 276-2. Title.
The New Jersey Statute established and adopted by this section is described
and commonly known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," N.J.S.A. 13:1E1
et seq., 13:1B-3, 13:1D-9 and N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.1 et seq.
§ 276-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-2
1:489

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recyclable Collection Program
§ 276-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to regulate, control, dispose of, manage and
collect solid waste and appropriate recycling materials within the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 276-4. Responsibility for collection and disposal.
It shall be the responsibility of the Mayor and Council or his/her designee to
collect and dispose of all appropriate solid waste materials and recyclables,
as defined within, with the exception of demolition, excavation, business,
commercial, industrial, medical, hazardous, building/remodeling waste,
lawn service, landscaper and tree removal, contractor's waste or refuse.
§ 276-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — All disposable containers fabricated primarily of
aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, or other beverages.
ANTIFREEZE — An automotive engine coolant consisting of a mixture of
ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol and water.
APPLIANCES/SCRAP IRON (WHITE GOODS) — Washers, dryers, hot water
heaters, refrigerators, freezers, compactors, dishwashers, stoves, and air
conditioners.
ASBESTOS — The asbestiform varieties of serpentinite (chrysotile),
riebecktie (crocidolite), cummingtonite-grunerite, anthophyllite, and
actinolite-tremolite.
ASBESTOS-CONTAINING WASTE MATERIALS (ACWM) — Mill tailings or
any waste that contains commercial asbestos and is generated by a source
subject to the provisions of 40 CFR 61.140. This term includes filters
from control devices, friable asbestos waste material, and bags or other
similar packaging contaminated with commercial asbestos. As applied to
demolition and renovation operations. This term also includes regulated
asbestos-containing material waste and materials contaminated with
asbestos including disposable equipment and clothing.
AUTOMATED SOLID WASTE/RECYCLE COLLECTION — The method of
collecting solid waste and recycling through the use of mechanical
collection equipment and special containers to accommodate the collection.
BATTERIES — Batteries from automobiles, trucks, other vehicles,
machinery and equipment, which shall be stored in a manner that protects
them from the elements to avoid corrosion and leakage.
§ 276-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-5
1:491
BIODEGRADABLE BAGS — A paper bag which is designed and
manufactured to decompose by a natural biological process.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lindenwold.
BUSINESS WASTE — Any solid waste or recycling materials that are
generated as a result of operating, conducting or performing a business or
service. (See also "commercial waste").
CARDBOARD — Corrugated cardboard, paperboard boxes (cereal, pasta,
and tissue), paper towel rolls, and cardboard beverage carriers.
COLLECTION DAY — Shall start no earlier than 6:30 a.m. and end no later
than 6:00 p.m. or as designated by any contract.
COLLECTION or COLLECTING — The act of picking up solid waste and/or
recycling at its point of generation.
COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPER — Any business, trade or industry providing
the service of grass cutting, tree and brush removal, trimming, stump
removal, mulching or any other yard maintenance or improvement.
Commercial landscaper shall include tree surgeon, arborist, gardener or
horticulturist.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste generated by wholesale,
retail, service businesses or waste generated by maintenance departments
of multi-unit residential dwellings. (See also "business waste").
COMMERCIAL USER — Any person utilizing the services of a business,
trade, industry or other nonresidential activity for the purpose of
landscaping.
CONCRETE AND ASPHALT RECYCLING — The weekly collection that is
neatly stacked or in containers of no more than 50 pounds per container
(100 pounds max).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste building material
and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition
operations on houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other
structures. The following materials may be found in construction and
demolition waste: treated and untreated wood scrap; tree parts, tree
stumps and brush; concrete, asphalt, bricks, blocks and other masonry;
plaster and wallboard; roofing materials; corrugated cardboard and
miscellaneous paper; ferrous and nonferrous metal; nonasbestos building
insulation; plastic scrap; dirt; contractors carpets and padding; glass
(window and door); and other miscellaneous materials; but shall not include
other solid waste types.
CONTRACT(S) — Shall be between the Borough and an independent
contractor(s) for the collection and disposal of solid waste and/or recyclable
material.
CONTRACTOR — A person or firm engaged in a business of service,
construction, repairing, refurbishing, remodeling or demolition of buildings
or grounds within the Borough.
§ 276-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-5
1:492
CONTRACTOR — Any individual or firm engaged in providing a service of
repairing, constructing, refurbishing, remodeling, or demolishing buildings
or grounds within the Borough.
CONTRACTOR'S WASTE — See "construction and demolition waste".
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Camden County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling.
DUMPSTER CONTAINER — Either black eight-yard solid waste metal
container or green/blue four-yard recycling container issued by the Borough
for the purpose of disposing of solid waste/recyclable material intended to
be mechanically collected and dumped into a solid waste/recyclable truck.
These dumpster containers are the property of the Borough.
ELECTRONICS/E-WASTE — Items with electronic components and circuit
boards, including but not limited to computers, monitors, printers,
computer peripherals, cameras, VCRs, DVD players, stereos, cell phones,
telephones etc.
GARBAGE/FOOD WASTE — Any animal or vegetable waste solids resulting
from the preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, but not including
human waste.
GENERATION — The act or process of producing solid waste.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the
product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known as glass,
excluding, however, blue and flat glass commonly known as window glass.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Wastes presenting a clear danger to health and
safety by reason of their biological, pathological, explosive, radiological, or
toxic characteristics.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Oil based paints, solvents,
thinners, pesticides, gasoline, cleaning fluids, etc. that must be recycled.
LANDSCAPER/LAWN SERVICE CONTRACTOR/TREE REMOVAL
CONTRACTOR — A person or firm engaging in a commercial enterprise or
business which designs, constructs, alters, demolishes, excavates, plants,
weeds, fertilizes, mows, elevates, trims, prunes and/or completely removes
trees, stump removal and/or grind roots from the premises of another's
property and is paid for such endeavors or otherwise alters and/or cares for
the outdoor natural premises of a property.
METAL CANS — All disposable containers fabricated primarily of metal and
commonly used for soda, beer, or other beverages.
MOTOR OIL — Petroleum base or synthetic oil whose use includes, but is
not limited to, lubrication of internal combustion engines.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
§ 276-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-5
1:493
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a), and shall include apartment complexes,
condominiums, senior housing.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things, enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Borough of Lindenwold.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest.
PAPER RECYCLABLES — Newspaper, white paper, magazines, junk mail,
paper bags, phone books, office paper, and file folders.
PLASTICS — Disposable containers made and fabricated primarily of
plastic, and having imprinted on them a recycling code of No. 1, No. 2, No.
4, No. 5 and No. 7 only.
RECYCLABLE WASTE — Any material that can be separated at the source of
generation, which can be reused in manufacture of new products or goods.
RECYCLABLES — That portion of the solid waste generated that can be
separated and reused and returned to the economic mainstream in the form
of raw materials or products.
RECYCLE CART CONTAINER — A wheeled black ninety-six-gallon plastic
receptacle with blue lid issued by the Borough to its residents for the
purpose of disposing of single-stream recyclable material intended to be
mechanically collected and dumped into a recycling truck. These containers
are the property of the Borough.
RESIDENT — Any person occupying or maintaining a place of residence
within the Borough, occupying a single-family house or multi-family
dwelling of two units or less.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Residential user generated solid waste that
has resulted from normal household activities and is collected and disposed
of at an approved disposal location.
RESIDENTIAL USER — All owners, tenants, occupants or persons in
possession of, or exercising control over, a dwelling unit such as a singlefamily
home or a multi-family dwelling of two or less units, and who utilize
or purport to utilize the Borough or its authorized agent for the collection
of solid waste, rubbish, trash and recyclables.
ROUTE — A specific path of a trash or recycling collection vehicle.
SCAVENGERS — Any unauthorized or unlicensed person, firm or
corporations collecting rubbish, trash or recyclable materials placed at the
collection point for Borough collection.
§ 276-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-5
1:494
SEASONAL LEAF COLLECTION — The special collection of loose leaves
raked for curbside collection, completed in scheduled neighborhoods,
weekly during the months of November, December and first week of May
only.
SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING — The method of placing mixed paper,
cardboard, glass, tin, aluminum and plastics No. 1, No. 2, No. 4, No. 5,
and No. 7 only together in one container for collection. Then collected in
one noncompartmentalized vehicle and delivered to the materials recovery
facility (MRF). All recyclable materials are collected in one stream.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A specially designed wheeled black ninetysix-
gallon container with black lid issued by the Borough to its residents to
accommodate the automated collection operation to be used for the deposit,
disposal, and collection of solid waste. These containers shall remain the
property of the Borough.
SOLID WASTE CONTRACTOR — A person or firm for hire properly licensed
by the State Department of Environmental Protection (N.J.A.C. 7:26-3.2 et
seq.).
SOLID WASTE/RECYCLING DROP-OFF CENTER — The municipal center
located at the Lindenwold Public Works at 861 Gibbsboro Rd. open 8:00
a.m. through 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Separating recyclables from solid waste at the
point of generation.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
STUMPS AND LOGS — The weekly collection that is neatly stacked of 12
inches in diameter or larger and/or over 50 lbs. per log.
TEXTILES — Items such as clean unsoiled cloth, fabric and etc., including,
but not limited to, clothing, drapes, curtains, sheets, towels, belts, shoes,
handbags and small stuffed animals.
TIRES — A rubber-based scrap automotive and light truck tire that is not on
rims.
VEGETATION/YARD WASTE COLLECTION — The weekly collection of
brush, tree parts, grass clippings and garden recyclables. It shall not mean
dirt or soil.
WHITE GOODS — See "appliances/scrap iron".
WOOD SCRAP — Unfinished lumber from construction or demolition
projects, including pallets. Unfinished shall mean nonchemically treated
(not pressure treated, impregnated with preservatives, insecticides,
fungicides, creosote or other chemicals, and not painted, resin-coated or
otherwise surface treated, and not laminated or bonded, and not similarly
altered from its natural condition).
§ 276-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-6
1:495
§ 276-6. Intention.
It is the intention of the Borough to provide automated curbside solid waste
and automated recycling collection to residential users. Automated curbside
collection does not apply to certain multi-family structures that are located
in areas that have been deemed unsuitable for the automated curbside
collection process.
§ 276-7. Collection schedule.
The Mayor and Council or designee shall have the authority to establish,
alter or amend the schedule for the collection of residential solid waste and
recyclables.
A. Residential curbside solid waste must be properly placed into Borough
issued black ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart containers with the
wording (trash only) on the black lid, not exceeding the container's
three-hundred-thirty-five-pound container rating. Residential
recyclables must be properly placed in black ninety-six-gallon cart
containers with the wording "recycling only" on the blue lid, not
exceeding the container's three-hundred-thirty-five-pound container
rating. These containers must be placed in the roadway within three
feet from the curb and within the limits of the residence.
B. Where the residence lies within an area deemed unsuitable for
automated pick-up (multi-family structures), residents shall use
approved dumpster containers and follow the same regulations.
(1) Each residential user must source separate the recyclable material.
(2) Such waste must be generated within the premises collected.
(3) Waste must conform to all other requirements specified by the
Borough.
A. Holidays. There will be no collection on Borough holidays.
B. Recyclables. Recyclable material, including yard waste/shall be
collected one time per week.
C. Solid waste. Solid waste shall be collected at no additional charge one
time per week. Additional collections will be provided for a fee, which is
outlined in Chapter 150 Fees, including additional solid waste removal.
D. Time and placement for collection. Residents shall only use areas
suitable for curbside solid waste and recyclable collection, and shall not
be permitted to place solid waste and recyclables at the collection point
earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the evening before the scheduled collection
day for that location. Thereafter, empty containers shall be removed
from curb no later 8:00 p.m. after the regular collection day for that
location. All solid waste and recyclables must be placed at the collection
point prior to 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day.
§ 276-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-8
1:496
§ 276-8. Mandatory source separation requirements; exemption.
§ 276-9. Points of collection.
A. Within the Borough of Lindenwold, it shall be mandatory for all persons
who are owners, tenants or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, school and other
institutional locations within the Borough of Lindenwold, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recycling of paper, cardboard, glass, metal and aluminum cans, plastics,
motor oil and yard waste and e-waste recyclables materials shall be
deposited separate and apart from other solid waste generated by the
owners, tenants or occupants of such premises.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16d, the governing body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional
premises within its municipal boundaries from the source separation
requirements of the ordinance which requiring persons generating
municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to source
separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified recyclable
materials, if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of
all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this section, a commercial or institutional generator of solid
waste shall file an application for exemption with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator. The following information is needed: the name
of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and
lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of
the person making the application on behalf of the commercial or
institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and
telephone number of the facility which provides the service of recycling
those designated recyclable materials, and a certification that the
designated recyclable materials will be recycled and that, at least on an
annual basis, said recycling service provider or commercial/
institutional generator shall provide written documentation to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons collected
and recycled for each designated material.
C. Violations. It is a violation of this section for the resident, occupant or
owner to fail to properly separate recyclables and yard waste from solid
waste.
D. Penalties/remedies. The Borough, at its discretion, may choose to
educate, warn, notify or issue a summons for a violation of § 276-8 and/
or the Borough may choose not to collect solid waste or recyclables
which are not properly separated.
A. All Borough issued black ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart containers
with the wording "trash only" on the black lid and Borough issued black
ninety-six-gallon recycling cart containers with the wording "recycling
only" on the blue lid are to be placed in the roadway within the limits of
§ 276-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-9
1:497
§ 276-10. Preparation of residential solid waste for curbside
collection.
the residence. Cart containers must be placed at least 10 feet from any
motor vehicle and no more than three feet in front of the curb or edge
of the roadway, and maintaining a minimum of three feet of spacing
between containers and any other obstructions which may be present
in the roadway. When placed in the roadway, carts should be situated in
a manner by which the handles of the carts are facing the front of the
residential structure and the arrow on lid facing the roadway.
B. A second black ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart container with the
wording "trash only" on the black lid and/or a second black ninety-sixgallon
solid waste cart container with the wording "recycling only" on
the blue lid (maximum of two solid waste/recycling cart containers per
residence) may be requested, however, there is a one-time fee
associated with this service, which is outlined in Chapter 150,
additional solid waste/recycling cart container. The solid waste/
recycling cart container will remain property of the Borough, and will
be subjected to all of the same rules and regulations of the Borough
concerning solid waste/recycling cart containers.
C. Only one collection point shall be permitted per residential user. In the
case of corner lots, solid waste, recyclables and yard waste shall be
placed at the curbside of an improved roadway which is most
convenient to the collection vehicle or as directed by the Public Works
Superintendent.
D. The Public Works Superintendent has the right to designate collection
points located on dead-end and one-way streets, which provide the most
efficient and safe route to accommodate automated solid waste and
recyclables collection.
E. No collection of solid waste or recyclables will be provided to dwellings
under construction, dwellings being remodeled, vacant or unoccupied
dwellings, vacant lots or vacant lands or those properties/residences
without a valid certificate of occupancy.
F. Dumpster collection of multi-family dwellings will be collected at the
designated collection points on the scheduled day(s) set forth by the
Public Works Superintendent. Optional additional collections will be
provided for a fee, which is outlined in Chapter 150, (additional solid
waste removal). Contracts and payments must be made for entire year
by January 1 and are nonrefundable.
A. Residential solid waste, shall be placed into the Borough issued black
ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart containers with the wording (trash
only) on the black lid, which are property of the Borough and are the
responsibility of the homeowner to maintain in a safe and sanitary
manner. When placed curbside, the container lid should be closed shut
with nothing protruding from the top opening of the container. It is the
§ 276-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-10
1:498
§ 276-11. Preparation of recyclable materials for curbside
collection.
All residential recyclable material, including yard waste, shall be placed for
collection according to the following minimum standards:
responsibility of the homeowner to report any damage to the container
which would threaten to hinder its use effectively for the purpose of
solid waste collection. In all instances, it is the responsibility of the
resident to ensure that all possible precautions are being taken to
protect their solid waste containers and any contents from vermin,
insect, and other animal intrusions.
B. Additionally there shall be a limit of one piece of furniture per weekly
solid waste collection.
C. Solid waste shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids,
wrapped securely and placed in the solid waste cart container.
A. Preparation of residential recycling, shall be placed into Borough
issued black ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart containers with the
wording (recycling only) on the blue lid, which are property of the
Borough and are the responsibility of the homeowner to maintain in a
safe and sanitary manner. When placed curbside, the container lid
should be closed shut and nothing protruding from the top opening of
the container. It is the responsibility of the homeowner to report any
damage to the container which would threaten to hinder its use
effectively for the purpose of solid waste collection. In all instances, it is
the responsibility of the resident to ensure that all possible precautions
are being taken to protect the solid waste containers and any contents
from vermin, insect, and other animal intrusions.
(1) Single stream recycling Newspaper, corrugated cardboard,
phonebooks, chipboard paperboard boxes, beverage cartons,
cardboard beverage carriers, paper bags, file folders, office paper
and paper towel rolls, paperback books, magazines, brochures,
inserts, greeting cards, regular and junk mail, aluminum and metal
cans, No. 1, No. 2, No. 4, No. 5 and No. 7 plastic bottles, steel bottle
caps and metal jar lids, shall be placed together in the Borough
issued black ninety-six-gallon recycling cart containers with the
wording "Recycling only" on the blue lid provided by the Borough.
(2) All containers must be empty and rinsed, plastic lids and caps must
be removed.
(3) No plastic bags are to be placed in recyclable containers.
(4) Loose recyclables placed outside the cart or bucket is prohibited.
B. Appliances/scrap iron/white goods as defined above are collected on a
scheduled day, one time per week. Residents must call the Department
§ 276-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-11
1:499
of Public Works to schedule collection of these items on a weekday
assigned.
C. Concrete/asphalt as defined above, are collected on a scheduled day,
one time per week. Residents must call the Department of Public Works
to schedule collection of these items on a weekday assigned. These
items must be neatly stacked at curbside or contained for collection.
(One-hundred pounds maximum).
D. Stumps and Logs as defined above, are collected on a scheduled day,
one time per week. Residents must call the Department of Public Works
to schedule collection of these items on a weekday assigned. These
items must be 12 inches in diameter or larger and/or over 50 pounds
per log and be neatly stacked curbside.
E. Vegetation/yard waste collection as defined above, are collected on a
scheduled day, one time per week.
(1) Yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, vegetative waste from lawns/
flower beds and tree brush/shrubs and vegetative debris shall be
placed in biodegradable paper bags or open containers. A
maximum of five no larger than thirty-two-gallon containers or no
more than one pile of vegetation/yard waste, not to exceed two
cubic yards will be collected per residence. Yard waste must be
placed curbside, behind or beside the solid waste and recycling
containers, a maximum of four feet behind the curb or edge of the
roadway, in front of the residential structure. No individual item
(bag, container or bundles) shall weigh in excess of 50 pounds.
Larger branches and limbs shall be cut into four foot lengths and
securely tied in bundles with total weight not in excess of 50
pounds. Containers are prohibited from having hinged or attached
lid. Recyclables shall not be mixed with solid waste. Commingling
of solid waste and recyclables is a violation and will be subject to a
penalty described in § 276-8D.
(2) Placement of all yard waste including but not limited to grass
clippings, leaves and brush in plastic bags for Borough collection is
prohibited and will not be collected by the Borough. It is
recommended that residents consider a "cut it and leave it"
program where grass cuttings are left on the lawn.
(3) Any yard waste generated from a commercial landscaper/lawn
service contractor/tree removal contractor will not be collected by
the Borough. Any landscaper/lawn service contractor/tree removal
contractor performing services within the Borough shall remove all
trimmings, branches, trees, stumps, grass cuttings and other waste
materials generated from the services performed by them from the
premises in which they service.
F. Seasonal leaf collection, Municipal collection of leaves is limited to the
months of November, December and the first week of May only.
Municipal collection schedules are annually identified by newsletter
§ 276-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-11
1:500
§ 276-12. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
and development yard signs noting the week of collection. Sweeping,
raking, blowing or otherwise placing leaves that are not containerized
at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the 14 days
prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed
closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Leaf waste generated
from a commercial landscaper/lawn service contractor/tree removal
contractor will not be collected by the Borough. If such placement of
leaves occurs, the party responsible for placement of the leaves must
remove the leaves from the street or said party shall be deemed in
violation of this section.
G. Prohibited curbside recycling material: Electronics, motor oil,
automotive batteries, CFLs, fluorescent lamps and household
hazardous materials shall not be placed curbside and are to be brought
to the Department of Public Works for recycling.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or its designee, unless the municipality provides for the
collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Requests for curbside collection of designated recyclables must be in
writing to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator. If request is granted,
the property owner will be responsible to pay the same fee as the onetime
fee for an additional solid waste/recycling cart container, which is
outlined in Chapter 150. The solid waste/recycling cart container will
remain property of the Borough even though you paid the one-time fee
and will be subjected to all of the same rules and regulations of the
Borough provided for solid waste/recycling cart containers and their
collection.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products and maintain such records as may be
prescribed for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
E. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as
may be prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the
§ 276-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-12
1:501
§ 276-13. Solid waste and recycling cart containers.
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
A. Solid waste cart containers. All solid waste is to be placed into Borough
issued black ninety-six-gallon solid waste cart containers with the
wording "trash only" on the black lid. Additional cart container can be
obtained for a fee, which is outlined in Chapter 150, additional solid
waste and recycling cart containers.
B. Recycle cart containers. All recycling is to be placed into Borough
issued black ninety-six-gallon recycling cart containers with the
wording "recycling only" on the blue lid. Additional cart containers may
be obtained for a fee, which is outlined in Chapter 150, additional solid
waste and recycling cart containers.
C. Contents placed into the cart container should not exceed the maximum
rating of 335 pounds and should not have items protruding through the
top side opening of the cart container which would prevent the lid from
properly closing. It is the responsibility of the resident to maintain the
cart container in a clean, sanitary, and overall safe manner. Additionally,
it is the resident's sole responsibility to alert the Borough of damage to
the cart container that prohibits the ability for the container to be
effectively used for collection and disposal of materials.
D. Borough-issued and any additionally requested cart containers are the
property of the Borough of Lindenwold. Cart containers assigned to
every address must remain with the property at all times. If the
property is transferred or sold, the cart container shall stay with the
property, otherwise the cart container will be considered stolen and
reported to the authorities.
E. The containers shall not be defaced, marked, or painted upon. Every
cart container is registered and recorded with a serial number and no
other identification is necessary. If the serial number is unknown, it can
be obtained by calling the public works during regular business hours.
Defacement of the container in any way shall cause the responsible
party to incur the cost of replacing the container.
F. Storage of cart containers. Solid waste/recyclable cart containers
stored outside residential buildings shall be placed behind the extended
front face of the structure. Cart containers shall be concealed to the
extent that they are not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
properties.
G. Regular trash cans and/or carts purchased privately cannot be used
with the automated solid waste/recycle collection system. Plastic
disposal bags and grocery bags, shall not be considered acceptable
solid waste containers and are thereby also prohibited.
§ 276-12 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-13
1:502
§ 276-14. Solid waste and recycling dumpster containers.
H. Spill. Residential users shall remove any solid waste spilled by animals
or vandals as a result of defective or inadequate lids on cart containers.
I. Vermin/animals. All cart containers should be stored and placed for
collection in such a way so as to discourage intrusion by vermin and
animals.
J. Placement of cart containers. See §§ 276-7 and 276-9 for permitted
schedule of cart containers and placement at the collection point.
A. Solid waste dumpster containers. All solid waste is to be placed into
Borough issued black eight-yard solid waste dumpster containers with
the wording "trash only" on the front of the container. Solid waste shall
be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids, wrapped securely
and placed in the solid waste cart container.
B. Recycling dumpster containers. All recycling is to be placed into
Borough-issued green or blue four yard recycling dumpster containers
with the wording "recycling only" on the front of the container. All
residential recyclable material shall be placed for collection according
to the following minimum standards:
(1) Single stream recycling. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard,
phonebooks, chipboard paperboard boxes, beverage cartons,
cardboard beverage carriers, paper bags, file folders, office paper
and paper towel rolls, paperback books, magazines, brochures,
inserts, greeting cards, regular and junk mail, aluminum and metal
cans, No. 1, No. 2, No. 4, No. 5 and No. 7 plastic bottles, steel bottle
caps and metal jar lids, shall be placed together in the recycling
dumpster container.
(2) All containers must be empty and rinsed, plastic lids and caps must
be removed.
(3) No plastic bags are to be placed in recyclable containers.
C. Contents placed into the dumpster containers should not have items
protruding through the top side opening of the dumpster container
which would prevent the lid from properly closing. It is the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain the dumpster container
in a clean, sanitary, and overall safe manner. Additionally, it is the
property owner's sole responsibility to alert the Borough of damage to
the dumpster container that prohibits the ability for the container to be
effectively used for collection and disposal of materials.
D. The containers shall not be defaced, marked, or painted upon. Every
cart container is registered and recorded with a serial number and no
other identification is necessary. If the serial number is unknown, it can
be obtained by calling the public works during regular business hours.
§ 276-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-14
1:503
Defacement of the container in any way shall cause the responsible
party to incur the cost of replacing the container.
E. Storage of trash/recyclable dumpster containers. Solid waste/
recyclable dumpster containers are to be placed and stored in solid
waste enclosures. Dumpster containers shall be concealed to the extent
that they are not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
properties.
F. Solid waste/recycling enclosures.
(1) Solid waste/recyclable enclosures shall be large enough to handle
the trash and recycling dumpster container.
(2) The solid waste/recyclable enclosure shall be constructed on three
sides by masonry walls not less than six feet or more than eight feet
in height with a facade treatment that is aesthetically similar with
the facade treatment of the building.
(3) Solid waste/recyclable enclosures shall be located a minimum of 15
feet away from the building wall unless specifically approved by the
Fire Marshal.
(4) The trash and recycling area shall have an enclosure gate of
durable material that will be kept closed when solid waste/
recyclable is not being picked up.
(5) Solid waste/recyclable containers may not be located anywhere on
the property without a trash enclosure.
(6) The inside and outside of the dumpster enclosure must remain
clean and free of debris of any kind. The Borough shall only collect
the Borough issued solid waste/recyclable dumpster containers.
Property owner must ensure area is clean and free of debris at all
times or shall be subjected to fines from the Borough of Lindenwold
Code Enforcement.
G. Privately purchased regular trash cans and/or carts cannot be used
with the dumpster solid waste/recycle collection system. Plastic
disposal bags and grocery bags, shall not be considered acceptable
solid waste containers and are thereby prohibited outside of the
dumpster.
H. Appliances/scrap iron/white goods, concrete/asphalt, stumps and logs
and vegetation/yard waste, as defined above, shall not be included in
the weekly solid waste/recycling dumpster container collection.
I. All hazardous materials, including, but not limited to, waste materials
which present a clear danger to health and safety by reason of their
biological, pathological, explosive, radiological or toxic characteristics
shall not be permitted into the solid waste/recycling dumpster
container collection.
§ 276-14 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-14
1:504
§ 276-15. Additional collections.
J. Spill. Property owners shall remove any solid waste spilled by animals
or vandals as a result of defective or inadequate lids on dumpster
containers.
K. Vermin/animals. All dumpster containers shall be stored with lid tightly
closed for collection in such a way so as to discourage intrusion by
vermin and animals.
A. The Borough of Lindenwold shall make available to all residential
properties within the Borough, optional additional solid waste
collections on a weekly basis, upon request of the owner. The Borough
shall impose an annual service charge upon the owners of those
properties, which elect to utilize optional additional solid waste
collections. The service charge for the optional additional collection
shall be assessed for each residential unit for which the optional
additional solid waste collection is being provided by the Borough.
Upon an owner electing additional collections, the Borough shall
provide the additional collection for the entire calendar year and the
owner shall receive the service for an entire year, without right of
refund.
B. The owner of a residential property, which elects additional weekly
solid waste collections, shall notify the Borough in writing no later than
December 1 of the calendar year, of their intent to discontinue service
for the following calendar year. In the event the owner fails to timely
notify the Borough in writing to discontinue or cancel service, the
service shall continue into the succeeding calendar year.
C. The Borough shall bill the owner of each property based upon the
number of residential units for which each additional solid waste
collection is being provided by the Borough. An owner electing an
additional collection shall pay the entire service charge for the year, at
time of the initial request, and thereafter, within 30 days of receiving an
invoice from the Borough.
D. The funds collected pursuant to this section, shall be paid to the
Borough of Lindenwold. The charges set forth herein, shall draw the
same interest as taxes upon real estate beginning 30 days after the due
date and shall be a lien upon the property for which the service was
requested, until paid. In the event of nonpayment of the service charge,
the Borough shall have the right to discontinue additional solid waste
collections without notice to the owner.
E. For purposes of this section, residential units shall be defined as a
structure, or an entirely self-contained portion thereof, which is
designated for occupancy principally as a place of residence of one
housekeeping unit, and which contains facilities for cooking, sleeping,
bathing, and human sanitation which are used for the exclusive use of
the occupants of the dwelling. An individual apartment unit within a
§ 276-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-15
1:505
§ 276-16. Unacceptable wastes.
The following materials shall not be collected as part of the Borough's
solid waste and recyclable materials program. This list is not exhaustive.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: asbestos, asbestos
containing waste materials, asphalt roofing products containing more than
1% asbestos, resilient floor coverings, demolition materials, excavation
materials; commercial, industrial, hazardous and medical waste generated
from commercial facilities or medical offices. Also included are construction
materials generated by the residents or private contractors, yard wastes
which are not generated at the property of the residential user and on
premises yard waste generated by a lawn service, landscaper, or tree
service contractor.
§ 276-17. Hazardous materials.
multi-family dwelling shall be classified as a residential unit. A singlefamily
home shall also be classified as a residential unit.
F. For calendar year 2016, an owner of a residential property electing to
utilize optional additional solid waste collections, shall notify the
Borough no later than July 1, 2016, and pay a prorated yearly fee, based
upon the number of months of service to be provided through 2016.
G. The additional solid waste collection offered by the Borough is optional,
and participation is voluntary, and subject to the discretion of the
Borough, to provide additional collections.
A. Construction/remodeling/building materials. Private contractors shall
remove the debris materials from the site and shall dispose of the
debris properly at their own cost. This debris is not to be placed for
normal residential collection.
B. Hazardous materials. All chemical and corrosive wastes and other
hazardous materials as defined within are prohibited to be placed for
residential pick up.
C. House cleanouts. Furniture, carpets, bedding and similar household
items resulting from the sale of a house (house clean-out or move-ins/
move-outs) will not be collected by the Borough. Disposal of such items
shall be the responsibility of the owner (at time of disposal) of the
property.
D. Cardboard boxes. Cardboard boxes may not be used to dispose of
regular household trash. Cardboard is recyclable and must be placed
into Borough supplied recyclable cart containers in accordance with the
requirements of § 276-11. Any cardboard boxes containing household
trash shall be left at the curb.
A. All hazardous materials, including but not limited to waste materials
which present a clear danger to health and safety by reason of their
§ 276-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-17
1:506
§ 276-18. Scavengers.
Scavengers are prohibited from operating within the Borough.
§ 276-19. Tips; gratuities; conduct.
biological, pathological, explosive, radiological or toxic characteristics
shall not be permitted into the curbside collection.
B. Injection needles shall be broken from syringe and hub and separated
from the syringe before depositing for collection and shall be placed in
metal or plastic containers in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the New Jersey Health Department and Department of Solid Waste,
"Household Hazardous Waste Management Act."
C. All medical waste generators shall comply with any and all applicable
regulations promulgated by the NJDEP for such generators for the
disposal of medical hazardous waste.
D. Residential users and those users identified by contract shall be
responsible for any personal injury to collection personnel resulting
from improper disposal of hazardous materials.
E. The following other household hazardous materials shall be brought to
the county household special waste collection site on desginated
collection days to be recycled:
(1) Automotive fluids, paint-related products, household cleaners,
pesticides, fuels, personal care products, home and hobby
products, oil based paints, gasoline, aerosols, mercury-containing
devices are not to be placed curbside with normal wastes, but are
to be disposed of at county household special waste collection sites.
(2) Latex paint is a nonhazardous material. It can be disposed of in the
regular trash, following the elimination of all liquid content by
removal of drying techniques.
A. Tips and gratuities shall be strictly prohibited.
B. No Borough employee or Borough-contracted solid waste contractor
employee shall enter upon or on private property, except at the
designated curb collection point, for the purpose of removing solid
waste or recycling materials.
C. No individual shall harass, assault, threaten, or otherwise engage in
any criminal conduct toward a Borough employee engaged in the
course of removal of solid waste or recyclable materials. In the event an
individual engages in prohibited conduct as set forth herein, the
Borough shall have the right to refuse future solid waste and recyclable
removal service to the responsible party, to include any entity, business,
or organization with which the responsible party is employed and/or
affiliated.
§ 276-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-20
1:507
§ 276-20. Additional recycling regulations; authorization.
The Mayor and Council or designee is authorized to issue additional
recycling regulations as needed to provide for the most safe and efficient
means of removal of recyclable materials as defined within.
§ 276-21. Collection by unauthorized person prohibited.
All solid waste, yard waste and recyclable material aggregated and offered
for collection shall remain the property and responsibility of the generator
until said material are collected by the Borough or self hauled to the
Borough's recycling center, at which time they become the property of
the Borough, respectively. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person not authorized by the Borough to collect items herein described or
to pick up or cause to be picked up such items. Each such unauthorized
collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as provided herein.
§ 276-22. Unlawful disposal.
It shall be a violation of this section in addition to other pertinent Borough
ordinances and applicable state law for a person to place residential solid
waste, commercially generated solid waste or private contractor waste at
the collection site reserved for the Borough's solid waste collection sites.
§ 276-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-22
1:508
ARTICLE III
Mandatory Commercial Institutional and Industrial Source
Separation Program
§ 276-23. Program regulations.
A. All persons within the Borough who are not residents and who are not
served by the curbside collection program established pursuant to this
chapter shall source separate and arrange for collection for recycling of
all designated recyclables.
B. Designated recyclables for the mandatory commercial, institutional and
industrial source separation program shall consist of the following
materials:
(1) High grade paper; including white letterhead paper, white bond
typing paper, white copier paper, white note pad paper, white
writing paper, white envelopes, computer printout paper, and
computer tab cards.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass bottles and aluminum and metal cans.
(4) Other recyclable material as designated by the Borough of
Lindenwold or as mandated by the State Resource Recovery and
Recycling Act or other statute or regulations.
C. The arrangement for collection and disposal of designated recyclables
shall be the responsibility of the person or firm who has generated the
recyclables (generator) or the person or firm obligated to the generator,
by contract, to arrange for collection and disposal of its solid waste. The
arrangements may include, without limitation, direct marketing of
recyclables, delivery to a drop-off, contracts with solid waste collection
haulers for separate collection of any or all designated recyclables,
contract with other persons for separate collection of any or all
designated recyclables or direct delivery to recycling facility.
D. This section shall be enforced by the Borough of Lindenwold Code
Enforcement and/or Camden County officials.
§ 276-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-23
1:509

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 276-24. Solid waste/recycling drop-off center.
Solid waste/recycling municipal drop-off center. The Borough may provide,
during regular business hours, a solid waste/recycling municipal drop-off
site, should a need be determined by the Borough. This drop-off is to be
used for residential solid waste/recycling that is inconvenient to place at
curbside for scheduled bulk pickup. No construction debris in excess of 50
pounds generated by an individual, or from a single site, shall be deposited
at the municipal drop-off site. All debris in excess of 50 pounds shall be
taken to an approved recycling center or landfill. Proof of residency in
the Borough of Lindenwold is required in order to use the municipal solid
waste/recycling drop-off site. Such proof may be provided by a resident
showing his or her driver's license or vehicle registration. In the event that a
nonresident contractor is hauling bulk trash for a resident to the municipal
drop-off site, a letter stating the resident's name, address and telephone
number and the contractor's authorization to haul bulk trash from that
residence with the resident's signature is required. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, and within the discretion of the Public Works Superintendent,
in-person authorization, given directly by the resident to the Public Works
Superintendent or his designee, may be required before admittance of the
nonresident contractor to the drop-off site.
§ 276-25. Dumping restricted.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, except in a place specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 276-26. Transportation of garbage and other refuse.
A. No person shall carry or transport or cause or permit to be carried or
transported through or along any public street any solid waste or other
vegetable or animal refuse from outside the limits of the Borough into
the Borough except as herein after limited and provided for.
B. In all cases where solid waste or other refuse is to be transported
through the Borough and not dumped or otherwise disposed of therein,
it shall be unlawful for the person transporting the same to make use of
any street or other public place in the Borough for that purpose unless
the vehicle in which the solid waste or other refuse is to be transported
or that portion wherein the solid waste or other refuse may be
contained, shall be thoroughly and securely covered and fastened down
in order that there be no spilling of any solid waste or other refuse or
escaping of odors, and unless the vehicle, or part thereof, shall be
§ 276-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-26
1:511
§ 276-27. New developments.
New developments of multi-family residential units or commercial,
institutional or industrial properties (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and
13:1E-99.16c) shall be subject to the following:
thoroughly watertight in order that there may be no leaking or
draining.
A. Any application to the Joint Land Use Board of the Borough of
Lindenwold for subdivision or site plan-approval for the construction of
multi-family dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.), as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough of
Lindenwold, the owner of any new multi-family housing or commercial,
institutional or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer and
the Borough Public Works Superintendent.
§ 276-26 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-27
1:512
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management; Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
§ 276-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Lindenwold and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 276-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Borough of Lindenwold or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
SOLID WASTE/RECYCLING CONTAINER — Any waste container that a
person controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters,
trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 276-30. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out; or
§ 276-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-30
1:513
§ 276-31. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 276-32. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of Lindenwold Code
Enforcement.
§ 276-33. Penalties.
Any person(s) assessed for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance
with Chapter 1, § 1-1 of this code book.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Lindenwold.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 276-30 LINDENWOLD CODE § 276-33
1:514
ARTICLE VI
Violations Notice; Enforcement; and Penalties
§ 276-34. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department of Public
Works, Police Department and the Borough Code Enforcement, who may, at
their discretion, choose to educate, warn, notify or issue a summons for any
violation of this chapter.
§ 276-35. Notice.
Should the Borough issue a formal notice of violation or summons for a
violation of this section, the violation will be notified in accordance with
Municipal Court and/or Borough procedure.
§ 276-36. Penalties.
Penalties assessed for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance
with Chapter 1, § 1-1 of this code book, which states any person who shall
violate any provision of "The Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of
Lindenwold" or other ordinance of the Borough, where no specific penalty
is provided regarding the section violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court.
§ 276-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-36
1:515
Chapter 283
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 287.
Stream buffer conservation zones — See Ch.
291.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 283-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 283-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Lindenwold Borough.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
§ 276-36 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-1
1:516
§ 283-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design, and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This chapter
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law, except that, where
any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision
of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 283-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-2
1:517
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure or land or extension of use of land by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit, any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project, as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lindenwold, Camden County, New
Jersey.198
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission,
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 283-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-2
1:518
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Lindenwold Borough, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
§ 283-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-2
1:519
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 283-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 283-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
§ 283-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-3
1:520
§ 283-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
B. Note: Alternative standards shall provide at least as much protection
from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater
quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects as
would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 283-11.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G of this section:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G of this section may be obtained for
the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
§ 283-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:521
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G of this section shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at this Subsection E
into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural
measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the
applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in Subsection E(2)
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-4
1:522
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:523
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) of this section are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood)
that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-4
1:524
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office or subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 283-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 283-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:525
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery
located at an industrial facility that is directly or
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not
limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 283-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that, for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed at any point in time the
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-4
1:526
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 283-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:527
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 283-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 283-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-4
1:528
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 283-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converges on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 283-7.
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:529
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.199
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where an
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-4
1:530
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:531
§ 283-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) of this section and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A
runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the
design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed
on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover has existed on the site during the five years immediately
prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest
runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic
condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
§ 283-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-5
1:532
§ 283-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/stormwater/bmp_manual2.htm or at
New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427, (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high-water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
§ 283-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-6
1:533
§ 283-7. Sources for technical guidance.
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 283-9B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 283-9.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 283-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 283-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
§ 283-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-7
1:534
§ 283-8. Mitigation plan.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. Variance or exemption from stormwater design standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the design standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a finding by the
Lindenwold Joint Land Use Board that the variance or exemption
will be mitigated by the construction of a stormwater project of
equal construction value within the same subdrainage area (HUC).
[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(2) In order to be granted a variance or exemption a development must
demonstrate that the design standard cannot be met due to
unusual circumstances on the existing property, such as unusual
surface conditions or extremely low drainage flow rates for the twoyear
storm event. Variances or exemptions are not recommended
for properties where any portion is developed on pervious or
undeveloped open space.
(3) In order to be granted a variance or exemption, the applicant will
be required to perform a preliminary stormwater management
design and cost analysis of the stormwater system that would be
required to meet all the stormwater management requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:8, Subchapter 5. This analysis will be utilized to
determine and select the mitigation project to be constructed by
the applicant.
B. Mitigation projects.
(1) Stormwater basin retrofit. Provide water quality and recharge
measures at existing stormwater basins within the same HUC14
§ 283-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-8
1:535
under the guidance of the Lindenwold Stormwater Management
Coordinator and Public Works Department. The retrofit of existing
basins may be accomplished through a variety and/or combination
of options to meet the mitigation costs required. Each existing
basin condition and surrounding condition should be reviewed with
the Public Works Department before selecting one or more of the
following options:200
(a) Outlet structure modifications.
(b) Regrading and planting.
(c) Elimination of low-flow channels.
(d) Installation of in-line or end-of-pipe best management practice
(BMP) as approved by the NJDEP to pretreat stormwater
draining into an existing stormwater management basin.
(2) Stream and stream bank stabilization. Mitigation projects other
than those listed in the stormwater management plan that meet the
following criteria may be presented for review and approval by the
Lindenwold Stormwater Management Coordinator/Public Works
Department. Stabilization projects will be reviewed for the
following benefits:
(a) Stabilization of eroded steam banks where public or private
property or structures are threatened.
(b) Reduced sediment deposition in lakes, ponds and other lowvelocity
areas.
(c) Improved water quality.
(3) Stormwater outfall restoration. Mitigation of existing stormwater
outfalls within the same HUC14 may be performed under the
guidance of the Lindenwold Stormwater Management Coordinator/
Public Works Department. The retrofit of existing outfalls may be
accomplished through a variety and/or combination of options to
meet the mitigation costs required. Each existing outfall condition
should be reviewed with the Borough before selecting one or more
of the following options:201
(a) Replacement of failed outfall structure with outlet protection.
(b) Replacement with installation of drop manhole to set outfall
structure at invert of stream channel with outlet protection.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 283-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-8
1:536
§ 283-9. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(c) Installation of in-line or end-of-pipe best management practice
(BMP) as approved by the NJDEP to pretreat stormwater
before the outfall structure.
(d) Disconnect outfall from receiving waterway to eliminate
erosion condition. This mitigation will be permitted only with
detailed hydrologic analysis and stability analysis of the
receiving area.
C. Lake and pond management. Provide a comprehensive management
plan and maintenance schedule for a publicly held lake/pond within the
Borough of Lindenwold.
D. Design costs. The developer will be responsible for the costs of all
design associated with a mitigation project including the costs
associated with obtaining any NJDEP approvals and permits necessary
for the projects.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
§ 283-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-9
1:537
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C of this section a freestanding outlet structure
may be exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See Subsection D of this section for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the Lindenwold Joint Land Use
Board that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to
public safety. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 283-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-9
1:538
§ 283-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-10
1:539
§ 283-10. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Joint Land Use Board to determine
if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine
if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that a topographic base map of the site be submitted
which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
§ 283-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-10
1:540
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map, indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 283-3
through 283-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 283-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
§ 283-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-10
1:541
§ 283-11. Maintenance and repair.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 283-11.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain, and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 283-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
§ 283-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-11
1:542
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 283-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-12
1:543
§ 283-12. Impervious coverage.
The following shall be added to Article VI, for the R-1 Zone, and Article VIII,
for the R-2 Zone:202
§ 283-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 283-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon approval by the county
review agency or 60 days from the receipt of the chapter by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
Chapter 287
STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Solid waste — See Ch. 276.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
A. Standards to limit the stormwater runoff from residential lots.
(1) Maximum building coverage:
(a) Principal building: 20% of total lot area.
(b) Accessory building: 2% of total lot area.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage.
(a) Total impervious coverage: 45% of total lot area.
A. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains
or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(1) Any violation must be brought into compliance with this chapter.
(2) A penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.203
B. Each day that the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 365, Zoning, Articles VI and VIII.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 283-12 LINDENWOLD CODE § 283-14
1:544
ARTICLE I
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 287-1. Purpose.204
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Lindenwold so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 287-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Lindenwold, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Lindenwold or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-2
1:545
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Non-contact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 287-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Lindenwold any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 287-4. Enforcement.205
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 287-5. Violations and penalties.206
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
205. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
206. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 287-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-5
1:546
ARTICLE II
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 287-6. Purpose.207
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Lindenwold so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 287-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Lindenwold or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 287-8. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Lindenwold is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-9
1:547
§ 287-9. Exceptions to prohibition.208
Section 287-8 of this article does not apply to the following:
§ 287-10. Enforcement.209
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 287-11. Violations and penalties.210
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its intended
purposes and equipment used in the application of salt and deicing
materials immediately following salt and deicing material applications.
Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment as noted in the above situation is
limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply
to engines or other enclosed machinery.
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
209. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
210. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 287-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-11
1:548
ARTICLE III
Litter Control
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 287-12. Purpose.211
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Lindenwold so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 287-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 287-14. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-15
1:549
§ 287-15. Enforcement.212
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 287-16. Violations and penalties.213
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
212. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
213. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 287-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-16
1:550
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 287-17. Purpose.214
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Lindenwold so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 287-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal),
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle or other
suitable container and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 287-19. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-20
1:551
§ 287-20. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 287-21. Enforcement.215
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 287-22. Violations and penalties.216
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
215. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
216. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 287-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-22
1:552
ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 287-23. Purpose.217
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough
of Lindenwold so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 287-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 287-25. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Lindenwold, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers) or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 287-26. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-27
1:553
§ 287-27. Violations and penalties.218
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-27 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-27
1:554
ARTICLE VI
Private Storm Drainage Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 7-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1262]
§ 287-28. Purpose.219
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction or resurfacing, or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Lindenwold so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 287-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Lindenwold or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 287-30. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-30
1:555
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 287-31. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 287-30 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash and other floating, suspended or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 287-31 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 24 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards.
§ 287-30 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-31
1:556
§ 287-32. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 287-33. Violations and penalties.220
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed at a minimum to prevent delivery of all solid
and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars.
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-33
1:557

ARTICLE VII
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 1263]
§ 287-34. Purpose.221
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharging
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Lindenwold
and/or the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 287-35. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Lindenwold or other public body and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 287-36. Prohibited conduct.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-36
1:559
§ 287-37. Exceptions to prohibition.222
Section 287-36 of this article does not apply to the following:
§ 287-38. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Lindenwold Police Department and/or
the Lindenwold Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 287-39. Violations and penalties.223
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Lindenwold.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowners' trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-36 LINDENWOLD CODE § 287-39
1:560
Chapter 291
STREAM BUFFER CONSERVATION ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environment — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 287.
Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 291-1. Intent, purpose and definitions.
A. In recognition of the fact that natural features contribute to the welfare
of residents, the following regulations have been enacted to provide
reasonable controls governing the restoration, conservation,
disturbance and management of existing stream buffers for all
perennial and intermittent streams and all lakes and ponds in the
municipality by establishing designated Stream Buffer Conservation
Zones.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream with a drainage area of 50 acres
or greater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream that flows continuously throughout
the year in most years.
STREAM — A natural watercourse containing flowing water for at least
part of the year.
C. In addition, the specific purposes and intent of this article are to:
(1) Reduce the amount of nutrients, sediment, organic matter,
pesticides and other harmful substances that reach watercourses,
wetlands, subsurface and surface water bodies by using
scientifically proven processes, including filtration, deposition,
absorption, adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation,
denitrification, and by improving infiltration, encouraging sheet
flow, and stabilizing concentrated flows.
(2) Improve and maintain the safety, reliability and adequacy of the
water supply for domestic, agricultural, commercial, industrial and
recreational uses, along with sustaining diverse populations of
aquatic flora and fauna.
(3) Regulate the land use, siting and engineering of all development to
be consistent with the intent and objectives of this chapter,
accepted conservation practices, and to work within the carrying
capacity of existing natural resources.
§ 287-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-1
1:561
§ 291-2. Establishment of Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
(4) Assist in the implementation of pertinent state laws concerning
erosion and sediment control practices.
(5) Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources (e.g., headwater areas, groundwater recharge zones,
floodway, floodplain, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, prime
wildlife habitats) and other features constituting high recreational
value or containing amenities that exist on developed and
undeveloped land.
(6) Work with floodplain, steep slope, and other ordinances that
regulate environmentally sensitive areas to minimize hazards to
life, property and stream features.
(7) Conserve natural, scenic and recreation areas within and adjacent
to stream areas for the community's benefit.
A. Definition. The Stream Buffer Conservation Zone is defined as areas
surrounding municipally designated surface water bodies, including
creeks, lakes and intermittent watercourses, that intercept surface
water runoff, wastewater, subsurface flow, and/or deep groundwater
flows from upland sources and function to remove or buffer the effects
of associated nutrients, sediment, organic matter, pesticides or other
pollutants prior to entry into surface waters. This area may also provide
wildlife habitat, control water temperature, attenuate flood flow, and
provide opportunities for passive recreation. This buffer area may or
may not contain trees and other native vegetation at the time of
ordinance enactment.
B. Establishment.
(1) The establishment of the Stream Buffer Conservation Zone applies
to the following areas, which are identified on the Municipal
Stream Buffer Map:
(a) Lands adjacent to municipally designated streams within the
municipality.
(b) Lands adjacent to municipally designated intermittent
watercourses within the municipality.
(c) Lands at the margins of municipally designated lakes.
(2) The measurement of the Stream Buffer Conservation Zone shall
extend a minimum of 75 feet from each defined edge of an
identified watercourse or surface water body at bankfull flow or
level or shall equal the extent of the one-hundred-year floodplain,
whichever is greater. The zone will consist of two distinct zones
designated as:224
(a) Zone One.
§ 291-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 291-2
1:562
§ 291-3. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted, either by right or after review and
approval by the municipality, in the Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
However, within any buffer, no construction, development, use, activity or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the activity is described in the
stream buffer management plan, as outlined in § 291-8.
[1] This zone will begin at each edge of an identified waterway
(which can include wetlands and intermittent
watercourses) and occupy a margin of land with a
minimum width of 25 feet measured horizontally on a line
perpendicular to the edge of water at bankfull flow.
[2] Where steep slopes (in excess of 25%) are located within
25 feet of a municipally designated watercourse, Zone One
shall extend the entire distance of this sloped area. If the
distance of this sloped area is greater than 75 feet, there
will be no requirement for the establishment of Zone Two.
If the distance is less than 75 feet, the width of Zone Two
will be adjusted so that the total buffer width (Zone One
and Zone Two) will be 75 feet maximum.
(b) Zone Two.
[1] This zone will begin at the outer edge of Zone One and
occupy a minimum width of 50 feet in addition to Zone
One.
[2] Where the one-hundred-year floodplain extends greater
than 75 feet from the waterway, Zone One shall remain a
minimum of 25 feet wide, and Zone Two shall extend from
the outer edge of Zone One to the outer edge of the onehundred-
year floodplain.
(3) Width determination. The developer, applicant or designated
representative shall be responsible for the initial width
determination of the stream buffer and identifying this area on any
plan that is submitted to the municipality for subdivision, land
development, or other improvements that require plan submissions
or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to review and
approval by the Municipal Engineer, governing body, or its
appointed representative.
A. Zone One.
(1) Uses permitted by right. Open space uses that are primarily
passive in character shall be permitted to extend into the area
defined as Zone One, including:
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 291-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-3
1:563
(a) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves,
fishing areas, passive areas of public and private parklands,
and reforestation in compliance with the guidelines of the
stream buffer management plan.
(b) Stream bank stabilization in compliance with the guidelines of
the stream buffer management plan.
(2) Uses requiring municipal review and approval. Buffer crossings by
farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails, roads, railroads,
centralized sewer and/or water lines, and public utility
transmission lines, provided that any disturbance is offset by buffer
improvements identified in the stream buffer management plan.
B. Zone Two.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses, which are primarily
passive in character, shall be permitted by right to extend into the
area defined as Zone Two:
(a) Open space uses, including wildlife sanctuaries, nature
preserves, forest preserves, passive areas of public and private
parklands, and recreational trails.
(b) Reforestation in compliance with the guidelines of the stream
buffer management plan.
(c) Minimum required front, side and rear yards on private lots,
provided that no yard may extend into Zone Two more than
half the distance between the outer boundaries of Zone One
and Zone Two.
(d) Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter.
(2) Uses requiring municipal review and approval.
(a) New agricultural uses.
(b) Buffer crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, roads,
railroads, centralized sewer and/or water lines, and public
utility transmission lines, provided that any disturbance is, at a
minimum, offset by buffer improvements identified in the
stream buffer management plan.
(c) Centralized sewer and/or water lines and public utility
transmission lines running along the buffer, provided that any
disturbance is, at a minimum, offset by buffer improvements
identified in the stream buffer management plan. These lines
shall be located as far from Zone One as practical.
(d) Selective cutting of trees when removal is consistent with
approved standards in the stream buffer management plan.
§ 291-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 291-3
1:564
§ 291-4. Prohibited uses.
Any use or activity not authorized within § 291-3 shall be prohibited within
the Stream Buffer Conservation Zone. By way of example, the following
activities and facilities are specifically prohibited:
(e) Areas such as camps, campgrounds, picnic areas and golf
courses.
(f) Active recreation areas such as ball fields, playgrounds and
courts, provided these uses are designed in a manner that will
not permit concentrated flow.
(g) Naturalized stormwater basins in compliance with the
guidelines in the stream buffer management plan. The entire
basin shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the defined
edge of identified watercourses.
A. Clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation.
B. Selective cutting of trees and/or the clearing of other vegetation within
Zone One, except where such clearing is necessary to prepare land for a
use permitted under § 291-3A and where the effects of these actions are
mitigated by revegetation, as specified under § 291-9.
C. Selective cutting of trees and/or the clearing of other vegetation within
Zone Two, except where such clearing is necessary to prepare land for
a use permitted by § 291-3B and where the effects of these actions are
mitigated by revegetation, as specified under § 291-9.
D. Removal of trees in excess of selective cutting, except where such
removal is necessary as a means to eliminate dead, diseased or
hazardous tree stands that jeopardize public safety or as part of a
reforestation project, provided that the removal is in compliance with a
stream buffer management plan approved by the Municipal Engineer,
governing body, or its appointed representative.
E. Removal or disturbance of vegetation in a manner that is inconsistent
with erosion control and buffer protection.
F. Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
G. Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of the
Camden County Conservation District.
H. Roads or driveways, except where permitted as buffer crossings in
compliance with § 291-3A(2) or B(2)(b).
I. Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
J. Parking lots.
§ 291-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-4
1:565
§ 291-5. Nonconforming structures and uses.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the Stream Buffer
Conservation Zone shall be regulated under the provisions of Chapter 365,
Zoning (existing nonconformance regulations). The following additional
regulations also shall apply:
§ 291-6. Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
§ 291-7. Inspections.
K. Any type of permanent structure, including fences, except structures
needed for a use permitted in § 291-3.
L. Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
M. Sod farming.
A. Existing nonconforming structures or uses within Zone One or Two that
are not permitted under § 291-3 may be continued but shall not have
the existing building footprint or uses expanded or enlarged.
B. Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time within one
year from such discontinuance but not thereafter when showing clear
indications of abandonment. No change or resumption shall be
permitted that is more detrimental to the Stream Buffer Conservation
Zone, as measured against the intent and objectives under § 291-1, than
the existing or former nonconforming use.
C. This one-year time frame shall not apply to agricultural uses which are
following prescribed best management practices for crop rotation.
A. When a landowner or applicant disputes the zone (One or Two)
boundaries of the stream buffer or the defined edge of a watercourse or
surface water body, the landowner or applicant shall submit evidence to
the municipality that describes the boundary, presents the landowner's
or applicant's proposed boundary, and presents all justification for the
proposed boundary change.
B. The Municipal Engineer, governing body or appointed representative
shall evaluate all material submitted and shall make a written
determination within 45 days, a copy of which shall be submitted to the
Joint Land Use Board and landowner or applicant.
C. Any party aggrieved by any such determination or other decision or
determination under this section may appeal to the Borough under the
provisions of this chapter. The party contesting the location of the zone
boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.225
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 291-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 291-7
1:566
§ 291-8. Stream buffer management plan.227
Within any municipally identified buffer area, no construction, development,
use, activity or encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of such
development are accompanied by implementation of an approved stream
buffer management plan. The landowner or developer shall submit to the
Municipal Engineer, governing body, or its appointed representative a
stream buffer management plan prepared by a landscape architect,
professional engineer or other qualified professional which fully evaluates
the effects of any proposed uses on the Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
The stream buffer management plan shall identify the existing conditions
(vegetation, one-hundred-year floodplain, soils, slopes, etc.), all proposed
activities, and all proposed management techniques, including any
measures necessary to offset disturbances to the Stream Buffer
Conservation Zone. The plan shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer,
governing body, or appointed representative as part of the subdivision and
land development process.
§ 291-9. Vegetation selection.
To function properly, dominant vegetation in the stream buffer management
plan shall be selected from a list of plants most suited to the stream buffer.
Plants not included on the list may be permitted by the Municipal Engineer,
governing body, or its appointed representative when evidence is provided
from qualified sources certifying their suitability. The municipality may
require species suitability to be verified by qualified experts in the Camden
County Conservation District, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, or state and federal forest agencies.
A. Lands within or adjacent to an identified Stream Buffer Conservation
Zone will be inspected by the municipal representative when:
(1) A subdivision or land development plan is submitted.
(2) A building permit is requested.
(3) A change or resumption of nonconforming use is proposed.
B. The zone may also be inspected periodically by the municipal
representative for compliance with an approved restoration plan,
excessive or potentially problematic erosion, or at any time when the
presence of an unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the
attention of municipal officials.226
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 291-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-9
1:567
Chapter 296
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-10.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 240.
A. In Zone One, dominant vegetation shall be composed of a variety of
native water-tolerant trees, shrub species, tall grasses and appropriate
plantings necessary for stream bank stabilization.228
B. In Zone Two, dominant vegetation shall be composed of water-tolerant
trees and shrubs, with an emphasis on native species and appropriate
plantings necessary to stabilize the soil.229
C. Disturbed areas shall be revegetated with stream buffer plants, in
compliance with an approved stream buffer management plan.
D. Areas that cannot be revegetated shall be restored in compliance with
an approved stream buffer management plan.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 291-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 291-9
1:568
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 181, Art. I, of the 1981 Code); amended
in its entirety 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-116]
§ 296-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Borough
Official or designee for an excavation permit hereunder.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lindenwold.
BOROUGH COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough
of Lindenwold.
BOROUGH OFFICIAL — The appointed person who represents the Borough
of Lindenwold.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Highway Department of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
EMERGENCY OPENING — An urgent and immediate opening and repair
operation required to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general
public from immediate hazards posed by a broken or leaking main, an
eroded and undermined structure, damaged utilities or other similar
instance involving a sudden and unforeseen hazard on a public street.
EXCAVATION — The digging, displacing, undermining, opening, boring,
tunneling, auguring, or in any manner breaking up any improved or
unimproved street, sidewalk, curb, gutter or other public property in any
roadway.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation and other work permitted under an
excavation permit and required to be performed under this article.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A security in the form of either a bond,
letter of credit, cash or a certified check posted by the applicant to
guarantee the proper maintenance of the reconstruction of the work as
described on the application and permit forms for a period of two years after
final acceptance.
PERFORMANCE SURETY — A corporate bond, performance bond, certified
check or other similar security acceptable to the Borough Solicitor which
is furnished by the applicant as a guaranty of good faith to perform and
complete the work as described on the application and permit forms, to
full compliance with the construction standards contained herein to assure
that any subsequent necessary repairs are accomplished as directed by the
Borough Official.
§ 296-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-1
1:569
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted and has in full force and
effect an excavation permit issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, avenue, shoulder, right-of-way or other
public way or public grounds in the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 296-2. Excavation permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any street, right-of-way or public
grounds, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the
surface of any street or public grounds for any purpose, or to place, deposit
or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing
or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person
shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the Borough
Official or designee as provided herein.
§ 296-3. Application for permit.
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the
issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Borough Official or
designee. The written application shall state the name and address of the
applicant; the nature, location and purpose of the excavation; the date of
commencement and date of completion of the excavation; and other data as
may reasonably be required by the Borough Official. The application shall
be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation
work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior
to excavation and the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the
excavation work and such other information as may be prescribed by the
Borough Official.
§ 296-4. Fees; scope and period of permit.
A. A permit fee shall be charged by the Borough Official for the issuance of
an excavation permit, which shall be in addition to all other fees for
permits or charges relative to any proposed work. This fee for the
excavation permit charged by the Borough Official shall be as
prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-10, and
shall be nonrefundable.
B. Said permit shall be good for only one excavation within one street or
block. A permit must be obtained for each excavation proposed, and it
must note the date of completion, which shall be within 30 days from
the date of issue of the permit or a new permit will be required and an
additional permit fee as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
Schedule, § 150-10, must be paid.
§ 296-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-5
1:570
§ 296-5. Placard; form and content, exhibition; misrepresentation.
The Borough shall provide each permittee, at the time a permit is issued
hereunder, with a suitable placard plainly written or printed in English
letters at least one inch high with the following notice: "Borough of
Lindenwold, Permit No. _____ Expires _____," and in the first blank space
there shall be inserted the number of said permit and after the word
"expires" shall be stated the date when said permit expires. It shall be
the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted in a
conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for
any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered
by such permit or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of
expiration of the permit.
§ 296-6. Terms of permit.
The Borough Official or designee shall, upon receipt and examination of the
application and the deposit and fee referred to hereinabove, issue a permit
under his/her hand for the excavation. The Borough Official or designee
shall specify on the permit that such work shall be completed and the road
or sidewalk surface restored within 48 hours after work is commenced or a
duration of time which in the opinion of the Borough Official is reasonable
and fair.
§ 296-7. Commencement of work.
The applicant or contractor is forbidden to commence work until the items
listed in Issuance of Permit have been compiled and the applicant has
notified the Borough Official at least 48 hours in advance of the exact date
and hour the proposed work is to commence.
§ 296-8. Bond required.
Before an excavation permit as herein provided is issued, the applicant shall
deposit with the Borough Official or designee a surety bond in the amount
as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-10,
payable to the Borough. The required surety bond must be:
A. With good and sufficient surety.
B. By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state.
C. Satisfactory to the Borough Solicitor in form and substance.
D. Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this article and to
secure and hold the Borough and its officers harmless against any and
all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and
other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the Borough,
the Borough Council, Borough Official or designee may be made liable
by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the
fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or
for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee.
§ 296-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-9
1:571
§ 296-9. Performance security; deposits.
§ 296-10. Maintenance bond.
In addition to the posting of a performance surety, and as a condition to the
release of same, the applicant shall also post a maintenance surety: either a
bond, letter of credit, cash or a certified check and in the penal sum of 15%
of the performance surety. The maintenance bond will serve to guarantee
that the road as reconstructed will remain in good condition and free of
defects after acceptance, as follows: The applicant shall be responsible for
all maintenance and repairs required at the site for a period of two years
after the date of acceptance for which have a depth of four or more feet
from the road surface; or for a period of two years after the date of final
acceptance for all other work which requires a permit as set forth herein.
A. The performance surety shall be in the form of either a corporate
guaranty bond or a surety or guaranty bond issued by a company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, in a form
satisfactory to the Borough Solicitor and in the penal sum of 100% of
the full amount of the total estimated construction costs. A certified
check drawn in favor of the Borough of Lindenwold for the same
amount (100% of the total estimated construction cost) may be
substituted for the performance surety. The estimated cost of the
proposed work shall be based upon current market values, and said
amount shall be prepared by the applicant and approved by the
Borough Official. Upon completion of the work covered by such permit,
and approval by the Borough Official, the Borough Official or designee
shall return 50% of surety, except in the case of annual deposit, and the
balance shall be refunded by the Borough to the permittee upon
expiration of a six-month period.
B. In lieu of the above-mentioned performance surety, public utility
companies or authorities may post an annual performance surety for
$20,000 or for an increased amount determined by the Borough
Official. The form of the surety shall be approved by the Borough
Solicitor. Fifty percent of the annual deposit shall be refunded by the
Borough at the end of the one-year period for which the deposit was
made or upon the satisfactory completion of all excavation work
undertaken during such a period, whichever is later.
C. The balance of the annual deposit shall be refunded at the end of a sixmonth
period.
D. The Borough may use any or all of any such deposit to pay the cost of
any work that the Borough performs to restore or maintain the street as
herein provided in the event that the permittee fails to perform such
work, in which event the amount refunded to the permittee shall be
reduced by the amount expended by the Borough.
§ 296-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-11
1:572
§ 296-11. Responsibility for routing and controlling traffic.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the
performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as nearly normal
as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and
to the general public, provided that the Borough Official may permit the
closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in
his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic,
including its own vehicles, as directed by the Borough Police Department.
The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to
any highways by the operation of its equipment. A traffic control plan is
required if permittee is closing lanes or roads and must be submitted at the
time of application.
§ 296-12. Obstruction of fire stations, equipment and hydrants.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles
of material or other obstructions.
§ 296-13. Protective barriers around excavations; lights at night.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of
the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the Borough
streets or rights-of-way, and such protective barriers shall be maintained
until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there
shall be placed upon such place of excavation and upon any excavated
materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and
sufficient lights, which shall be kept burning throughout the night during
the maintenance of such obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any
lights provided there for the protection of the public.
§ 296-14. Guarding of machinery at site.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment
or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to
attract children and hazardous to their safety and/or health.
§ 296-15. Damage to existing improvements; repair by permittee or
Borough.
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such
repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code or
ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the
necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the Borough Official shall
§ 296-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-15
1:573
have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be
furnished by the Borough, and the cost shall be charged against the
permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on his or its bond therefor.
§ 296-16. Confinement of work outside property lines and
easements.
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit, and
it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within
these limits.
§ 296-17. Cleanup operations.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Director. From time to time as may
be ordered by the Borough Official or by the Director and in any event
immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at his or its
own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any
kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours
after having been notified to do so by the Borough Official or by the Director,
said work may be done by the Borough and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under
the surety bond provided hereunder.
§ 296-18. Backfilling.
Backfill material shall be clean sand or gravel and shall not contain any
foreign matter, such as broken concrete or asphalt. All compaction shall be
in accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
Standard Specifications for Bridge and Road Construction, 2007, 301.03
Subbase and Base Courses, or newest version.
§ 296-19. Trenches; laying of pipes.
Should any street or rights-of-way be opened transversely, the trench shall
not exceed four feet in width, except by special permission of the Borough
Official. Except by special permission of the Borough Official, no street or
rights-of-way shall be opened longitudinally more than 250 feet in advance
of pipe or other conduit installation, nor left unfilled more than 500 feet
where pipes or other conduits have been laid. The length of the trench
that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length
of the pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at the site
ready to be put in place. Permittee and contractor shall comply with the
OSHA trench sheeting regulations and all other OSHA regulations, and any
other applicable laws, in the performance of the work. No timber bracing,
logging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in trench. Upon completion
§ 296-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-19
1:574
of laying of pipe or other conduit, excavations must not be left open for more
than 24 hours or as may be determined by the Director or Borough Official.
§ 296-20. Street surface restoration.
A. Temporary restoration.
(1) Temporary restoration shall be considered any pavement material
to be placed in an opening prior to permanent restoration.
(2) Temporary restoration shall be cold patch, asphalt or approved
equal a minimum of two inches thick. The applicant shall be solely
responsible for maintaining the opening on a continuous basis until
the final restoration is completed. Upon verbal or written
notification by the Borough, the applicant shall remedy any defects
to the temporary paving within 24 hours. Failure to comply with
these regulations shall result in a $500 daily fine.
(3) Backfill material shall be clean sand or gravel and shall not contain
any foreign matter, such as broken concrete or asphalt. All
compaction shall be in accordance with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) Standard Specifications for
Bridge and Road Construction, 2007, 301.03, or newest version.
(4) Openings exceeding 18 inches in depth shall be temporarily
restored and have a waiting period of 90 days before permanent
restoration.
B. Permanent restoration.
(1) All openings shall be completed with six inches of compacted DGA,
three inches of FABC base course, Mix 1-2, and two inches of FABC
surface course, Mix 1-5.
(2) Backfill material shall be clean sand or gravel and shall not contain
any foreign matter, such as broken concrete or asphalt. All
compaction shall be in accordance with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) Standard Specifications for
Bridge and Road Construction, 2007, 301.03, or newest version.
(3) Any emergency opening occurring in a street repaved within the
previous five calendar years shall be infrared sealed. All other
openings shall be tack sealed to the satisfaction of Borough Official.
(4) No openings other than emergency basis shall be permitted in
roads paved within five years. Any opening permitted during
moratorium period must be milled and repaved to a length of 50
feet beyond the area of disturbance.
(5) Multiple road openings occurring within 30 feet of one another
shall be restored as a single opening. Pavement between then
openings shall be milled (milling depth shall be two inches) or
removed and replaced from curb to center line of roadway. Multiple
§ 296-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-20
1:575
§ 296-21. Restoration or completion of work by Borough.
§ 296-22. Prompt completion of work by permittee.
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedience all excavation
work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such
work and restore the street to its original condition or as near as may be as
soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the
excavation permit therefor.
openings down the middle of the road shall be restored as a single
opening, milled or removed and replaced across the full width of
the road from curbline to curbline. Openings shall be sealed as
indicated above.
(6) All openings shall be inspected by the Borough. The applicant shall
notify the Borough Public Works Department a minimum of 24
hours prior to final restoration to schedule the inspection. Failure
to schedule the final inspection will result in a $500 fine and
removal of all paving materials and reinstallation at the applicant's
cost. Upon acceptance of the restoration, the Borough shall issue a
dated acceptance letter to the applicant. The applicant shall be
responsible for all future restoration of the opening for a period of
five years from the date of the acceptance letter.
(7) Final restoration shall occur within 30 days from the initial
opening. Extensions of time are subject to the discretion of the
Borough and must be submitted in writing. Failure to complete the
restoration within the prescribed time period will result in the
forfeiture of the performance bond posted by the applicant.
A. If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to
its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by
such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit, the Director, if he deems it advisable,
shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the
street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be
liable for the actual cost thereof and, in addition, 25% of such cost for
general overhead and administrative expenses. The Borough shall have
a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it
from any funds of the permittee deposited as herein provided, and the
Borough shall also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety bond
provided pursuant to this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for six months after restoring to its original condition.
§ 296-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-23
1:576
§ 296-23. Requirement to perform work as emergency work.
If in his judgment traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest requires that the excavation work be
performed as emergency work, the Director shall have full power to order,
at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day so that such excavation work
may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 296-24. Emergency repairs.
In the event of any sudden breaking or bursting of any gas, sewer or
water main where immediate repair is imperative to prevent loss or damage
to life, health, streets or property or discontinuance of service, it shall
not be necessary to obtain a permit before commencing such repair. The
Borough requests immediate notification by phone or an email of the event.
Such permit shall be obtained within three working days thereafter, and
this section shall not be held or taken in any case to exempt any person
repairing said pipes or mains from any other of the provisions of this article.
§ 296-25. Control of noise, dust, debris; noisy equipment.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in
the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris,
and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except
with the express written permission of the Director or in case of emergency
as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing
noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring properties.
§ 296-26. Inspections; promulgation of rules and regulations.
A. The Borough Official shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this article.
(1) Street opening inspection schedule:
(a) Initial inspection prior to opening.
(b) Backfill/temporary restoration inspection.
(c) Final restoration/50% refund inspection.
(d) Six-month follow-up for balance of deposit (upon verification of
maintenance deposit).
B. The Borough Official shall have the authority to promulgate and cause
to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article.
§ 296-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-27
1:577
§ 296-27. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent Borough authorities, by employees of the
Borough or by any contractor of the Borough performing work, in behalf of
the Borough, necessitating openings or excavations in streets.
§ 296-28. Public utilities: permit, fee, compliance with
requirements.
All persons operating public utilities in the Borough and having the right
either by general or special permission to enter upon streets and open and
excavate pavements, sidewalks or disturb the surface thereof by excavation
or other work shall be required to apply for a permit for a fee as prescribed
in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-10, and shall be
required to perform the work and bring it to completion as promptly as
practicable and, to that end, shall employ an adequate standing force.
Any person operating any such public utility shall comply with all of the
requirements of this article, including the surety bond and deposit
requirements.
§ 296-29. Insurance required.
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish to the Borough Official satisfactory evidence in writing that the
permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of
the excavation permit public liability insurance of not less than $100,000
for any one person and $300,000 for any one accident and property damage
insurance of not less than $50,000, duly issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in this state.
§ 296-30. Duties of police.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough to review and
approve any and all traffic plans submitted.
§ 296-31. General requirements.
A. All openings larger than 20 square feet must be saw cut. All others may
be cut by other means, but in all cases the edges must be square.
B. All cuts in pavement surface shall be saw cut, with no cut closer than
four feet to a seam, curb or edge of pavement, or the entire section up
to four feet must be replaced. Backfill under pavement is to be
compacted in accordance with Borough standards.
C. New clean backfill materials under pavement areas are to be used when
excavated material is unsuitable for reuse. Suitability to be determined
by Borough inspector.
D. All paving where areas are excavated is to be replaced with two inches
of FABC and the edge sealed with AC 120 or approved equal.
§ 296-27 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-31
1:578
§ 296-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1,
§ 1-1, of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
E. Openings in the roadside area must be graded, top soiled and seeded.
Backfill in this area is to be new clean material when excavated
material is unsuitable for reuse.
§ 296-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-32
1:579

ARTICLE II
Removal of Snow, Ice and Weeds230
[Adopted 11-17-1969 (Ch. 181, Art. II, of the 1981 Code)]
§ 296-33. Removal from sidewalks by abutting landowners.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants of premises abutting or
bordering upon any of the streets, avenues or highways in the Borough of
Lindenwold shall remove or cause to be removed all ice or snow from the
sidewalks and gutters of any such streets, avenues or highways within 12
hours of daylight after the same shall have formed or ceased to fall thereon
and all grass, weeds and other impediments within three days after notice
has been mailed to the last known address of the owner or owners, occupant
or occupants to remove the same.
§ 296-34. Violations and penalties; removal by Borough. [Amended
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587; 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 296-33 of this
article shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of
this Code, or in lieu of the imposition of said fine and imprisonment, said
snow or ice, grass, weeds and other impediments may be removed from
the sidewalks and gutters by the Highway Department of said Borough or
under its direction, in which case the cost of said removal shall be certified
to Council and charged as a lien against the abutting property and shall be
added to and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such abutting property.
230. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2017-13, adopted 8-9-2017, amended Art. I of this chapter in
its entirety. Pursuant to this ordinance, former §§ 296-30 to 296-31 were renumbered as §§
296-33 to 296-34.
§ 296-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-34
1:581

ARTICLE III
New Construction231
[Adopted 7-10-1991 by Ord. No. 883 (Ch. 181, Art. III, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 296-35. New openings after completion of work.
No street which has been newly constructed or paved or reconstructed or
repaved shall be opened or disturbed for a period of six months after the
completion of the work.
§ 296-36. Roadway construction. [Added 11-28-2000 by Ord. No.
1083]
Any person, corporation or entity, public or private, doing any work within
the Borough of Lindenwold which impedes the flow of traffic or creates a
hazard on any street shall, at least 20 days prior to the start of construction,
submit to the Lindenwold Borough Police Chief a plan for the rerouting of
traffic. This plan must be approved by the Police Chief prior to the start of
any construction work.
§ 296-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any person violating the aforesaid provision of this article shall be subject
to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
231. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2017-13, adopted 8-9-2017, amended Art. I of this chapter in
its entirety. Pursuant to this ordinance, former §§ 296-32 to 296-34 were renumbered as §§
296-35 to 296-37.
§ 296-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-37
1:583

ARTICLE IV
Sports Equipment in Streets232
[Adopted 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1097]
§ 296-38. Prohibited equipment.
The following sports equipment is hereby prohibited from being used in and
on any public street, roadway or right-of-way of the Borough of Lindenwold:
§ 296-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs and/or
continues.
§ 296-40. Parent and/or guardian responsibility.
In addition to the above penalties, the Municipal Court is authorized to
impose fines on the parents and/or guardians of any minors found to have
violated this article and/or impose fines on the owner of the property
adjoining the offending equipment in an amount not to exceed $200.
§ 296-41. Seizure; disposal.
The police are authorized to seize any offending equipment placed in
violation of this article, if said equipment is not properly removed after
notification to the owner or the apparent owner. The Municipal Court shall
determine the ultimate disposition of the offending equipment, including up
to the destruction of the offending equipment.
A. Basketball poles and/or nets.
B. Bases of any kind.
C. Goals and other type netting, i.e., hockey, soccer.
D. Similar-type sports equipment.
232. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2017-13, adopted 8-9-2017, amended Art. I of this chapter in
its entirety. Pursuant to this ordinance, former §§ 296-35 to 296-38 were renumbered as §§
296-38 to 296-41.
§ 296-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-41
1:585

ARTICLE V
Maintenance of Sidewalk and Adjacent Area233
[Adopted 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1265]
§ 296-42. Responsibilities of property owners.
Where the lands of a property owner abut a right-of-way, it shall be the
responsibility of such property owner to keep the area between the property
line and the street line, including the sidewalk, driveway apron and curb,
as the case may be, in good repair. The street line for the purposes of this
article is designated as the edge of the paved surface of the street.
§ 296-43. Order to repair. [Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
If it comes to the attention of the Director of Public Works that the area
described in § 296-42 is kept in such a state of disrepair as to endanger the
health and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough, the Director may
order the property owner to repair the area within 10 days.
§ 296-44. Removal of trees; determination of need. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
The maintenance responsibility of § 296-42 herein shall extend to the
removal of trees within the regulated area that are determined to be dead,
to be causing an upheaval of the adjacent sidewalk, or otherwise
determined to be a threat to the public safety. The determination shall be
made by the Director of Public Works, who shall provide the property owner
with the determination and allow the property owner 10 days to provide a
plan for curing the problem to be completed within 60 days.
§ 296-45. Trimming of trees; notice of violation. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
The maintenance obligation of § 296-42 herein shall include the trimming
of trees and other vegetative growth so as to allow clear passage by
pedestrians along the sidewalk, and trees and other vegetative growth shall
be trimmed to allow a clearance of eight feet in height. In the event that
the Director of Public Works determines a property to be in violation of this
section, he shall give the property owner written notice of the same and an
opportunity to cure the violation within 10 days of said notice.
§ 296-46. Failure to comply; costs to become liens. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
If the owner of the lands in question shall refuse or neglect to abate or
remedy the condition within the time allowed following receipt of notice
233. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2017-13, adopted 8-9-2017, amended Art. I of this chapter in
its entirety. Pursuant to this ordinance, former §§ 296-39 to 296-43 were renumbered as §§
296-42 to 296-46.
§ 296-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-46
1:587
pursuant to this article, the Director of Public Works shall cause the
condition to be remedied and shall certify the cost to the Borough
Administrator, who shall cause the costs as shown to be charged against the
lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, and such amount shall bear interest
at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 296-46 LINDENWOLD CODE § 296-46
1:588
ARTICLE VI
Pedestrian Crosswalks234
[Added 10-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1348]
§ 296-47. Designation.
The following shall be designated as pedestrian crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
East Gibbsboro Road (CR
686)
Approximately 100 feet south from the center
line of the intersection of East Gibbsboro Road
and Burrows Lane
234. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2017-13, adopted 8-9-2017, amended Art. I of this chapter in
its entirety. Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 296-44 was renumbered as § 296-47.
§ 296-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-47
1:589
Chapter 301
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 199. Sanitary standards — See Ch. 386.
§ 301-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCING — Piercing the skin for the express intention of insertion
of any object, including but not limited to jewelry; provided, however, that
the piercing of the lobes of the ears shall be specifically excluded from the
purview of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the County Health
Officer or his authorized representative that said tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this
chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The certificate held by an operator
upon registration with the Camden County Health Department by meeting
the required provisions of this chapter.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER — The Camden County Public Health
Coordinator or his authorized representative of the Camden County
Department of Health and Human Services.
ESTABLISHMENT — The premises wherein tattooing or body piercing is
performed.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association
that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed and any individual who performs or practices the above on the
person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Refers to any method of placing
designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with
ink dye or any other substance, resulting in the coloration of the skin by the
aid of needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.
§ 301-2. Requirements of business licensing and operator
registration.235
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 296-47 LINDENWOLD CODE § 301-2
1:590
§ 301-3. General provisions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to engage in the practice of
tattooing or body piercing without first obtaining a certificate of
registration from the Camden County Health Department.
B. Persons applying shall submit to the Camden County Health
Department a medical certificate issued by a physician duly licensed to
practice medicine and surgery in the State of New Jersey stating that
the prospective licensee or registrant is free from all contagious or
communicable diseases or conditions which may endanger the health of
the client.
C. An application must be made for a local mercantile license. An
applicant shall submit a floor plan of the establishment to the Camden
County Health Officer prior to the initiation or construction and shall
receive a preopening inspection. All establishments shall be subject to a
periodic compliance and/or annual inspection. Every operator shall be
registered with the Camden County Health Department and shall
acquire a certificate of registration upon payment of a fee prior to
business operation or practice. Fees for a plan review, inspections and
operator registration shall be established by the Camden County Board
of Chosen Freeholders.
D. All licenses shall expire on the last day of each calendar year. If a
renovation of the tattooing or body piercing establishment is
anticipated after acquisition of the annual license, plans must be
submitted to the Camden County Health Department and the applicant
will be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The
license expiration date for renewal shall be December 31 of each year.
E. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed so as to affect the practice
of medicine or surgery or any other recognized profession or
occupation by a person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to
engage in such practice, profession or occupation and whose license
would lawfully authorize the tattooing or body piercing.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattooing or body
piercing business to tattoo or pierce the body of an individual under 18
years of age without written authorization signed by the parent or legal
guardian as witnessed by the operator. The operator shall be
responsible for maintaining the original consent form for a period of
two years beyond the recipient's 18th birthday.
B. If the applicant is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs
or any other behavior-modifying substance, the operator must refuse
the applicant.
C. Inquiry shall be made for anyone with a history of recent jaundice,
hepatitis B or HIV/AIDS, and the person shall not be tattooed or body
pierced.
§ 301-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:591
§ 301-4. Sanitary requirements of facility.
No person, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the tattooing or
body piercing business shall be issued with a municipal mercantile license
to engage in such activity unless the premises at which such activity is to be
conducted and the equipment to be utilized in conjunction therewith meet
the following standards and are inspected/approved by the Camden County
Health Department:
D. Each person wishing to be tattooed or pierced must fill out an
application, which will include the name, date of birth, address and
telephone number of the client as well as the design and location(s) of
the tattoo(s) or piercing(s). The operator shall verify applicable
information from a valid photo ID of the applicant and so note on the
application. All records regarding tattooing or body piercing are to be
maintained for a minimum of two years.
E. No person or operator shall state or imply in any advertisement that the
tattooing or body piercing establishment is endorsed or approved by
the Camden County Health Department in compliance with the terms of
this chapter.
F. Piercing of any part(s) of the genitalia shall not be permitted.
A. Each tattooing and/or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom
accessible to the client and staff. Each bathroom shall be equipped with
a commode and a sink with the sink being connected to hot and cold
running water. Soap and sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying
devices shall be available at the sink at all times. Common towels are
prohibited. In addition to the above, each tattooing or body piercing
cubicle or work station must be provided with a sink connected to hot
and cold running water. This area shall also be provided with soap and
appropriate hand-drying devices.
B. The chair, seat or exam table reserved for the person receiving the
tattooing or body piercing shall be of a material that is smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. Any
surfaces on the chair, seat or exam table that become exposed to blood
or body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized prior to use by the next
customer.
C. The worktable or counter used by the operator shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and the
wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This table/
counter must be cleaned and sanitized or use single-use disposable
sheets, utilizing a method approved by the Camden County Health
Department, between customers.
§ 301-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 301-4
1:592
§ 301-5. Requirements of tattooing and body piercing practices.
D. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of nonabsorbent materials. Floors
shall be kept clean.
E. Lighting within the tattooing or body piercing area shall be adequate so
as to provide a minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas.
F. The work area reserved for the tattooing or body piercing shall be not
less than 100 square feet and shall be separated from other areas of the
establishment by walls or durable partitions extending at least six feet
in height.
G. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized using a method approved by
the Camden County Health Department.
H. Products used in the cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures
must be clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner. Smaller
working containers filled on site from larger containers must be clearly
marked with the name of the product.
I. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste disposed of at
appropriate intervals.
A. Tattooing or body piercing operators.
(1) All operators while performing services shall neither be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs nor be infected with Hepatitis B, HIV/
AIDS, contagious dermatitis or any communicable disease.
(2) Hepatitis B preexposure vaccination or proof of immunity is
required for all operators. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination
for medical reasons, he/she shall submit to the Camden County
Health Department a letter from his/her physician certifying that
the individual does not have Hepatitis B and vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed. Any
accidental needle stick injury shall be immediately reported to the
Camden County Health Department.
(3) All tattooing or body piercing operators shall attend a training
program sponsored by the Camden County Health Department to
assure basic knowledge on sterile technique and universal
precautions.
(4) Before working on each patron, each operator shall scrub and
thoroughly wash his/her hands with hot water and antiseptic soap.
The hands shall be dried with individual single-use towels.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
(5) Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the operator
during tattooing or body piercing preparation and application to
§ 301-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-5
1:593
prevent contact with blood or body fluids. Universal precautions
as described by the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) shall be followed. All materials shall be disposed
of in accordance with waste disposal provisions of this chapter
after contact with each patron. Hands shall be washed immediately
after removal of gloves. Any skin surface that has contact with
blood shall be washed immediately.
(6) Immediately after tattooing or piercing a patron, the operator shall
advise the patron on the care of the site tattooed and shall instruct
the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of infection.
Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given to each
patron by the operator.
(7) All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body
piercing which becomes known to the operator shall be promptly
reported to the County Health Officer by the person owning or
operating the body piercing establishment or by the operator.
B. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal healthy
skin surface that is free of cuts, wounds, rashes, boils, pimples,
moles or infection or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to the waste
disposal procedure of this chapter after each use and a new blade
used for each patron.
(3) Following shaving, the tattooing area shall be thoroughly cleansed
and scrubbed with tincture of green soap or its equivalent and
warm water. Before placing the tattoo design or body piercing on
the patron's skin, the area shall be treated with 70% alcohol and
allowed to air dry. A single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the
area.
(4) Only petroleum jelly [United States Pharmacopeia (USP) or
National Formulary] or antiseptic ointment shall be applied to the
tattoo area prior to tattooing. The ointment shall be applied in a
sanitary manner, disposing of the utensil after spreading.
Collapsible tubes of ointment or jelly may also be used.
(5) Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an
approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes or disposed of
following each use.
(6) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the Camden
§ 301-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 301-5
1:594
County Health Department of the nontoxicity of the dyes or inks at
the time of license application and renewal.
(7) No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with
chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering
any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo.
(8) Ear-piercing guns may not be used for body piercing but may only
be used for piercing of the ear lobes.
C. Needles, instruments and supplies.
(1) All clean and ready-to-use needles, gloves, gauze and instruments
shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet
while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary
manner at all times.
(2) Single-service sterilized needles shall be used.
(3) If needles and needle bars are to be reused, these items shall be
steam sterilized (autoclave) before reuse on any customer. Any
other method of sterilization shall be approved by the County
Health Officer.
(4) The sterilizer shall be well maintained with a tight-fitting gasket
and a clean interior.
(5) The manufacturer's operating instructions and the sterilization
specifications shall be at hand. The operation of the sterilizer shall
conform to the manufacturer's specifications with regard to
temperature, pressure and time of the sterilization cycle.
(6) Proper functioning of the sterilization cycles shall be verified.
(7) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using a
chemical indicator or strip to verify steam exposure.
(8) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the operator shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with the waste disposal
procedure of this chapter.
(9) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the County
Health Officer shall be notified within 24 hours. In an emergency
situation, the Camden County Health Officer may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
D. Disposal of wastes.
(1) Needles shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Operators
shall take precautions to prevent puncture injuries from
contaminated needles. Needles shall be disposed of directly into a
solid puncture-resistant container.
§ 301-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-5
1:595
§ 301-6. Imminent closure.
When it appears to the County Health Officer that the operation of the
tattooing or body piercing establishment poses an immediate and imminent
threat to the public health and safety such that irreparable harm will occur
if the tattooing or body piercing establishment is not immediately closed,
the County Health Officer shall have the power to order the immediate
closure of the tattooing or body piercing establishment until such time that
the violations complained of have been corrected.
§ 301-7. Violations and penalties; counsel fees; revocation and
suspension.
(2) These medical wastes shall be disposed of by an authorized
contractor as per the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's regulation.
(3) If blood-contaminated gloves, gauze and other materials are
sterilized by autoclaving, these wastes can be placed for off-site
waste collection.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which violates any
section of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. Each day that the violation exists is
considered to be a separate offense.236
B. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Camden County Health
Department in the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the
defendant. The amount of such reasonable fees and costs shall be
determined by the court hearing the matter.237
C. In addition to being subject to the penalties provided herein, any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended for any intentional misstatement in any
application or for any violation of this chapter. No license shall be
revoked or suspended until the licensee has been afforded a hearing.
Notice of the filing of a complaint which seeks to suspend or revoke any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be
served on the defendant personally or on the person designated to
receive service of this chapter. This notice will establish a date for a
hearing to be held not more than 10 days from the date of such notice,
at which time the defendant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses produced in support of
the complaint, as well as such other rights necessary in order to ensure
due process. Should any license or certificate of registration be revoked
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 301-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 301-7
1:596
Chapter 305
TAXATION
or suspended, no part of the license or registration fee shall be
returned.
§ 301-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-7
1:597

ARTICLE I
Abatement for Commercial and Industrial Properties
[Adopted 10-28-1992 by Ord. No. 916 (Ch. 185, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 305-1. Types of construction eligible for abatement.
The abatement shall apply to the new construction of commercial or
industrial property upon vacant land, conversion of an existing property to
a commercial or industrial use, acquiring of a use variance for commercial
or industrial use of an existing structure or improvement to an existing
commercial or industrial structure.
§ 305-2. Application for abatement.
§ 305-3. Determination of value of property. [Amended 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01]
In determining the value of real property, the municipality shall regard up
to the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements as not increasing
the value of the property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that
the value of the property to which the improvements are made is increased
thereby. During the abatement period, the assessment on the property shall
not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, unless there is damage to the structure through the action
of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
A. Applications for abatement from taxation shall be granted pursuant to
written application therefor filed with and approved by the Assessor of
the Borough of Lindenwold. Such application shall be filed with the
Assessor within 30 days, including Saturday and Sunday, following the
completion of the improvement, conversion or construction.
B. Every application for abatement shall set forth:
(1) A general description of a project for which abatement is sought.
(2) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be requested by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project.
(4) Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
§ 305-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-3
1:599

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Residential Property
[Adopted 2-5-2003 by Ord. No. 1127]
§ 305-4. Exemptions authorized.
The Tax Assessor of the Borough of Lindenwold is hereby directed to allow
tax exemptions throughout the entire Borough of Lindenwold in accordance
with the provisions of Public Law 1991, Chapter 441.238
§ 305-5. Determination of real property value. [Amended 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01]
In determining the value of real property for the purpose of taxation, the
first $15,000 in the Assessor's full and true value of home improvements
for each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by the improvement
in any single-family dwelling; two-, three- or four-family dwelling, provided
the owner(s) occupies one unit; or condominium and cooperative units more
than 20 years old shall be regarded as not increasing the value of such
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
dwelling to which such improvement is made is increased thereby.
§ 305-6. Assessment.
In no event, however, shall the assessment during that period be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to such home
improvements, unless there shall be damage through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 305-7. Amounts deducted.
The above amounts up to $15,000 shall be deducted from the amount
determined by the Assessor on October 1 of any year following the
completion of the improvements to be so treated for each of the five years
subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor.
§ 305-8. Additional improvements; deduction; limit to deduction.
Additional improvements, completed during a period in which the improved
property is subject to previously granted exemption privileges in an amount
less than the maximum deduction permissible, shall be qualified for
additional deduction privileges under terms and conditions herein specified;
provided, however, that in no tax year shall the total deductions for any
single property exceed $15,000.
§ 305-9. Application for exemption.
A claimant desiring to seek the exemption to the above shall file a written
application, on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation,
238. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 305-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-9
1:601
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following completion
of the improvement with the Tax Assessor of Lindenwold pursuant to the
directions of Public Law 1991, Chapter 441.
§ 305-10. Tax abatement. [Added 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
Residential properties that receive a tax exemption pursuant to this article,
may obtain a tax abatement of up to 30% of the exemption amount, to be
deducted from the current tax assessment on the property, upon submission
and approval of an application submitted to the Tax Assessor, on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation, and submitted within
the time prescribed for tax exemption applications, as set forth in this
article. The tax abatement will be granted at the discretion of the Tax
Assessor, and shall serve as an abatement upon the residential property, for
a period of five years, subsequent to approval by the Tax Assessor.
§ 305-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 305-10
1:602
Chapter 309
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-6.
§ 309-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases and their derivatives, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lindenwold.
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Borough
with a taxicab for the purpose of soliciting passengers or presenting the
purpose of the taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab
driving along the streets of the Borough for any purpose other than while
transporting a passenger or going to a definite destination by the most
direct route in response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger or
returning by the most direct route to the taxicab's home by the most direct
route shall be prima facie evidence of "cruising."
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within the limits of the Borough.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section of this
chapter.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting in such vehicle one or more
persons for hire along any of the streets or public highways of the Borough
of Lindenwold. Accepting passengers to be transported for hire from points
or places to other points or places within or without the Borough of
Lindenwold shall be deemed to be operation by the owner thereof as well
as by the person actually driving the vehicle. The "operation of a taxicab"
is as defined below without regard to whether the vehicle bears omnibus
or livery registration tags; both are included if the vehicle is performing
the above-described acts. The transportation of any person other than the
owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing a sign thereon or thereupon
using any of the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab" or "limousine service" shall
be prima facie evidence of such operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title to
any taxicab is registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State
of New Jersey or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee
or lessee thereof.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers, and includes the
plural as well as the singular.
§ 305-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-1
1:603
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other
public place.
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motorcar engaged in the business
of carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or advertised
to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the streets
or public highways within the Borough of Lindenwold and which accepts
passengers for transportation from points or places to points or places
within or without the Borough of Lindenwold. "Taxicab" shall include all
such vehicles whether they bear "omnibus" or "livery" registration tags
issued by the Motor Vehicle Department.
§ 309-2. License required; number of licenses.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall
operate any taxicab within the limits of the Borough unless both the
taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this chapter and
conform to all the provisions hereof and to the provisions of all
applicable statutes.
B. The governing body, as mandated by the State of New Jersey, is
required to set the number of taxicab licenses it desires to issue in any
particular year. The governing body has decided to make such
limitation by issuing 95 taxicab licenses to existing taxicab owners
currently on file in the Borough of Lindenwold. [Amended 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 1350]
C. If the Borough decides to issue one or more new or additional taxicab
licenses it must do so by ordinance. After making this determination,
the Borough shall publish a notice of the new or additional authorized
licenses. The notice shall specify a time and date after which no further
applications will be accepted. The notice shall be published at least
twice and at least one week apart, with the second notice published at
least 30 days prior to the time and date specified in the notice as the
time and date after which no further applications will be accepted. If a
license or licenses are not issued within six months after the closing
time and date for acceptance of applications specified in the notice, no
such license or licenses shall be issued without again complying with
the above-described notice provisions.
D. Whenever the Borough determines by ordinance to issue one or more
taxi licenses, the governing body may authorize that such license or
licenses be issued to the highest qualified bidder therefor at a sale by
public auction for that purpose conducted or supervised by the
Municipal Clerk. The ordinance may prescribe qualifications for
prospective bidders; provided, however, that such qualifications shall
not be inconsistent with any law of this state or rule or regulation of any
agency thereof. The ordinance may fix a minimum bid price and
conditions of sale with reservation of the right to reject all bids where
the highest bid is not accepted. The ordinance may also contain a
provision that requires the recipient of the taxicab license to reimburse
§ 309-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § 309-2
1:604
§ 309-3. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be known
as "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license," respectively.
§ 309-4. Taxicab driver's license.239
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within the limits of the Borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder and
under the laws of the State of New Jersey until the license granted pursuant
to the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered, suspended
or revoked, and shall not be transferable. The annual fee for an initial
taxicab driver’s license and the annual renewal fee shall be as prescribed in
Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-6. Each driver is required
to undergo testing by an accredited laboratory for use of controlled
dangerous substances every year and provide to the Borough proof of such
testing before the taxicab driver's license will be issued.
§ 309-5. Taxicab owner's license.
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in the Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder and duly
licensed under the laws of this state until the license granted pursuant to
the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked, and shall not be transferable.
§ 309-6. Qualifications of licensees.
No taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license shall be issued:
§ 309-7. Expiration of licenses; prorating or refunding of license
fees.
the municipality for any costs incurred by the municipality in complying
with the public notice requirements discussed in Subsection C above.
In the event more than one taxicab license is issued at the same
public auction, the recipients thereof shall equally split the costs of
reimbursing the municipality for any costs incurred by the municipality
in complying with the public notice requirements.
A. To an individual who is not legally residing in the United States or who
has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
B. To a corporation unless each of the officers, directors and stockholders
thereof is a citizen of the United States and none has been convicted of
a crime involving moral turpitude.240
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
240. Editor's Note: Original § 188-6.1, Records of drivers; drug tests, of the 1981 Code, which
immediately followed this section , was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 309-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-7
1:605
§ 309-8. Application form and contents.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class
shall be made to the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough or designee
on forms to be adopted by the said Mayor and Borough Council and to be
obtained from the Borough Clerk's office and designed to elicit information
respecting the identification, responsibility and law-abiding habits of the
applicant.
§ 309-9. Verification of applications.
Every application for a taxicab owner's license or a taxicab driver's license
shall be verified by the oath or an affirmation of the applicant or applicants,
if an individual or copartnership, and if a corporation, shall be verified by
the oath or affirmation of an officer thereof.
§ 309-10. Application for taxicab owner's license; fee; filing.
[Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall set forth the full name
and address of the owner, lessee or bailee of the taxicab to be licensed, the
make and character of the taxicab, the number of persons said vehicle is
suitable for carrying, and the serial number of said vehicle. The applicant
may be requested to present each taxicab for which a license is sought to
the Mayor and Council or its authorized representative, which may include
the Borough Police Department, Director of Public Safety or Compliance
Officer, for an inspection prior to the issuance of a license for the taxicab. A
written report of the inspection shall be included with the application that is
presented to the Mayor and Borough Council or designee. No license shall
be granted to any taxicab which has failed the inspection. Each application
shall be accompanied by a license fee as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees,
Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-6, for each taxicab to be licensed. All
applications for a taxicab owner's license shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk or designee prior to the operation of the taxicab in the Borough of
Lindenwold or the expiration of license.
A. All taxicab owner's licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the 31st day of March first
occurring following the issuance of said license. No license fee payable
under this chapter shall be prorated nor shall any part thereof be
refunded for any reason unless a license shall be refused.
B. All taxicab driver's licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the 31st day of December of
the year of the issuance of said license. No license fee payable under
this chapter shall be prorated nor shall any part thereof be refunded for
any reason unless a license shall be refused.
§ 309-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 309-11
1:606
§ 309-11. Taxicabs to contain meters.
All taxicabs licensed to operate within the Borough of Lindenwold shall
compute mileage by means of a meter, the form of which is to be approved,
inspected, and sealed by the Camden County Department of Weights and
Measures. Prior to the issuance of any license for a taxicab, the meter may
be checked to assure that it is properly calibrated and shall be sealed by the
Borough Compliance Officer or his designee, which may be a member of the
Borough police force, the Public Safety Director or any person determined
by the Compliance Officer to be qualified and an employee of the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 309-12. Hours and rates.
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall file with his application a
statement as to the hours when said taxicab or taxicabs will be in operation
for public use and a statement of the fares, charges or tariff rates. The
failure of any licensee to provide taxi service to the general public during
the hours named in said statement or the receiving of fares, charges or tariff
rates other than as set forth in the statement shall be sufficient cause for
revocation of any license.
§ 309-13. Insurance policy required.
§ 309-14. Power of attorney.
No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor
shall have delivered to the Borough Clerk or designee, concurrently with
the filing of the insurance policy hereinbefore referred to, a power of
attorney executed by said applicant wherein and whereby said applicant
shall appoint the Treasurer of the Borough of Lindenwold as his, her or
A. No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor
files with the Borough Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state for a
combined single limit coverage of not less than $50,000, insuring
against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon the owner or
driver of the taxicab for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of or by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of any taxicab within the Borough. Any license
issued for any such operation of the taxicab thereunder shall be
permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in force to
the full and collectible amounts aforesaid. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
B. The operation of any taxicab under any license issued hereunder shall
be permitted only so long as said insurance policy shall remain in force
to the full and collectible amounts aforesaid. The insurance policy shall
name the Borough of Lindenwold as an additional insured such that the
Borough shall receive copies of all premium notices, cancellation
notices and nonrenewals.
§ 309-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-14
1:607
its true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of
any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against
the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy
filed, and any license for a taxicab issued upon any such application shall
continue effective and the operation of any taxicab thereunder shall be
permitted only so long as said power of attorney shall remain in effect and
unrevoked.
§ 309-15. Owner's license card; rate schedule; license transfer fee.
[Amended 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
If the application for a taxicab owner's license shall be granted, there
shall be issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof setting
forth the name and address of the licensee, the number of the license and
the name and character of the taxicab licensed, together with the serial
number of said vehicle and the maximum number of passengers to be
carried therein at any one time. Said license card shall be signed by the
Borough Clerk or designee and shall at all times be prominently displayed
and adequately protected in the interior of any taxicabs so licensed so that
the face thereof shall be at all times in full view of and plainly legible to
any passenger seated on the rear seat of such taxicab. There shall also
be displayed in the interior of said taxicab so licensed a statement or
schedule of charges for the use thereof. Any taxicab license issued pursuant
to this chapter may be transferred to another vehicle owned by or in
the custody of the same licensee upon the payment of a transfer fee as
prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-6, and upon
the approval of the Mayor and Borough Council or designee. There shall
also be displayed on the exterior rear portion of each taxicab so licensed a
metal license plate or decal, which shall be furnished and supplied by the
Borough.
§ 309-16. Application for taxicab driver's license. [Amended
11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
Every application for a taxicab driver's license shall set forth the full name
and address of the applicant, his or her age, whether or not he or she is
a citizen of the United States and whether or not he or she has ever been
convicted of a crime and, if so, the crime of which he or she has been
convicted, the place of conviction, the date thereof and the punishment
thereof. Such applicant shall also furnish satisfactory evidence that he or
she has received a driver's license from the Motor Vehicle Department of
the State of New Jersey unless a previous taxicab driver's license has been
issued by the Borough of Lindenwold. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's
license shall, at the time of filing his/her initial application, be fingerprinted
by the Police Department of the Borough or a designated outside agency.
Such fingerprint impressions may be used by the Borough for securing
from any agency any report or reports it may deem necessary with respect
to said application. Said fingerprint impressions and any report received
with respect thereto shall be affixed to the application before consideration
thereof by the Mayor and Borough Council or designee. For subsequent
§ 309-14 LINDENWOLD CODE § 309-16
1:608
taxi driver renewals, the Lindenwold Police Department shall provide the
applicant with the SBI instruction form which allows the applicant to utilize
the New Jersey State Police portal for a background check with respect to
said application. In addition, proof of testing from an accredited laboratory
for use of controlled dangerous substances must be provided. A license fee
as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-6, shall
accompany each application for a taxicab driver's license.
§ 309-17. Driver's license card.
If the application for a taxicab driver's license shall be granted, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof setting forth
the number of the license, the name and address of the licensee and his or
her age. Said license card shall be signed by the Borough Clerk or designee
and shall at all times be permanently displayed and adequately protected in
the interior of any taxicab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof
shall be at all times in full view of and plainly legible to any passenger
seated on the rear seat of such taxicab.
§ 309-18. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Mayor and Borough Council or designee may refuse to issue or renew
or may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend:
A. Any taxicab driver's license if a criminal history record background
check required pursuant to this section reveals a record of conviction of
any of the following crimes:
(1) In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory or commonwealth, or other jurisdiction
of the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection A(1) of this section.
(3) If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section can produce a
certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8
or, if the criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an
equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal
§ 309-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-18
1:609
§ 309-19. Inspections of licensed taxicabs.
Any taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter may be inspected by any
member of the Borough Police Department, Director of Public Safety or the
Compliance Officer of the Borough of Lindenwold if such individual has a
reasonable basis for believing that the taxicab is dangerous to the safety or
health of the occupants or others. If, upon inspection, the taxicab is found
to be dangerous to the safety and health of the occupants or others, the
Mayor and Borough Council shall be notified immediately and the license
for the taxicab shall immediately be suspended and shall be precluded from
operating within the Borough of Lindenwold as a taxicab. The taxicab owner
must request a hearing before the Mayor and Borough Council to determine
whether the license is to be reinstated. The hearing may be conducted at a
regularly scheduled Council meeting.
§ 309-20. Physical condition of licensed taxicabs.
Each licensed taxicab shall be maintained in good physical condition with no
physical damage. If the Borough Compliance Officer or designee determines
that a licensed taxicab does not comply with this provision, the Compliance
Officer shall issue a warning on the first violation and will allow the operator
offense occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the
applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
(4) If a person is an alien citizen of any nation between which and the
United States of America a state of war exists; or has made false
answers in his application for such license or any renewal thereof;
or has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and
adequate taxicab service; or has not complied fully with all
requirements of this chapter for such class of license.
(5) The provisions contained in Subsection A(1) through (4) above
pertaining to a criminal background check shall not apply to an
operator or driver of a taxicab who has received the consent to
operate in the Borough prior to the effective date of P.L. 2011, c.
135 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1 et seq.). The Borough reserves the right to
have an applicant for a taxicab driver's license submit to a criminal
background check as it sees fit and at any time discussed in this
chapter.
B. Any taxicab driver's license if the licensee or applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle or has any
communicable or contagious disease.
C. Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reason of unsafe or unsanitary condition, is dangerous to
the safety or health of the occupants or others, or if the policy of
insurance required by this chapter has lapsed or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
§ 309-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 309-20
1:610
three days in which to make the necessary repairs. In the event that the
operator does not complete the repairs within three days of the notice and
continues to operate the taxicab, such operation shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
§ 309-21. Displaying of owner's card, driver's license and rates
required.
No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in the Borough unless and until
there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof within full view and
access to any passengers therein an illuminated display case containing
the owner's card, the taxicab driver's license, which license shall include a
recent photograph of the driver then operating the taxicab, and a complete
list of fares, charges or tariff rates so displayed, and no others shall be
charged any passenger so transported.
§ 309-22. Insignia on vehicles.
Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides thereof one of
the words "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least three inches high or the name
of the operating owner containing at least one of the words "taxi," "cab"
or "taxicab." Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on each side
thereof, in letters at least one inch high, the name of the owner thereof
followed or preceded by the word "owner." Magnetic signs are not accepted
and may cause the taxicab owner's license to be revoked. The owner of
a taxicab shall cause to be displayed on the body of the vehicle the taxi
license number issued to that vehicle. The number shall be three inches in
height and located in the center of the rear quarter panels on the driver
and passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk of the vehicle.
Each taxicab shall display on each rear door of the vehicle the "Borough of
Lindenwold" in letters three inches in height.
§ 309-23. Record of trips required.
The owner of each taxicab so licensed shall keep or require to be kept a
written record of each trip made by the said taxicab, showing the number of
daily trips. Such record shall not be destroyed for at least one year from the
date of the trip and shall be kept within the Borough in readily accessible
form and shall be accessible at all reasonable times for inspection by
the Mayor and Borough Council, any Borough official or member of the
Lindenwold Police Department. The daily log shall be kept in the vehicle
until, at the earliest, the end of the workday.
§ 309-24. Parking or ranking.
No person shall park or rank any taxicab on any of the streets of the
Borough at any time except at such place or places as may from time to time
be lawfully designated as municipal taxi stands.
§ 309-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-25
1:611
§ 309-25. Cruising.
No person shall cruise on the streets of the Borough with any taxicab at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
§ 309-26. Transferability of taxicab licenses.241
No taxicab driver's license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall
be transferable. Similarly, no taxicab owner's license shall be transferable,
except in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any transfer of a
taxicab driver's license or a taxicab owner's license in violation of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 309-27.
§ 309-27. Violations and penalties.242
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate this chapter or
any of its provisions shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
§ 309-28. Designation for renewals.
The Borough Clerk or designee may set the time and date for renewals of
licenses pursuant to this chapter as required.
Chapter 317
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-44.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 339.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 345.
§ 317-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and pricing for towing
services, storage of vehicles and accident cleanup services within the
Borough of Lindenwold when said services are requested by the Borough's
Police Department.
§ 317-2. Qualified towers.
A. Any tower in compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be
considered qualified and shall be called by the Borough Police
Department on a rotating basis. Any interested tower shall submit proof
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 309-25 LINDENWOLD CODE § 317-2
1:612
of compliance on an annual basis to the Police Department for review
and determination.
B. Requirements.
(1) Registration with the Department of Community Affairs.
(2) Conformance with the Borough's Schedule of Fees.243
(3) Ability to respond to a service call within the Borough within 20
minutes.
(4) A properly licensed and zoned storage yard open for business, at a
minimum, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturdays, excluding legal holidays,
which has at least two covered or interior storage spaces.
(5) Tow trucks, including all necessary equipment and materials to
remove and clean up the vehicles and debris resulting from a twovehicle
collision.
(6) Agreement to follow directions of police officers concerning the
removal and storage of vehicles as well as the cleanup of the scene,
including an agreement that any vehicle designated as impounded
may not be released without written permission from the Police
Department.
(7) General liability/comprehensive general liability insurance policy
with at least $1,000,000 coverage.
(8) Garage keepers' legal liability coverage with at least $100,000 in
coverage.
(9) Automobile liability coverage with at least $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
(10)Worker's compensation coverage as required by law.
(11) Posting of schedule of fees on premises in a conspicuous place
visible to the public. The Police Department reserves the right to
publicly post the schedule of fees in whatever manner the Chief of
Police deems appropriate for the purpose of informing the public.
(12) The operator must own and maintain enough equipment and
possess adequate resources to remove two vehicles from the
roadway at the scene of a two-car collision where both vehicles
have been rendered inoperable.
(13) Tow trucks used by the operator must be of such construction to
tow any type of vehicle and to pass inspection by the Police
Department or its designee.
243. Editor's Note: See § 150-44 of the Code.
§ 317-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-2
1:613
§ 317-3. Schedule of fees.244
The Schedule of Towing Service Fees shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-44. A qualified tower may not charge in
excess of said schedule for services provided at the direction of the police.
§ 317-4. Qualification process.
Any tower interested in qualifying shall present to the Chief of Police, who is
designated as the municipal officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
proof of compliance with § 317-2B and other such information as the Chief
deems relevant on an annual basis. The Chief shall review such proofs
and, if satisfied with the same, issue a written notice of qualification to the
applicant and place the name of the qualified applicant on the list of towers
to be called by the Police Department on a rotating basis.
§ 317-5. Removal of qualification.
In the event that the Police Chief determines that a qualified tower is no
longer in compliance with this chapter, the Chief shall give such qualified
tower written notice of the deficiency and an opportunity to cure the
deficiency under such terms established by the Chief. If the deficiency
is not cured, the Chief shall send the qualified tower written notice that
the qualification has been revoked. In the event of a second instance of
the same deficiency within one year the Chief shall be authorized to
immediately revoke the qualification.
§ 317-6. Appeals.245
Any tower aggrieved by the revocation of qualification by the Police Chief
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council, which could
sustain the Chief's action, reverse it, modify it and/or add conditions. Any
aggrieved tower desiring such a hearing shall file with the Borough Clerk a
written statement requesting the same and setting out the factual basis for
the appeal and pay a fee as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee
(14) Tow trucks shall be maintained in good condition, comply with all
applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., and be available 24
hours a day and be identified on each side with the name and
address of the operator. There shall be no marking on tow trucks
indicating affiliation with the Police Department, such as "official
police towing."
(15) Agreement to follow the regulations established by the Chief of
Police, which regulations may be amended and/or modified by the
Chief.
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 317-6
1:614
Schedule, § 150-44, all or a portion of which may be refunded by the Mayor
and Council in the event of a reversal or modification of the Chief's decision.
§ 317-7. General procedures.
Any qualified tower, as a condition of said qualification, shall comply with
the following general procedures:
§ 317-8. Storage of vehicles.
A. Tower shall be notified by the Police Department for the removal of all
vehicles whether considered abandoned, disabled or impounded. Tower
must arrive prepared to remove all vehicles within 20 minutes of
notification, unless otherwise specified by the Police Department. If the
tower fails to respond within the allotted time, the Borough may, within
its discretion, notify another vendor to effect immediate removal and
towing of vehicles. Any towing charges assessed by the vendor to the
Borough shall be passed on to the tower.
B. Tower must be available for removal and storage of vehicles 24 hours a
day, seven days a week, including the removal of abandoned vehicles.
C. In the event that the owner of a vehicle also arrives at the scene to
which a tower has been summoned, with approval of the Police
Department the owner shall be allowed to remove the vehicle at no
expense to himself or the Borough.
D. In the event the tower is required to perform additional unspecified
services in furtherance of its obligations hereunder, such services shall
be provided at reasonable cost. Such services shall not affect the basic
towing and storage charges outlined in the Borough's Schedule of Fees.
E. In the event that a vehicle has been wrongfully removed pursuant to
this chapter, the vehicle shall be returned to the owner at no charge. On
occasion, tower will be required to tow certain wrongfully removed
vehicles back to the initial towing site.246
F. Any municipal-owned vehicles shall be towed free of charge.
G. Tower shall change flat tires on any vehicle assigned to the Police
Department free of charge at any time when employees of the Borough
Garage are not working or available.
H. Tower must accept all major credit cards for all towing services and
associated costs.
A. All vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter must be stored at the
tower's storage facilities, with the following exception: on occasion the
tower will be required to tow certain vehicles which are involved in
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-8
1:615
§ 317-9. Release of vehicles.
§ 317-10. Records and inspections.
Tower shall maintain records of all vehicles towed, stored and released by
him, as well as all services rendered while performing services covered by
this chapter.
§ 317-11. Reporting requirements.
criminal investigation or other investigation to a designated facility for
further investigation at no charge to the Borough.
B. Tower shall be responsible for each vehicle in its storage area,
including but not limited to damage or theft, until final disposition or
removal is ordered by the Borough. All vehicles, regardless of
condition, must be stored singly and so arranged to permit inspection
and subsequent removal if necessary. Adequate walkway inspection
space must be provided at all times.
C. The owner of any vehicle towed shall have the right to remove property
belonging to him from the stored vehicle at no cost to the owner unless
"Police Hold" is marked on tow form. Vehicle owner or his
representative shall have the right to take photos of stored vehicle for
insurance purposes at no cost to the vehicle owner or his
representative. Any property removal disputes will be referred to the
Police Department. Access to storage facility/yard must be given to
owner/representative with consent of police.
A. No vehicle shall be released to either owners or lienholders without a
police release form. Vehicles shall be available for release between 8:00
a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon, Saturday, except for legal holidays. It shall be the responsibility of
the Police Department to notify the owners of vehicles, when known,
when vehicles are turned over to the tower for removal and storage.
B. Upon release of a vehicle to its owner or lienholder, all ownership rights
and responsibilities shall revert to the owner or lienholder. The Borough
shall not be liable for daily storage fees for any day following the date of
release, whether or not the owner actually reclaims possession of the
motor vehicle from the tower. Tower shall not impose any additional
charges upon an owner or lienholder which are not expressly indicated
in the Borough's Schedule of Fees. All vehicles shall be released by
tower upon receipt of a police release form.
C. The tower shall notify the Police Department of any released vehicle
which remains unclaimed by the owner by way of a monthly written
report.
A. Tower shall be required to maintain a yearly tow log documenting all
vehicles that were towed at the request of the Police Department. A
§ 317-8 LINDENWOLD CODE § 317-11
1:616
Chapter 335
VEHICLE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 317.
copy of this log will be submitted to the Police Department at the end
of the calendar year. Tower is required to maintain a copy of said tow
log for a period of seven years. The tower shall update the tow log on
a daily basis and it shall be made available to the Chief of Police or his
designee immediately upon request.
B. Towed vehicle log. This report shall include the following information
on every vehicle towed by the tower at the request of the Police
Department and covered under the terms of this chapter:
(1) Date vehicle was towed by contractor.
(2) Vehicle identification number.
(3) License plate number.
(4) State vehicle registered in.
(5) Make of vehicle.
(6) Model of vehicle.
(7) Color of vehicle.
(8) Release date.
(9) Final disposition of vehicle.
C. The Police Department will provide a tow log form to tower to be used
by tower to document towed vehicles.
§ 317-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-11
1:617

ARTICLE I
Improper Operation
[Adopted 3-11-1998 by Ord. No. 1023 (Ch. 193 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 335-1. Improper or unreasonable operation and maintenance.
A person who operates a vehicle in the Borough of Lindenwold without due
caution and circumspection, or in any other manner so as to endanger or
be likely to endanger a person or property, or who maintains a vehicle with
faulty or unlawful equipment, shall be guilty of improper or unreasonable
operation and maintenance.
§ 335-2. Violations and penalties.247
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-2
1:619

ARTICLE II
Motorized Vehicles on Borough Property
[Adopted 3-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1068]
§ 335-3. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, park, locate or permit the
use, operation and/or parking of any motor vehicle upon any real property
owned by the Borough.
§ 335-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes cars, trucks, all-terrain vehicles, mopeds and/
or any vehicle powered by a gas engine, but does not include batterypowered
toys.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes any public playground, ball field, undeveloped
land, woods, recreation area, lawns and/or trails owned by the Borough of
Lindenwold, but does not include streets or paved parking areas.
§ 335-5. Violations and penalties.248
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with the provisions of
this article shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1,
of this Code. In addition, any motor vehicle which is used or is permitted
to be used to violate the provisions of this article shall be seized by the
arresting officer and taken into custody to be held until such time as the
trial in Municipal Court. In the event of a not guilty determination, the
motor vehicle shall be returned to its owner. In the event of a guilty finding,
the Court may, in its discretion, order the motor vehicle forfeited to the
Borough as an additional penalty for a violation of this article.
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 335-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-5
1:621
Chapter 339
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 240. Towing — See Ch. 317.
§ 339-1. Findings.
It is hereby determined and declared that the abandonment or outside
storage of any motor vehicles not currently in use for transportation,
whether or not currently licensed or registered, on any public or private
property within the Borough is contrary and harmful to the public welfare
in that such articles so abandoned or stored attract or may attract persons
of tender years who, being so attracted, may play in and about them
and be injured, and in that such vehicles so abandoned or stored outside
deteriorate and are unsightly and, as such, are detrimental to and
depreciate the value of property in the neighborhood and affect the entire
Borough and, further, that said abandoned vehicles constitute a danger to
the public health and safety.
§ 339-2. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases and words, as used in and for the purpose of
this chapter, shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes any motor vehicle, omnibus,
road tractor, trailer, truck, truck trailer and vehicle, which:
BOROUGH OFFICIAL — The Zoning Officer, Compliance Officer, Director
of Public Safety or any member of the Borough of Lindenwold Police
Department.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE, JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY OR OTHER JUNK
VEHICLES — Any vehicle which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle
or such vehicle, as is, is incapable of being operated safely or being put in a
safe operational condition except at a cost in excess of the value thereof.
Has remained on or about private property or public property without
the consent of the owner or other person so in charge of said property
for a continuing period of more than 10 days;
A.
B. Does not have current license plates or registration;
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of 30 days; or [Amended 4-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 969]
C.
D. Is found without one or more tires.
§ 335-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 339-2
1:622
MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRAILER, TRUCK, TRUCK
TRAILER AND VEHICLE — Intended to have the meanings stated and
defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being the owner
or having any legal right in or to a motor vehicle or other vehicle as herein
defined.
REPAIR — That work performed or to be performed upon any vehicle,
including but not limited to motors, ignition systems, transmissions, drive
trains, electric systems or body or fender work.
§ 339-3. Repairs to vehicles; outdoor storage.
§ 339-4. Reports of complaints.
A. No person shall authorize, permit, allow or suffer the repair, service or
overhaul of any motor vehicle of any description upon any public
parking lot, highway, street or alley within the Borough of Lindenwold
except when such repairs are necessary in an immediate emergency.
Emergency repairs necessary to place said vehicle in operation may be
made upon said public highway, street, parking lot or alley, provided
that said emergency repairs can be completed in less than 60 minutes
or unless an extra period of time has been granted by the person in
charge of the Police Department at the time of the emergency.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit to be stored on any
property in the Borough of Lindenwold an abandoned or junk vehicle,
as defined herein, out of doors. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit the placing, keeping or storage of any such vehicle
in an enclosed garage, barn or other building.249
A. Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the Borough or
any employee of the Borough, the Borough official, as defined in this
chapter, shall make an investigation of the conditions complained of
and report thereon, in writing, as to the conditions found. Upon
receiving such report, if the property in question about which the
complaint was made is found to be in violation of this chapter, the
Borough official shall notify the owner or possessor of the property,
personally or by mail, to take steps to effectively remove the violation
from the property within 10 days after receipt of such notice.
B. The Borough official shall reinspect said lands after the ten-day period
shall have expired, and if it is found that a condition complained of and
previously found to exist in violation of this chapter has not been abated
or remedied, such Borough official shall remove or secure the removal
of such vehicle to a garage or place for impounding. The person owning
the same shall first pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 339-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-4
1:623
§ 339-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 339-6. Exceptions. [Added 4-12-1995 by Ord. No. 969]
This chapter shall not apply to automobiles without license tags and
registration temporarily stored for not more than six months, to be
measured from the date of the notice of violation, provided that said
automobile is not an eyesore and remains operable.
Chapter 345
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 220. Towing — See Ch. 317.
which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition
to such other penalties as may be prescribed, pay all costs of removal
and impounding, and in the event that the violator is a property owner,
said costs and such other fines and penalties as may be levied in
accordance with this chapter shall become a lien upon his property in
accordance with law and be collected in the manner ascribed and
established for the collection of liens.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of
this Code.250
C. A continuance of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Borough Council shall
have the right to apply to the courts of this state for injunctive relief or
other relief in addition to the penalties provided herein.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 339-4 LINDENWOLD CODE § 339-6
1:624
ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
[Traffic regulations of the Borough are on file at the office of the
Borough Clerk. See also the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and state regulations, including N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-6
1:625

ARTICLE II
School Property
[Adopted 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 1346]
§ 345-1. State motor vehicle regulations applicable.
The schools in the Borough of Lindenwold have filed written consent with
the Borough of Lindenwold that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of
the revised Statutes of New Jersey251 for various traffic regulations be made
applicable to semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at all
public school property located in the Borough of Lindenwold, County of
Camden, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 345-2. Parking.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas in between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle on any of the streets or
parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking restrictions.
(1) Lindenwold High School.
Name of
Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
Road C Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Road D Both All Entire length
Road E Both All Entire length
Aisle F Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle G Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle H Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle I Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle K Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle L Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
251. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 345-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-2
1:627
Name of
Street Side(s) Hours Location
Aisle M Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
(2) Lindenwold Middle School.
Name of
Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle B Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle C Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
(3) Lindenwold School No. 4.
Name of
Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Road B Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle C Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle D Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle E Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle F Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle G Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle H Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle I Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle J Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
(4) Lindenwold School No. 5.
§ 345-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § 345-2
1:628
§ 345-3. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets:
Name of
Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Road B Both All Entire length (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle C Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
Aisle D Both All Entire site (unless in
designated spaces)
C. Handicapped parking. All van-accessible stalls shall be eight feet wide,
with an eight-foot loading area, and standard handicapped parking
stalls shall be eight feet wide with a five-foot loading area, as shown on
the attached site plan, and signed with R7-8, R7-8A and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking with Penalty Plate) in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by
the Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Lindenwold High School.
Name of Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
Road C Both All Entire length
Road D Both All Entire length
B. Lindenwold Middle School.
Name of Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
C. Lindenwold School No. 4.
Name of Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
D. Lindenwold School No. 5.
§ 345-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:629
§ 345-4. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic on the roadways and on the
parking aisles shall be 10 miles per hour.
§ 345-5. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway, or where it presents in any way a safety hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense. The
contracted tow company shall conform to the standards set forth in the New
Jersey Predatory Towing Prevention Act.252
§ 345-6. Installation.
All signs, posts or other necessary material shall be installed and paid for by
the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and 39:4-183.27.
§ 345-7. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $250 or imprisonment from a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Name of Street Side(s) Hours Location
Road A Both All Entire length
Road B Both All Entire length
252. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq.
§ 345-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 345-7
1:630
Chapter 349
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
§ 349-1. Operation of certain vehicles on public property
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of unlicensed
motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including but not necessarily limited
to snowmobiles, two-wheel motor vehicles known as "mini bicycles," "trail
bicycles," and "motor scooters" and four-wheel motor vehicles commonly
known as "go-carts" upon any public property or Borough-owned land in the
Borough of Lindenwold, New Jersey.
§ 349-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH-OWNED LAND — Includes all parks, recreation areas, ball
parks, lake areas, storage facilities, garage areas, Board of Education
property and any and all other Borough- or publicly owned land and
premises.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all streets, sidewalks, easements or any
other areas dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
§ 349-3. Operation of certain vehicles on private property
restricted.
The operation of said motor-driven vehicles as defined in § 349-1 of this
chapter is additionally prohibited upon private property unless the operator
of said motor-driven vehicle has in his possession an express written
permission to operate said vehicle on said private property by the owner of
said property.
§ 349-4. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle as
defined in § 349-1 in such a manner as to create loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other
persons.
§ 349-5. Careless, reckless or negligent operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle as
defined in § 349-1 in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the safety of any person or the property of any person.
§ 345-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-6
1:631
§ 349-6. Operation of vehicles by Borough employees.
It shall not be unlawful for any employee of this Borough to operate motordriven
vehicles as defined in § 349-1 for the purpose of maintaining,
repairing or doing any public work within the scope of his employment.
§ 349-7. Operation of vehicles by minors.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the care,
custody and control of any child under the age of 17 years to permit such
child to operate a motor-driven vehicle in violation of the terms of this
chapter.
§ 349-8. Surrender and impoundment of vehicles.
Any child, operator or parent, as defined in this chapter, who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall forthwith voluntarily or
involuntarily surrender the unlicensed motor-driven vehicle or conveyance
to the Borough of Lindenwold Police Department, and said Police
Department shall impound and store said unlicensed motor-driven vehicle
or conveyance at the expense of the child, operator or parent until further
order of the court having jurisdiction to determine violations existing under
this chapter.
§ 349-9. Violations and penalties.253
Any child, operator or parent, as defined in this chapter, who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 358
WATER EMERGENCIES
§ 358-1. Declaration of emergency.
Whenever the governing body shall be satisfied and finds that a water
emergency exists in the Borough of Lindenwold, it may adopt a resolution
declaring that a water emergency exists in the municipality. Such resolution
shall be adopted by the governing body at any regular, special, adjourned
or emergency public meeting of the governing body. Such resolution shall
identify that portion of the municipality affected by the water emergency,
which may include the entire municipality, and shall specify which of the
water use regulations contained in § 358-2 of this chapter is being imposed,
as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be
effective immediately upon publication according to law and shall continue
in effect for 90 days unless extended or repealed as set forth in § 358-3 of
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 349-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 358-1
1:632
this chapter. For the purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist
for any of the following reasons:
§ 358-2. Use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the governing body of a resolution declaring that a water
emergency exists in the municipality in accordance with § 358-1 of this
chapter, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures, and any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed
and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona
fide health emergency exists and to exempt businesses, as specified herein,
during the water emergency:
§ 358-3. Duration of restrictions.
The resolution of the governing body required by § 358-1 of this chapter
shall, in addition to complying with § 358-1, provide a period of time during
which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which
shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency
under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
A. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
municipality has adopted water use restrictions and has notified the
municipality, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other
state, county or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions, and
such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any state,
county or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so.
B. The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the municipality.
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of
cars.
B. Outside water usage on alternate days allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of
any month during the water emergency.
C. Any other water use restriction specified by the governing body in the
resolution required by § 358-1 of this chapter which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall
be limited in application to that portion of the municipality, which may
include the entire municipality, identified as being affected by the water
emergency in the resolution of the governing body adopted in
accordance with § 358-1 of this chapter.
§ 358-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-3
1:633
the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the governing body shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been
abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the
water use restrictions inapplicable. If at the expiration of the time period
specified in the resolution the governing body shall be satisfied that the
water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a resolution in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 358-4. Enforcement of restrictions.
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
enforced during a water emergency by the governing body. Whenever the
local governing body shall find a violation of the water use restrictions,
such governing body shall give the violator a written warning and explain
the penalties for a second and third offense as provided by § 358-5 of
this chapter. The local governing body shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and
businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The local governing
body is hereby empowered to write summonses for the violation of the
water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 358-5. Violations and penalties.254
After a first offense in accordance with § 358-4 of this chapter, any person
or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with this
section. For a second offense, the penalty imposed shall be a fine of $500 or
imprisonment for 10 days, or both. For a third and subsequent offense, the
penalty imposed shall be a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for 30 days, or
both.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 358-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 358-5
1:634
Chapter 365
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 105.
Condominium associations — See Ch. 115.
Construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Drive-in restaurants and shopping
centers — See Ch. 137.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 145,
Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 150.
Fire codes and requirements — See Ch. 160.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 164.
Housing standards — See Ch. 180.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Resource extraction — See Ch. 253.
Sex offender residency — See Ch. 264.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 283.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 287.
Stream buffer zones — See Ch. 291.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
390.
§ 358-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-5
1:635

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 365-1. Purpose.
To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough and
to conserve the value of property; to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health, morals
and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
the overcrowding of land and buildings; to avoid undue concentration of
population; and to that end to regulate the height, design, appearance,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage
of the area of the lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other
open spaces; the density of population; the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; and
the height, size and location of these uses within the limits of the Borough,
these regulations are hereby established and shall hereafter apply.
§ 365-2. Filing of applications. [Added 6-21-1982 by Ord. No. 603]
A. Filing procedure. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(1) Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Joint Land
Use Board without prior application to the Zoning Officer shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board. The number of
copies of the application that shall be filed at the time of filing the
appeal or application shall be consistent with the Joint Land Use
Board but in no event less than 28 days prior to the date set for the
hearing. [Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1335255]
(2) The applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other documents
required by virtue of this chapter or any resolution of the Joint Land
Use Board.
(3) The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from either the
Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board or the Zoning Officer. The
Secretary of the Board or Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant
of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular
meeting dates of the Board.
B. An application shall only be considered complete when it has been
reviewed and certified as approved by the Zoning Officer or the
Secretary of the Joint Land Use Board. [Amended 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 1331]
C. Pursuant to and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, no application
will be considered if taxes or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property for which any application is made.
[Added 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 1011]
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-3
1:637
§ 365-3. Taxes. [Added 6-21-1982 by Ord. No. 603; amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, every application for development
submitted to the Joint Land Use Board shall be accompanied by proof that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on
the property which is the subject matter of such application, or if it is shown
that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any approval
or other relief granted by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will
be adequately protected.
§ 365-4. Commencement of development. [Added 6-21-1982 by Ord.
No. 603; amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
When the Joint Land Use Board makes a determination and thereby varies
the application of the provisions herein established, the successful applicant
must, within one year from the date of the favorable determination as set
forth in the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Act,256 commence development
of the use approved by the Board. If the successful applicant has not
commenced development within the above-mentioned year, said Joint Land
Use Board determination is automatically null and void unless said
applicant shall receive from the Joint Land Use Board a renewal, not to
exceed one year of determination. The application for renewal must be
made prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period, must include
the reasons for inaction and the basis for request for renewal and shall
be accompanied by a fee of 1/2 of the application fee then in effect for a
variance. If at the end of the extension the applicant has not commenced
development of the aforementioned use, the determination of the Joint Land
Use Board is automatically null and void and may not be further renewed.
256. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 365-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-4
1:638
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 365-5. Definitions of terms and word usage.
A. Definitions of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use or building, the
purpose of which is customarily incidental to that of the main use
or building and which is located on the same lot as the main use or
building.257
ADULT BUSINESS — An establishment which deals primarily with
the sale or display of literature, sexual aids, films, exhibitions or live
performance of nude, or so scantly covered as to appear to be nude,
human beings, human genitals or female breasts.[Added 3-13-1996
by Ord. No. 992]
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or a structure, means a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities,
or an enlargement, whether by extension of a side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any building or portion thereof designed or used
for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
BUFFER ZONE — That zone as prescribed by the Joint Land Use Board
of the Borough of Lindenwold which shall separate a residential district
from a commercial or industrial district by the planting of trees or
shrubbery to such a height and density as to restrict a clear view
beyond said zone.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a sheltered
or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property, including tents,
lunch wagons, dining cars, camp cars, trailers and other roofed
structures.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to
the highest point of the ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof,
to the deckline of a mansard roof, and to the average height between
the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of
Lindenwold.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the building on any side. In the case of a cantilevered
257. Editor's Note: The former definition of "adult bookstore," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 992.
§ 365-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-5
1:639
section of a building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the building
line.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
"Common open space" may contain such complementary structures
and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Joint Land Use Board.[Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use of
land.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during
and after construction or development to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where
practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution, to maintain the integrity of
stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage
and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention
or alleviation of flooding.258
DUPLEX — Two dwelling units, each on separate lots and sharing a
common wall.
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for
one or more families.
DWELLING HOUSE — A detached house designed for and occupied
exclusively as the residence of a single family living as an independent
housekeeping unit.
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-5
1:640
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling or group of dwellings on one
plot containing separate living units for two or more families, but which
may have joint services or facilities for both.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing complete living
facilities for one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions
for the same, and including room or rooms for living, sleeping and
eating.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body
created pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
FAMILY — A single individual doing his own cooking and living upon
a premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of
persons doing their own cooking and living together upon a premises
as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon
birth, marriage or other domestic bond, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building of no more than three stories
containing at least three dwelling units, in which one dwelling unit may
be located over another unit, access to such units being via a common
entrance, and utilities may be shared.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and members of the Borough Council
of the Borough of Lindenwold.
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling having not fewer
than six stories above the average elevation of the finished lot grade at
the front of the building.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for economic gain carried out in a
residential dwelling or accessory structure thereto, in which an owner
of residence and no more than one additional employee is employed,
which activity is clearly secondary to the use of the residence as a
dwelling and meets the requirements specified in each zone where
home occupations are permitted, subject to certain conditions and
requirements.[Amended 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1267; 2-6-2013
by Ord. No. 1334]
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used
or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are
occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general
kitchen and dining room are provided within the building or in an
accessory building.
JOINT LAND USE BOARD — The Joint Land Use Board of the Borough
of Lindenwold.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
JUNK — Any worn-out, castoff or discarded article or material which
is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage
or conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered
or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its
original purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
§ 365-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-5
1:641
JUNK SHOP — [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
JUNKYARD — Any place where any of the articles or items, or a
combination thereof, referred to under the definition of "junk shop" are
stored, kept or maintained, whether for sale or not, and shall be in a lot,
place, building, structure or yard, whether improved or unimproved,
where such articles or any of them are permitted to accumulate.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOADING AREA — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with
a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other
appropriate means of access.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot line bounding the area and is always expressed in terms of square
feet.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two
or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection
does not exceed 150°.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to its depth. In no case shall the lot width be
less than the frontage as required by this chapter. Frontage shall be
measured at the most forward allowable building line or setback line.
The width at the front property line shall be at least 2/3 of the required
width of the setback line.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
Any place of business conducted or maintained for the purpose of
buying, selling and storing, or any of them, of old junk, ropes, iron,
brass, copper, tin, lead, rubber in various forms, old papers, bottles
or any other material or materials, old unregistered automobiles
or trucks or other motor or mobile vehicles and other abandoned
and unusable vehicles and such other miscellaneous assortment of
articles and materials as are commonly classified and designated
as "junk."
(1)
The loading, unloading, sorting or storing of any materials brought
to a residence from another site is strictly prohibited and subject to
a court summons.
(2)
§ 365-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-5
1:642
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any space utilized for the parking of motor
vehicles, including both the parking spaces and the driveways, aisles,
turnaround, loading areas and open space used to provide access to
parking spaces or to control traffic within a parking lot, except the
access drive connecting a parking lot and a public right-of-way and
within which no parking maneuver could occur.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a
motor vehicle and which in this chapter is held to be nine feet wide
and 18 feet long, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant
thereto and giving access thereto.[Amended 12-12-2001 by Ord. No.
1104]
PATIO HOUSE (ZERO LOT LINE) — One freestanding dwelling unit on
a separate lot with open space on three sides.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building or buildings in which is conducted
the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, as hereinafter indicated, when conducted on a residential
property and which shall be conducted by a member or members of
the residential family entirely within a residential building and shall
include only the office of doctors, ministers, architects, professional
§ 365-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-5
1:643
engineers, lawyers and such similar professional occupations as may
be so designated by the Joint Land Use Board upon finding by such
Board that such occupation is truly professional in character by virtue
of the need for similar training and experience as a condition for the
practice thereof and that the practice of such occupation shall in no
way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property
rights in any zone in which it is located to a greater extent than the
professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a state or local
license for regulation of any gainful occupation need not be deemed
indicative of professional standing.[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 1331]
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESIDENTIAL TRASH — The act of putting materials, such as brush,
metals, cabinets, shelving, wood, old appliances, old furniture, junk or
any debris of any kind, brought to a residence from another site and
not generated as normal residential trash, out for Borough collection is
strictly prohibited and subject to a court summons issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer.[Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
SHOPPING CENTER — A business district consisting of an integrated
development of such uses as retail stores and shops, personal service
establishments, professional and business offices, banks, post offices,
restaurants and theaters or auditoriums housed in an enclosed building
or buildings with party walls of eight inches of concrete block between
each business use and utilizing such common facilities as customer
parking areas, pedestrian walks, truck loading and unloading space,
and utility and sanitary facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One freestanding dwelling
unit on a separate lot with open space (setbacks) on all sides.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, regulating noise levels, glare,
earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation,
noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and flammable materials, smoke
and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects
or conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably
required by the municipality, or standards required by applicable
federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.259
STORAGE — [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1249]
The placement or locating of materials such as brush, metals,
cabinets, shelving, wood, old appliances, automobile or truck parts,
junk or debris of any kind at a residence, whether on the ground or
in any container, shed, truck or trailer.
(1)
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-5
1:644
STORY — That part of a building between the surface of any floor and
the next floor above it or, in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof
above it. A split-level story shall be considered a second story if its floor
level is six feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor
next below it except a basement. Any floor under a sloping roof at the
top of a building which is more than two feet below the top plate shall
be counted as a story and, if less than two feet below the top plate, shall
be counted as a half story, provided that not more than 60% of the floor
area is used for rooms, baths or toilets; otherwise, it shall be counted as
the fraction of a story which the floor area of its rooms, baths or toilets
bears to the entire floor area.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law,
or which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter, or
which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board
and the grant to such board of the power to review plats, and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — One dwelling unit in a line of at least
three dwelling units, in which each unit has its own front and rear
access, no unit is located over another unit, each unit is separated from
others by a fire wall, and each unit has its own independent utilities.
TRAILER CAMP or TRAILER PARK — Any place, area, lot or tract of
land which is so designed or intended for placing or locating thereon a
trailer, trailer coach or other camp car, one or more, as defined below,
other than a garage or other similarly enclosed type of building in
which such vehicles may be placed.
TRAILER, TRAILER COACH or CAMP CAR — Any unit which is or
may be used for living, sleeping or business purposes by one or more
persons and that is equipped with wheels or similar device used for the
purpose of transporting said unit from place to place, whether it be selfpropelled
or otherwise, and whenever the word "trailer" is used herein,
it shall mean and include "trailer coach" and "camp car"; excepting,
however, that a trailer used as a temporary office for administrative
The Code Enforcement Officer will send a notice of violation by
regular and registered mail to the offending resident permitting
seven days to remove. The seven-day grace period can be used only
one time. After seven days following the initial notification or if
any subsequent violations of any zoning ordinance occur, the Code
Enforcement Officer will issue a court summons and prosecute the
offender.
(2)
§ 365-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-5
1:645
purposes in connection with the doing of construction work in the
Borough of Lindenwold and which has no sanitary facilities attendant
thereto is not within the meaning of this definition.
TWO-STORY STRUCTURE — A structure having space above the first
floor designed for and completed as living quarters with a height of
seven feet over an area equal to 100% of the first-floor area, excluding
the garage.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
YARD — An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the street line and front line of the building projected to the side lines
of the lot.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, situated between the rear line of the building and the rear line
of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear
line or front line shall be deemed a side lot line.
B. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future. The
singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular; the
word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the
word "structure"; the word "zone" includes the word "district"; the word
"occupied" includes the term "designed or intended to be occupied"; the
word "use" includes the term "arranged, designed or intended to be
used"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 365-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-5
1:646
ARTICLE III
Area, Yard and Building Requirements
§ 365-6. Schedule of requirements.
A. The schedule of regulations entitled "Schedule of Area, Yard and
Building Requirements" attached hereto and made a part hereof,
applying to the uses of land and buildings, the yard and other open
spaces to be provided contiguous thereto and all other matters
contained therein, as indicated for the various zones established by this
chapter, is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.260
B. The regulations listed for each zone as designated, reading from left to
right across the schedule, are hereby prescribed for such zones, subject
to the other provisions in this chapter, and shall be deemed to be the
minimum requirements in every instance of their application, unless
otherwise stated.
C. Impervious Surface Limits Schedule for the R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3
Residential Districts. [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1165]
Lot Size
(square feet) Structures Total
5,000 or less 35% 45%
5,001 to 8,000 25% 40%
8,001 to 15,000 20% 30%
15,001 to 21,000 15% 25%
21,001 or more 13% 22%
260. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-6
1:647

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations and Prohibited Uses
§ 365-7. Conformity with regulations required.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged except in
conformity with this chapter, and no land shall be used for any purpose
other than those included among the uses listed as permitted uses in
each zone by this chapter and meeting the requirements set forth by the
schedule appended to this chapter in accordance with Article III. No space
contiguous to any building shall be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner except in conformity to the yard, lot area, building location, density,
off-street parking and other regulations contained in the schedule in Article
III and the text of this chapter as they apply to the zone in which the
building or use is located. In the event of any such unlawful encroachment
or reduction, such building shall be deemed to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 365-8. Frontage on public street.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street improved to meet Borough standards or for which such
improvements have been ensured by the posting of a performance guaranty
pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the Borough.261 In the case of
lots not comprising portions of a plan of lots approved pursuant to the
subdivision regulations of the Borough, the minimum Borough standard of
street improvement shall be a thirty-foot roadway paved with a durable
and permanent surface on a properly prepared subgrade, the construction
of which shall be reviewed, inspected and approved by the appropriate
Borough authorities. These street improvements shall be made from the
nearest public street to the farthermost property line of the subject lot.
§ 365-9. Irregular lots.
In the case of an irregular lot in which the side lot lines are not parallel,
the average width of the lot may be substituted for the required minimum
lot frontage, but the street lot frontage shall not be less than 80% of the
minimum required width prescribed by Article III.
§ 365-10. Yard or open space requirements.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose
of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other
space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a
building on any other lot.
261. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development, Art. VIII, Performance Guaranties.
§ 365-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-11
1:649
§ 365-11. Sight triangles at intersections. [Amended 11-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
At the intersection or interception of two or more streets, no hedge, fence
or wall higher than 30 inches above curb level or any obstruction to vision
other than a post or tree not exceeding one square foot in cross section shall
be permitted within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street
lines and a straight line joining points located on said street lines 20 feet
distant from their point of intersection.
§ 365-12. Lots fronting on streets designated for widening.
When a lot has frontage on a street right-of-way which has been designated
for widening by the Borough, Camden County or the State of New Jersey,
the required front yard area shall be measured from the proposed right-ofway
line, which shall in all cases be a minimum of 25 feet from the road
center line.
§ 365-13. Use of nonconforming lots.
Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that prescribed for a
lot in the zone in which such lot is located may be used as a lot for any
purpose permitted in the zone other than multiple dwellings, provided that
the owner owns no adjoining land and all other regulations prescribed for
the zone in this chapter are complied with.
§ 365-14. Outdoor storage.
The outdoor storage of goods, articles, appliances and vehicles shall be
prohibited in business and industrial districts unless items being stored are
to be sold on the premises, are located to the rear of the front setback line
and are screened in a manner which prevents their being viewed from any
residential property. Visible storage of any kind shall not be permitted on
the premises in any residential district.262
§ 365-15. Prohibited uses. [Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1165]
Any use not specifically permitted in a zone established by this chapter
is hereby specifically prohibited in that zone, and the following uses and
activities are specifically prohibited in any zone of the Borough of
Lindenwold:
A. Junkyards; automobile wrecking, storage or disassembly yards; the
sorting or baling of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap or waste
material.
B. Any use which emits excessive and objectionable amounts of dust,
fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.
262. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 238, Art. I, Storage of Junk.
§ 365-11 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-15
1:650
C. Adult businesses and related establishments. [Amended 11-5-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-01]
D. The use of any portable building or structure, stationary vehicle or
stand of any description for the purpose of displaying or selling food,
merchandise or commodities of any kind.
E. The use of a barn, building or structure of a temporary nature, garage,
house trailer, outbuilding, shack, shed or tent on any lot or parcel of
land for living or sleeping purposes in any district on either a temporary
or permanent basis.
F. In the R-3 Zone, no garages are allowed.
G. In the R-4 Zone, no garages, sheds or pools are allowed.
H. Businesses selling, distributing, cultivating, growing and/or facilitating
the sale and/or use of either recreation or medicinal marijuana,
including any ancillary or related paraphernalia in any zone.
[Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
§ 365-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-15
1:651

ARTICLE V
Zones; Zoning Map; Zone Boundaries
§ 365-16. Zoning districts established. [Amended 12-16-1985 by
Ord. No. 699]
The territory of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be divided into the
following districts:
R-1 Single-Family Detached Residential
R-1A Single-Family Detached Residential
R-2 Single-Family Detached Residential
R-3 Single-Family Attached Residential
R-4 Multifamily Residential
OP-1 Office and Professional
B-1 Neighborhood Business
B-2 Highway Business
I-1 Light Industrial
§ 365-17. Zoning Map. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699;
4-12-1989 by Ord. No. 809]
The zones listed above in § 365-16 shall be established by the designations,
locations and boundaries found on the Zoning Map, as amended, attached
hereto and to be kept on file in the office of the Borough Clerk. This map
shall be known as the "Zoning Map of the Borough of Lindenwold" and shall
be considered a part of this chapter. Map changes and amendments shall be
made in accordance with Article XXII of this chapter.
§ 365-18. Interpretation of boundaries.
The following rules shall apply in the interpretation and application of the
boundaries shown on the Zoning Map:
A. Zoning district boundaries are intended to follow street right-of-way
lines, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
exist on plats of record at the time of the passage of this chapter unless
such zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning
Map.
B. In unsubdivided land or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of the zoning district boundary shall be determined by the use
of the scale on the Zoning Map if no dimensions have been indicated.
§ 365-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-18
1:653

ARTICLE VI
Regulations for R-1 Zone
§ 365-19. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
§ 365-20. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in Residential Zone R-1:
A. The purpose of Residential Zone R-1 shall be to create a zoning district
for single-family detached homes at a maximum density of
approximately 2.5 to 2.9 units per acre and for a limited number of
compatible uses.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Accessory uses. [Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1165]
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to a
permitted dwelling, including:
(a) Detached garage. A garage shall be for the noncommercial use
of the resident. A garage may not exceed 580 square feet in
area. A garage may not exceed 16 feet in height, measured
from the highest point of construction. A garage must be
located in the rear yard and must be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the side yard property line and 25 feet from the rear
property line. A garage may be used to house and care for the
automobiles or motor vehicles of the residents of the property.
A garage may not be used as a residential dwelling or for the
storage of vehicles owned by persons that do not live on the
property, or for any commercial use or support of a commercial
use. A garage may have electrical service but may not have
gas, sewer or telephone service. No property shall have more
than one detached garage. A garage must be enclosed and
must comply with the construction code. Carports must
conform to the existing construction and design of the home.
Membrane structures are not permitted. [Amended 3-8-2006
by Ord. No. 1180]
(b) Swimming pool. A swimming pool shall be considered a
structure for the purpose of determining lot coverage and must
comply with all setbacks within the Lindenwold zoning
regulations. Additionally, a swimming pool which is more than
two feet in height may be located no closer than 15 feet to the
principal structure. This subsection does not vacate or in any
way limit any other ordinances, statutes or other regulations
regarding swimming pools. For the purpose of ascertaining the
§ 365-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-20
1:655
setback, the construction of the pool shall be measured from
the concrete or brick paver pad or deck, not from the wall of
the pool.
(c) Sheds. In all residential zones, a single shed may be located in
the rear yards of properties, subject to the following
provisions. A shed shall not exceed 160 square feet in area and
12 feet in height as measured from the ground to the peak of
the roof exterior. No shed shall be closer than five feet to the
rear and/or side property line. A shed shall be considered a
structure for the purpose of determining lot coverage. A shed
may only be erected upon submission of an application upon an
approved form, issuance of a zoning permit, payment of the
appropriate zoning permit fees as set forth in §§ 150-19 and
365-109, and issuance of a building permit as required.263
(2) Unless otherwise provided in this code, no accessory structure
shall be closer to any principal building than a distance equal to the
height of such building unless it is attached to and is part of such
principal building.
(3) An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply
in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to
the rear of the front building line of the principal building and shall
conform to the side yard requirements of the schedule.264
(4) No accessory building shall be used for residential purposes.
(5) Accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height, with the
exception of sheds, which shall not exceed 12 feet in height as
provided in Subsection B(1)(c).
C. Public parks, government buildings and public utility installations
which involve no storage yards or commercial office space.
D. Public and parochial schools.
E. Day-care centers, private schools and related uses which are not
operated as a business.
F. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, convents and related uses,
provided that adequate provision is made for off-street parking as
required.
G. Home occupation. Persons employed by any company, business, agency
or government who are part of a program permitting employees to work
from their homes are not subject to the requirements of this section,
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
264. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-20
1:656
providing the "home office" is restricted to computer and telephone
communication, no customers or clients come to the home, and no
merchandise is stored in or sold from the home. [Amended
10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1267; 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Single business owner.
(b) Seamstress, tailor or embroidery.
(c) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(d) Tutor in academic studies.
(e) Manufacturers' representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
(f) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no equipment, materials or supplies are stored on site or on the
street.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this section, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signage on the
property, such as freestanding, monument or facade signage,
identifying the home occupation or business.
(b) No more than one employee may work at the dwelling, other
than the owner of the dwelling, provided that there is sufficient
off-street parking for that employee.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within 15% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the principal building,
excluding space used for a private garage or basement.
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as well as parking in the
vicinity of the home occupation, shall not be impaired.
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on the street to use a company vehicle during working
hours No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(f) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential
aspect of the neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be visible from a property line or street.
§ 365-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-20
1:657
§ 365-21. Conditional uses.
(Reserved)
§ 365-22. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-23. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-24. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.265
(h) There shall be no change in the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling.
(i) Mercantile license is required.
265. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-20 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-24
1:658
ARTICLE VII
Regulations for R-1A Zone
[Added 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699; amended 4-12-1989 by Ord. No.
809]
§ 365-25. Purpose; compliance required.
§ 365-26. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in Residential Zone R-1A:
A. The purpose of Residential Zone R-1A shall be to create a zoning
district for single-family detached homes at a maximum density of two
dwelling units per acre.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to a
permitted dwelling shall be the same as § 365-20B. [Amended
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1165]
C. Home occupation. Persons employed by any company, business, agency
or government who are part of a program permitting employees to work
from their homes are not subject to the requirements of this section,
providing the "home office" is restricted to computer and telephone
communication, no customers or clients come to the home, and no
merchandise is stored in or sold from the home. [Added 10-14-2009
by Ord. No. 1267; amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Single business owner.
(b) Seamstress, tailor or embroidery.
(c) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(d) Tutor in academic studies.
(e) Manufacturers' representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
(f) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no equipment, materials or supplies are stored on site or on the
street.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this section, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-26
1:659
§ 365-27. Conditional uses.
(Reserved)
§ 365-28. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-29. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-30. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.266
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signage on the
property, such as freestanding, monument or facade signage,
identifying the home occupation or business.
(b) No more than one employee may work at the dwelling, other
than the owner of the dwelling, provided that there is sufficient
off-street parking for that employee.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within 15% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the principal building,
excluding space used for a private garage or basement.
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as well as parking in the
vicinity of the home occupation, shall not be impaired.
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on site to use a company vehicle during working
hours. No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(f) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential
aspect of the neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be visible from a property line or street.
(h) There shall be no change in the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling.
(i) Mercantile license is required.
§ 365-26 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-30
1:660
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-30
1:661

ARTICLE VIII
Regulations for R-2 Zone
§ 365-31. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
A. The purpose of Residential Zone R-2 shall be to create a zoning district
for single-family detached homes at a maximum density of
approximately eight to 8.7 units per acre and for a limited number of
compatible uses.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
C. Home occupations. Persons employed by any company, business,
agency or government who are part of a program permitting employees
to work from their homes are not subject to the requirements of this
section, providing the "home office" is restricted to computer and
telephone communication, no customers or clients come to the home,
and no merchandise is stored in or sold from the home. [Added
2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Single business owner.
(b) Seamstress, tailor or embroidery.
(c) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(d) Tutor in academic studies.
(e) Manufacturers' representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
(f) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no equipment, materials or supplies are stored on site or on the
street.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this section, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signage on the
property, such as freestanding, monument or facade signage,
identifying the home occupation or business.
(b) No more than one employee may work at the dwelling, other
than the owner of the dwelling, provided that there is sufficient
off-street parking for that employee.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within 15% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the principal building,
excluding space used for a private garage or basement.
§ 365-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-31
1:663
§ 365-32. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in Residential Zone R-1 shall be the uses permitted in
Residential Zone R-2.
§ 365-33. Conditional uses.
(Reserved)
§ 365-34. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-35. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-36. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.267
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as well as parking in the
vicinity of the home occupation, shall not be impaired.
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on site to use a company vehicle during working
hours. No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(f) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential
aspect of the neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be visible from a property line or street.
(h) There shall be no change in the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling.
(i) Mercantile license is required.
267. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-31 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-36
1:664
ARTICLE IX
Regulations for R-3 Zone
§ 365-37. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
[Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699]
A. The purpose of Residential Zone R-3 shall be to create a zoning district
for single-family attached homes at a maximum of eight units per acre
and for a limited number of compatible uses.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
C. Persons employed by any company, business, agency or government
who are part of a program permitting employees to work from their
homes are not subject to the requirements of this section, providing the
"home office" is restricted to computer and telephone communication,
no customers or clients come to the home, and no merchandise is stored
in or sold from the home. [Added 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Single business owner.
(b) Seamstress, tailor or embroidery.
(c) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(d) Tutor in academic studies.
(e) Manufacturers' representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
(f) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no equipment, materials or supplies are stored on site or on the
street.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this section, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signage on the
property, such as freestanding, monument or facade signage,
identifying the home occupation or business.
(b) No more than one employee may work at the dwelling, other
than the owner of the dwelling, provided that there is sufficient
off-street parking for that employee.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within 15% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the principal building,
excluding space used for a private garage or basement.
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as well as parking in the
vicinity of the home occupation, shall not be impaired.
§ 365-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-37
1:665
§ 365-38. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in Residential Zone R-3:
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on site to use a company vehicle during working
hours. No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(f) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential
aspect of the neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be visible from a property line or street.
(h) There shall be no change in the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling.
(i) Mercantile license is required.
A. Any use permitted in Residential Zone R-2. Single-family detached
dwellings shall comply with the regulations and standards of
Residential Zone R-2.
B. Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, patio houses,
townhouses and row houses, in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) Single-family attached units may be in condominium, fee simple or
cooperative ownership or rental units.
(2) Each unit shall have direct vehicular access to a public street or a
private street with a minimum cartway of 30 feet which has been
improved in accordance with the design standards and
specifications of the Borough's Development Review and Land Use
Procedures Ordinance.268
(3) No more than two units shall be attached in one group. [Amended
12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699]
(4) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any singlefamily
attached dwelling and the property line of any adjoining lot
used for any purpose except that of a single-family attached
dwelling.269
268. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development.
269. Editor's Note: Original § 205-29B(5), regarding common open space, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 365-37 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-38
1:666
(5) No single-family attached unit shall be permitted to have direct
access to a county or state highway. Units fronting on a county or
state highway shall have access only on municipal and private
streets.
(6) There shall be a minimum setback of 75 feet between any dwelling
unit and a county or state highway.
(7) All streets, roads, access drives and parking areas shall be paved
and provided with curbing in accordance with the Borough's
specifications and standards.
(8) Pedestrian walks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and shall
be provided wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur.
Pedestrian walks shall be hard-surfaced in accordance with the
Borough's specifications and standards.
(9) All developments shall provide for landscaping, including shade
trees, shrubs and lawns. The landscaping shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(10) All developments shall provide sufficient illumination of streets,
roads, access drives, parking areas, dwelling entrances and
pedestrian walks. The site lighting plan shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(11) Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of one bedroom,
complete kitchen facilities, areas devoted to laundry and work
space, interior storage areas, bathroom areas, adequate living
space and minimum habitable floor areas in accordance with the
following schedule:
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Habitable Floor Area
(square feet)
1 750
2 1,000
3 1,250
4 or more 1,500
(12) All dwelling units shall be soundproofed to a limit of at least 45
decibels.
(13) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any
multifamily structure and any other structure or property line.
[Added 1-11-1989 by Ord. No. 797]
§ 365-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-38
1:667
§ 365-39. Conditional uses.
(Reserved)
§ 365-40. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-41. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-42. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.270
C. Day-care centers, community centers and recreation facilities designed
and maintained to meet the social service needs of the residents within
the development.
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-38 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-42
1:668
ARTICLE X
Regulations for R-4 Zone
§ 365-43. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
A. The purpose of Residential Zone R-4 shall be to create a zoning district
for multifamily dwellings at a maximum density of 12 units per acre for
all developments except housing for the elderly as permitted by
§ 365-44.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
C. Home occupations. Persons employed by any company, business,
agency or government who are part of a program permitting employees
to work from their homes are not subject to the requirements of this
section, providing the "home office" is restricted to computer and
telephone communication, no customers or clients come to the home,
and no merchandise is stored in or sold from the home. [Added
2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Single business owner.
(b) Seamstress, tailor or embroidery.
(c) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(d) Tutor in academic studies.
(e) Manufacturers' representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
(f) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no equipment, materials or supplies are stored on site or on the
street.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this section, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signage on the
property, such as freestanding, monument or facade signage,
identifying the home occupation or business.
(b) No more than one employee may work at the dwelling, other
than the owner of the dwelling, provided that there is sufficient
off-street parking for that employee.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within 15% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the principal building,
excluding space used for a private garage or basement.
§ 365-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-43
1:669
§ 365-44. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in Residential Zone R-4:
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as well as parking in the
vicinity of the home occupation, shall not be impaired.
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on site to use a company vehicle during working
hours. No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(f) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential
aspect of the neighborhood.
(g) No activity shall be visible from a property line or street.
(h) There shall be no change in the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling.
(i) Mercantile license is required.
A. Garden apartments.
B. Townhouses and row houses.
C. Housing for the elderly in garden apartment, townhouse or mid-rise
apartment buildings, subject to the following standards:
(1) All units in the development shall be reserved by deed or covenant
for permanent residents of at least 62 years of age, except that the
spouse or one immediate relative, live-in domestic, companion or
nurse aged 18 or older may reside in the unit. In no event shall
more than two permanent residents reside in any one residential
unit designated as housing for the elderly. The deed or covenant
reserving the unit as housing for the elderly shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough Solicitor.
(2) The residential density in developments of housing for the elderly
may be increased to a maximum of 20 units per acre.
(3) The maximum height of a mid-rise apartment constructed as
housing for the elderly shall be 12 stories.
(4) The minimum unit floor areas in Residential Zone R-4 may be
reduced in accordance with the following schedule for units which
qualify as housing for the elderly:
§ 365-43 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-44
1:670
§ 365-45. Standards for multifamily residential developments.
Multifamily residential developments shall adhere to the following
standards:
Unit Type
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency apartment unit 450
One-bedroom apartment unit 600
Two-bedroom apartment unit 750
Townhouse 1,000
D. Day-care centers, community centers and recreation facilities designed
and maintained to meet the social service needs of the residents within
the development.
A. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any group of
single-family attached units and any other group of single-family
attached units. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet between
any multifamily structure and any other structure or property line, and
a minimum distance of 100 feet plus 10 feet for each story exceeding six
stories for any mid-rise structure.271
B. There shall be a minimum setback of 75 feet between any structure and
a state, county or municipal street.
C. All streets, roads, access drives and parking areas shall be paved and
provided with curbing in accordance with the Borough's standards and
specifications.
D. Pedestrian walks shall be provided wherever normal pedestrian traffic
will occur. Pedestrian walks shall be hard-surfaced in accordance with
the Borough's specifications and standards.
E. All developments shall provide for landscaping, including shade trees,
shrubs and lawns. The landscape plan shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Joint Land Use Board. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 1331]
F. All developments shall provide sufficient illumination of streets, roads,
access drives, parking areas, dwelling entrances and pedestrian walks.
The site lighting plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Joint Land Use Board. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
G. Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of one bedroom, complete
kitchen facilities, interior storage areas, bathroom areas, adequate
271. Editor's Note: Original § 205-36B, regarding common open space, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 365-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-45
1:671
§ 365-46. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-47. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-48. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.272
living space and a minimum habitable floor area in accordance with the
following schedule:
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Habitable Floor Area
(square feet)
1 750
2 1,000
3 1,250
4 or more 1,500
H. All dwelling units shall be soundproofed to a limit of at least 45
decibels.
I. Within each development, recreation areas for preschool children and
school-age children shall be provided. Recreation areas for preschool
children shall be fenced. Developments containing four or more acres
shall be provided with open areas for active recreation and surfaced
areas for court games such as basketball, tennis, handball or volleyball.
Developments containing 15 or more acres shall provide open field
areas for group games such as softball, soccer or football.
J. No garage structure apart from such facilities contained within the
dwelling structure or underground shall be permitted in multifamily
developments.
K. In any apartment or in any high-rise apartment constructed under this
article it shall be required that no more than 25% of the units therein
shall include multi-bedroom apartments. [Added 12-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 1104]
272. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-45 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-48
1:672
ARTICLE XI
Regulations for OP-1 Zone
[Added 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699]
§ 365-49. Purpose; compliance required.
§ 365-50. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in Office and Professional Zone OP-1:
§ 365-51. Prohibited uses.
Although it should be understood that any use not complying with the above
specifications is prohibited, the following uses and activities are specifically
prohibited:
§ 365-52. Signs.
See Article XV.
§ 365-53. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-54. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
A. The purpose of Office and Professional Zone OP-1 shall be to create a
zoning district for office and professional use.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
A. Offices and/or professional buildings.
A. Automobile and truck sales and commercial parking lots.
B. Wholesale, storage and warehouse facilities.
C. Lumber and building supply sales and storage.
D. Junkyards.
E. Motels and hotels.
F. Automobile body repair and painting.
G. Gasoline stations.
H. Adult businesses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 365-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-55
1:673
§ 365-55. Buffer strips.
See Article XVI.
§ 365-56. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedure in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.273
273. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-55 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-56
1:674
ARTICLE XII
Regulations for B-1 Zone
§ 365-57. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
§ 365-58. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699]
The following uses shall be permitted in Business Zone B-1:
A. The purpose of Business Zone B-1 shall be to create a zoning district for
business, office, service and professional uses serving the
neighborhood in which they are located.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
A. Retail and business uses of and similar to the following:
(1) Groceries, food stores and bakeries.
(2) Drugstores and pharmacies.
(3) Newspaper, periodical, stationery and tobacco stores.
(4) Banks.
(5) Funeral homes.
(6) Restaurants.
(7) Clothing and shoe stores.
B. Service uses of and similar to the following:
(1) Barber and beauty shops.
(2) Tailor shops, dressmakers and shoe repair.
(3) Dry cleaners and laundries.
(4) Radio and television service.
C. Office and professional uses.
D. Public and institutional uses of and similar to the following:
(1) Schools, day-care centers and related uses.
(2) Public parks and government buildings.
(3) Churches, synagogues, parish houses, convents and related uses.
(4) Clubs and lodges organized for fraternal or social purposes.
§ 365-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-59
1:675
§ 365-59. Conditional uses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 991;
amended 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1158]
Any sale of alcoholic beverage as defined in § 69-2 shall not occur within
1,000 feet of a school, church, community house, children's playground or
amusement area. Distance shall be determined by measuring, in a straight
line, the closest points between the conditional use and the heretofore
mentioned use or the actual walking distance, whichever is greater.
§ 365-60. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699]
Although it should be understood that any use not complying with the above
is prohibited, the following uses and activities are specifically prohibited:
§ 365-61. Signs.
See Article XV.
§ 365-62. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-63. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-64. Buffer strips.
See Article XVI.
§ 365-65. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.274
A. Automobile and truck sales and commercial parking lots.
B. Automobile repair and service stations and auto painting.
C. Wholesale, storage and warehouse facilities.
D. Junkyards.
E. Motels and hotels.
F. Gasoline stations.
G. Adult businesses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 991]
274. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-59 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-65
1:676
ARTICLE XIII
Regulations for B-2 Zone
§ 365-66. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
§ 365-67. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699;
7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 722; 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 723]
The following uses are permitted in Business Zone B-2:
§ 365-68. Conditional uses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 991;
amended 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1158]
Any sale of alcoholic beverage as defined in § 69-2 shall not occur within
1,000 feet of a school, church, community house, children's playground or
amusement area. Distance shall be determined by measuring, in a straight
line, the closest points between the conditional use and the heretofore
mentioned use or the actual walking distance, whichever is greater.
A. The purpose of Business Zone B-2 shall be to create a zoning district for
business, office, service and professional uses that serve the Borough
and its environs. These uses shall include business uses which benefit
from locations along major roads and highways and which provide
goods and services needed by the community in which they are located.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule of Article III and the following regulations.
A. Any use permitted in Business Zone B-1.
B. Hospitals.
C. Animal hospitals.
D. Amusements.
E. Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
F. Automobile repair and service station. Automobile body repair and
painting is permitted, provided the work must be done in an enclosed
building, that workshop areas be a minimum of 75 feet from any
adjoining property, and that no outdoor storage of parts or materials be
permitted. [Amended 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
G. Shopping centers.
H. Carpet, appliance and furniture sales and related uses.
I. Convenience store with sale of gasoline and petroleum products.
[Added 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1110]
§ 365-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-69
1:677
§ 365-69. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699;
7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 723]
Although it should be understood that any use not complying with the above
specifications is prohibited, the following uses and activities are specifically
prohibited:
§ 365-70. Signs.
See Article XV.
§ 365-71. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-72. Off-street parking.
See Article XVII.
§ 365-73. Buffer strips.
See Article XVI.
§ 365-74. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.275
A. Storage and warehouse facilities.
B. Lumber and building supply sales or storage.
C. Junkyards.
D. Automobile and truck sales.
E. Adult businesses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 992]
275. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-69 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-74
1:678
ARTICLE XIV
Regulations for I-1 Zone
§ 365-75. Purpose; compliance with regulations required.
§ 365-76. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 722]
The following uses shall be permitted in Industrial Zone I-1:
A. The purpose of Industrial Zone I-1 shall be to create a zoning district for
light industry which will be compatible with the established residential
character of the Borough and which will contribute to the economic
base of the community by providing employment and a market for the
business and service uses within the community.
B. Within this zone, no lot or building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered to be used in whole or in part unless it complies
with the schedule in Article III and the following regulations.
A. Any business or service use permitted in Business Zone B-1,
Neighborhood Business, and Business Zone B-2, Highway Business.
B. Any manufacturing, processing or industrial use listed below, provided
that the proposed industrial process meets the performance
requirements listed in § 365-79 and does not have inherent
characteristics which are noxious, injurious, offensive or hazardous to
the health, safety or general welfare of the community:
(1) Manufacturing of light machinery comprising any of the following:
carburetors and small machine parts, cash registers, sewing
machines, typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(2) Fabrication of metal products comprising any of the following: baby
carriages, bicycles and other vehicles; metal foil, aluminum, gold,
etc.; metal furniture; musical instruments; sheet-metal products;
and toys.
(3) Fabrication of paper products comprising any of the following:
bags, bookbindings, boxes and packaging materials, office supplies
and toys.
(4) Fabrication of wood products comprising any of the following:
boats, boxes, cabinets and woodworking, furniture and toys.
(5) Food and associated industries comprising any of the following:
bakeries, bottling of food and beverages, food and cereal mixing
and milling, food processing, food sundry manufacturing and ice
cream manufacturing.
(6) Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
(7) Laboratories comprising any of the following: biological, chemical,
dental, pharmaceutical and general research.
§ 365-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-76
1:679
§ 365-77. Conditional uses. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 991;
amended 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1158]
Any sale of alcoholic beverage as defined in § 69-2 shall not occur within
1,000 feet of a school, church, community house, children's playground or
amusement area. Distance shall be determined by measuring, in a straight
line, the closest points between the conditional use and the heretofore
mentioned use or the actual walking distance, whichever is greater.
§ 365-78. Prohibited uses.
Although it shall be understood that any use which is not specifically
permitted in § 365-76 of this article is thereby prohibited, the following uses
and activities are specifically prohibited:
(8) Other permissible industries comprising any of the following: brush
and broom manufacturing; concrete and plastic products; electric
light and power companies; electronic products; farm machinery
sales and services; glass products manufacturing; jewelry
manufacturing, including polishing; laundering and cleaning
establishments; leather goods manufacturing, except curing,
tanning and finishing of hides; motion-picture exchange;
pharmaceutical products manufacturing; printing paper and cloth;
sporting goods manufacturing; textile products manufacturing;
thread and yarn manufacturing; and warehouses and storehouses.
(9) In addition to the above, any industry not inconsistent with the
above and meeting the performance requirements listed herein
may be conducted in this zone. All others are specifically excluded.
C. Wholesale establishments, warehouses and storehouses.
D. Lumber and building materials and other similar storage yards.
E. Railroad maintenance yards, railroad stations and switching yards.
F. Customary and conventional agricultural uses.
G. Motels and hotels.
A. Junkyards and automobile wrecking and disassembly yards.
B. Uses requiring open-air burning.
C. Uses involving the dissemination of noxious odors.
D. Foundries, forges and boiler works.
E. Landfills, chemical waste storage or disposal and bulk storage of
petroleum products, natural gas or chemicals.
§ 365-76 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-79
1:680
§ 365-79. Performance standards.
Any industrial use in the Borough of Lindenwold shall adhere to the
following standards:
§ 365-80. Buffer strips.
See Article XVI.
§ 365-81. Signs.
See Article XV.
§ 365-82. Area and yard requirements.
See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 365-83. Off-street parking and loading areas.
See Article XVII.
A. Dissemination of smoke, dust, odors, fumes and other noxious gases
shall be within the limits of the industrial tolerance standards of the
State Department of Health, Consumer, Environmental and
Occupational Health Service.276
B. Liquid wastes and effluents shall be discharged into an approved
existing sewage treatment plant in accordance with that plant's
regulations, or the industrial use shall treat its own wastes and
effluents in a treatment plant or process which is in compliance with the
state statutes and with the requirements of the State Department of
Health.
C. Precautions against fire hazards, radiation and explosion, proper
handling and storage of materials, structural design and safeguards for
the health of workers shall comply with the state statutes and
requirements of the State Department of Labor and Workforce
Development.277
D. No vibration or glare shall be evident at any point more than 150 feet
from the source of said vibration or light.
E. All permitted uses and accessory activities shall be confined within
completely enclosed buildings, with the exception of off-street parking,
loading and delivery areas, accessory fuel storage, parking for vehicles
and construction equipment, and the outdoor storage of lumber and
building supplies.
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
277. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-84
1:681
§ 365-84. Design review.
Any construction, alteration, modification or change in the use of a building,
structure or lot shall conform to the regulations in the Borough's
Construction Code and shall be subject to the review procedures in the
Borough's Development Review and Land Use Procedures Ordinance.278
278. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 365-84 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-84
1:682
ARTICLE XV
Signs
§ 365-85. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be the creation of a system of regulations
for the review, erection and maintenance of signs within the Borough of
Lindenwold.
§ 365-86. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either
enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame secured or mounted so as to allow
movement of the sign caused by movement in the atmosphere.
BUILDING FACADE and BUILDING FACADE AREA — That portion of any
exterior elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the
parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign which by manual, mechanical or
lighting effects can have its copy or message changed apart from any
reworking of the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A pole, ground or pylon sign not attached to a
building or structure.
FUNCTIONAL SIGN — A directional sign; a sign indicating the location
of rest rooms, telephones, first aid stations and similar public convenience
facilities; and signs located on mechanical dispensing equipment that
identify a product.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY SIGN — Any sign attached to a fixed shelter or roof
extending over a building line which is supported by the building to which
it is attached.
MOBILE SIGN — A sign not permanently attached to the ground or a
building, including any sign mounted on or attached to a vehicle which is
not capable of self-propulsion and registered with the New Jersey Division
of Motor Vehicles.
PARAPET — That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
POLE OR PYLON SIGN — A sign mounted on or supported by or suspended
from a freestanding column, pipe or pole.
PROJECTED SIGN — A sign cast, reflected or shown on a wall, screen or
other surface, whether for a continuous period or not.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on
top of or above the parapet of a building.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, illustration or any other visual
display which is affixed to, painted on or represented directly or indirectly
§ 365-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-86
1:683
upon any building, structure or land and which directs attention to an
organization, business, product, service or individual.
SIGN AREA — The entire space within a sign's continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of all words, devices or emblems but not
passing through or between any adjacent elements. In computing the area
of a sign with two display surfaces, the area of the larger surface shall be
considered the sign area. In computing the area of signs with three or more
display surfaces, the area shall be computed by adding the total surface
area of the sign and dividing by the number of display surfaces utilized by
the sign. The display surface of a sign shall mean all sides and faces of a
sign that can be viewed from one location.
UNDERCANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to the underside of a canopy.
WALL SIGN or FACADE SIGN — A sign attached to or erected against
the wall of a building with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the
building wall.
§ 365-87. General regulations. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No.
741]
The following regulations shall govern signs for all uses within the Borough:
A. All signs shall be subject to the provisions of the Building Construction,
Maintenance and Fire Codes of the Borough.279
B. The text of all signs shall be limited to identification and functional
purposes only. Identification signs shall contain the principal name of
the establishment, firm or proprietor, its address and a brief description
of the principal goods or services offered. The text of a sign may also
include a logogram or symbol of the use which it identifies.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to works of art, statues,
sculpture, fountains, holiday decorations and similar objects which do
not fall within the definition of a sign contained in § 365-86 of this
article.
D. Maintenance. The area surrounding a sign shall be kept clean, free of
litter and landscaped. Whenever a sign shall become structurally
unsound or a hazard to the public or a building, the Building Inspector
shall order that the sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be
complied with within 10 days of the receipt thereof by the person
owning or using the sign or by the owner of the building or premises on
which such unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
E. No sign except functional signs shall be located within 20 feet of the
existing or proposed right-of-way of any public road or street.
F. No sign shall exceed 20 feet in height.
279. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 160, Fire Prevention; and
Ch. 240, Property Maintenance Code.
§ 365-86 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-87
1:684
§ 365-88. Permitted signs.
The following signs shall be permitted within the Borough of Lindenwold in
accordance with the provisions of this article:
G. No wall sign shall extend beyond three feet of the building facade on
which it is mounted.
H. All signs shall conform to the provisions of Title 27 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated.
I. No sign shall be erected or placed in a position which will cause danger
to traffic on a street or within a parking lot by limiting the vision of
drivers or obstructing the flow of traffic.
J. Signs advertising or identifying a business or use no longer in existence
or a product no longer available shall be promptly removed.
K. No sign shall be erected containing information on it which states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted
under the provisions of this chapter as it applies to the property on
which the sign is located.
A. Signs erected by governmental agencies; court or public notices; traffic
control devices approved or installed by the appropriate governmental
agencies; and flags, emblems and insignias of governmental and
religious institutions.
B. One nonilluminated or white-light sign, not exceeding nine inches by 18
inches, and either freestanding or affixed to a building, which:
(1) Contains a message of caution, pertains to trespassing, identifies a
driveway or bears a related cautionary text; or
(2) Identifies the name and occupation of the practitioner of a
profession or trade.
C. One nonilluminated or white-lighted nonflashing sign for schools,
churches, hospitals, clubs, lodges or other similar use, provided that
the size of any one side of the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
When a building or lot fronts on more than one street, an additional sign
may be erected which meets the requirements of this subsection.
D. One nonilluminated real estate sign advertising the sale or rental of a
building or lot, provided such sign does not exceed 12 square feet.
When a building or lot fronts on more than one street, an additional sign
may be erected which meets the requirements of this subsection.
E. One nonilluminated real estate sign bearing the word "sold" or "rented"
with the name of the person or firm effecting the sale or rental,
provided that such sign does not exceed 12 square feet.
§ 365-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-88
1:685
§ 365-89. Prohibited signs.
Although it should be understood that any sign not complying with the
provisions of this article is prohibited, the following types of sign are
specifically prohibited:
F. One nonilluminated sign bearing the name and profession or trade for
each person or firm performing construction or repair work on the
premises, provided that such individual signs do not exceed 12 square
feet in area and are promptly removed upon completion of the work.
G. For business, office, commercial/industrial and institutional uses:
functional signs as defined in § 365-86, provided that no functional sign
shall exceed 12 square feet in sign area and that no functional sign shall
contain advertising.
H. For business, office, commercial, institutional and industrial uses: one
wall sign on each side of a building which faces an approved public
street, provided that the sign area does not exceed 10% of the building
facade area, as defined in § 365-86, on which it is mounted.
I. For business, office, commercial and industrial uses: one freestanding
sign, provided that the sign area does not exceed 10% of the building
facade area, as defined in § 365-86, which it adjoins, or a maximum sign
area of 200 square feet. No shopping center, office complex or other
business or industrial development or property shall have more than
one freestanding sign.
J. For shopping centers or strip stores: one undercanopy sign for each
business use, provided that the dimensions of the sign shall not exceed
one foot in width or four feet in length.
K. For movie theaters, theaters and sports areas: those signs permitted by
Subsections H and I above plus one changeable-copy sign with a
maximum sign area of 100 square feet.
L. Temporary signs announcing or advertising any political, educational,
charitable, civic, professional, religious or like campaign or event for a
consecutive period not to exceed 60 days in any calendar year, provided
that they do not exceed 50 square feet in size.
M. Signs identifying a residential area or apartment complex, provided
that not more than one sign shall be located at each principal entrance
to the project, not more than three signs shall be permitted for any one
project, and the sign shall contain only the name of the development, a
logogram or symbol, the address, and the phone number, and provided
that its size not exceed 50 square feet in sign area. [Amended
4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 1092]
A. Flashing, moving or apparently moving signs, except the changeablecopy
signs permitted by § 365-88 and time-and-temperature signs.
§ 365-88 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-89
1:686
§ 365-90. Nonconforming signs.
All signs which do not conform to the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the provisions of Article XXI, Nonconforming Uses and
Buildings.280
B. Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause radio or
television interference.
C. Any series of two or more signs or sign units placed in a line along a
roadway or in similar fashion, all carrying a single message, part of
which is contained on each sign.
D. Any sign which in any way simulates official, directional or warning
signs erected or maintained by the federal or any state, county or local
government or by any railroad or public utility or similar agency
concerned with the protection of the public health or safety.
E. Any sign located on a lot other than the lot occupied by the use, event or
product which the sign advertises. All signs within the Borough shall be
limited to on-premises signs only.
F. Any sign attached to or painted on trees, fences, utility poles, rocks,
curbs, walls, lamps, hydrants, benches or bridges.
G. Banner signs, as defined in § 365-86.
H. Mobile signs, as defined in § 365-86.
I. Projected signs, as defined in § 365-86.
J. Roof signs, as defined in § 365-86.
280. Editor's Note: Original § 205-71, Design and site location review, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 738.
§ 365-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-90
1:687

ARTICLE XVI
Buffer Strips
§ 365-91. Applicability. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 699;
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
All lots or parts of lots in the following zones which are improved with a
predominately nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent
to a residential zone shall be screened from such residential zone by
landscaped buffer strips or such other screening along said side or rear
lines as may be approved by the Joint Land Use Board:
OP-1 Office and Professional
B-1 Neighborhood Business
B-2 Highway Business
I-1 Light Industrial
§ 365-92. General provisions.
A. Within required buffer areas, a solid and continuous landscape screen
shall be planted and maintained. Said landscaping shall consist of
massed evergreen or a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees
at least five feet in height so as to continually restrict a clear view
beyond said buffer strip.
B. The required height of the buffer strip shall be measured in relation to
the elevation of the edge of the adjacent area to be screened. In cases
where the ground elevation of the location at which the screen is to be
planted is less than the elevation of the edge of the adjacent area, the
required height of the screen shall be increased in an amount equal to
said difference in elevation. In the event that the ground elevation of
the location at which the screen is to be planted is greater than that at
the edge of the adjacent area, the required height of the screen may be
reduced in an amount equal to said difference in elevation, provided
that in no case shall the required height be reduced more than two feet.
C. The entire buffer strip shall be at least 25 feet in width and shall be
graded and planted with grass or sod and such other shrubbery or trees
as may desired by the owner. The entire area shall be attractively
maintained and kept clean of all debris and rubbish. [Amended
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1217]
D. In the event that any of the plantings in accordance with the above
requirements do not live, they shall be replaced within one year.
E. The certificate of occupancy for the use of the premises shall not be
issued until such time as the landscaping requirements, buffer strips
and/or other approved dividers as required by this chapter and as
approved by the Joint Land Use Board are actually installed in full
compliance herewith or, in the event that the season is not appropriate,
§ 365-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-92
1:689
a performance guaranty of 125% of the cost, as estimated by the
Borough Engineer, has been deposited with the Borough Building
Inspector. Such guaranty shall be in the form of cash, and the depositor
shall agree, in making the deposit, that if performance is not completed
within the time specified by the Building Inspector on the receipt
delivered to the depositor, the Borough may complete the
requirements, charging the cost against the deposit; otherwise, the
deposit shall be returned in full after the satisfactory completion of the
work. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
F. In required buffer areas where a natural buffer strip is considered by
the Joint Land Use Board to be impracticable or inappropriate, an
opaque fence may be substituted in whole or in part for a natural buffer,
provided that its specifications are approved by the Joint Land Use
Board. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
§ 365-92 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-92
1:690
ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 365-93. General regulations and standards.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as specified in this article
for any development, structure or use in the Borough of Lindenwold. In
determining whether sufficient spaces have been provided,
consideration shall be given to the necessity of providing areas for
pedestrian use, emergency vehicles, driveways, loading areas, turning
movements and landscaping within the parking area. A parking area
shall be required space in the lot on which it is situated and shall not be
encroached upon or reduced in any way.
B. Paving. [Amended 1-10-1990 by Ord. No. 839]
(1) All parking spaces, except those for single-family detached
dwellings, shall be paved in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Borough. Paved areas shall be surfaced with a
durable, permanent and dustless surface and provided with
drainage facilities subject to review and approval of the Joint Land
Use Board and Engineer. All spaces should be clearly marked and
traffic control markings shall be included if required. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
(2) Single-family dwellings shall be provided with asphalt or concrete
driveways a minimum of nine feet wide. The driveway shall be
constructed from the back of the curbline or street line, where no
curb is present, to the garage or building line, where no garage is
present.
(3) Asphalt driveways shall be five inches thick consisting of two
inches of FABC Mix I-5 on three inches of bituminous stabilized
base course Mix I-2 on a well-compacted subbase or an equivalent
pavement section.
(4) Concrete driveways shall be New Jersey Department of
Transportation Class B concrete, four inches thick on six inches of
dense-graded aggregate or an equivalent pavement section.
(5) The provisions of this Subsection B shall be applicable to all new
driveways and/or to the repair or reconstruction of any existing
driveways.
C. None of the off-street parking facilities as required in this chapter shall
be required for any existing building or use not now conforming to
these requirements unless said building or use shall be enlarged, in
which case the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
D. All parking areas and access drives serving parking areas for any use
except a single-family dwelling shall be adequately illuminated during
the hours between sunset and sunrise. After 10:00 p.m., business uses
§ 365-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-93
1:691
may reduce this lighting to a minimum of 40% of the lights within the
parking area.
E. Lights within parking areas shall be shielded to prevent glare, the
illumination of adjoining residential uses and traffic hazards on
adjoining streets.
F. Off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the
established curbline or shoulder of any street. On roads designated for
widening by the Borough, county or state, the parking area shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from the future curbline.
G. Where there is a change in the number of employees, visitors, use or
size of any unit used in § 365-94 to calculate parking requirements and
that change creates a need to increase the required off-street parking
as required by this chapter, the developer, owner or proprietor of that
use shall provide the additional off-street parking facilities within a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months from the date on
which the change generating the need for added parking occurs.
H. In the case of mixed uses, the parking facilities required shall be the
sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed
separately in accordance with § 365-94. Parking facilities for one use
shall not be considered as providing the required parking facilities for
any other use.
I. Stall and driveway dimensions. [Amended 12-12-2001 by Ord. No.
1104]
(1) The following list of stall and driveway dimensions shall be adhered
to:
Angle of
Parking
Stall
Width
(feet)
Stall Depth
Measured at
Right Angle
to Front
Bumper
(feet)
Driveway
One-Way
(feet)
Driveway
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 9 18 18 24
60° 9 18 18 One-way only
45° 9 18 13 One-way only
30° 9 18 12 One-way only
Parallel 9 22 12 20
(2) In parking areas containing 20 or more spaces, only ninety-degree
parking shall be permitted unless, because of the exceptional
narrowness, shape or topographic conditions of the lot, it is the
determination of the Joint Land Use Board that another stall and
§ 365-93 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-93
1:692
driveway alignment should be utilized. [Amended 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 1331]
(3) Stall widths for supermarkets, home improvement stores and
similar uses must be 10 feet in width.
(4) Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an additional two feet
of sidewalk width is provided to accommodate such overhang.
(5) One-way drive aisles not adjacent to parking spaces must be a
minimum of 15 feet wide. Two-way drive aisles not adjacent to
parking spaces must be a minimum of 22 feet wide.
(6) Nonresidential parking areas and driveways shall be a minimum of
15 feet from a residential property and five feet from a
nonresidential property line.
J. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent the maneuvering
of vehicles within any portion of an entrance driveway or driveway lane
that is within 20 feet of the right-of-way lane of the street which
provides ingress and egress.
K. Intersections between driveways, streets and access drives in parking
areas shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case less
than 60°.
L. A curb, bumper block or similar abutment shall be installed along the
perimeter of all parking areas to prevent erosion, damage to
landscaped areas and encroachments on sidewalks, streets, driveways
or alleys. Retaining walls shall be constructed where needed to prevent
deterioration of the parking surface and erosion.
M. All parking areas shall be provided with a drainage system subject to
the review of the Joint Land Use Board and Borough Engineer.
[Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
N. Off-street loading and delivery areas.
(1) Off-street loading and delivery areas shall be required for any use
or activity which creates a need for the loading or delivery of goods
or materials. Loading and delivery areas shall not be located in any
area designated as required to meet the off-street parking
requirements of this chapter and shall not be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner. In addition, all loading and delivery areas
shall be paved in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the Borough and shall be surfaced with a durable, permanent
and dustless surface and provided with drainage subject to the
review and approval of the Joint Land Use Board and Borough
Engineer. All loading areas shall be clearly marked and traffic
control markings shall be included if required. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
§ 365-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-93
1:693
§ 365-94. Parking schedule.
All uses permitted by this chapter or permitted within the Borough in any
zone shall provide, as a minimum, the number of off-street parking spaces
specified in the following schedule:
(2) A minimum of off-street loading and delivery areas shall be
provided for each development as specified in the following
schedule:
(a) For retail and business uses: one loading and delivery area not
less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14 feet in
height.
(b) For any industrial use: one loading and delivery area not less
than 14 feet in width, 55 feet in length and 14 feet in height for
any use of 25,000 square feet or less, plus one additional
loading and delivery area having the dimensions listed in this
subsection for each additional 50,000 square feet or fraction
thereof.
A. For one-family and two-family dwellings: one parking space per
dwelling unit.
B. For townhouses: two parking spaces per unit; for garden apartments,
mid-rise apartments and high-rise apartments: 1.8 parking spaces per
unit.
C. For motels and hotels: one parking space for each room or suite, plus
one additional space for the owner or manager, plus additional space as
required by this section for any accessory or supplementary use,
including restaurants, bars, ballrooms and retail areas.
D. For private clubs or lodges: one space for every three members, plus
one additional space for each two employees of the club or lodge.
E. For hospitals, sanatoriums and convalescent homes: one parking space
for each three patient beds (exclusive of bassinets), plus one additional
space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each two
employees, including nurses. Loading and unloading space for hospital
ambulances and similar vehicles is not included in the spaces required
herein.
F. For medical or dental clinics: one parking space per doctor engaged at
the clinic, plus one additional space for every two employees, plus two
additional spaces for each medical examination room or dental chair or
combination thereof.
G. For mortuaries or funeral parlors: one parking space for each "official"
vehicle, plus one space for each family resident on the premises, plus
one additional space for each two employees (other than residents on
the premises), plus one space for each 30 square feet of floor area in the
§ 365-93 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-94
1:694
viewing rooms, slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service
rooms.
H. For bowling alleys: four parking spaces for each alley, plus additional
spaces equal in number to at least 60% of the number of employees on
all shifts.
I. For theaters: one parking space for each four seats, plus additional
spaces equal in number to at least 50% of the number of employees at
the theater.
J. For community centers, libraries, museums, convention halls,
gymnasiums, skating rinks and civic organizations: parking spaces
equal in number to at least 60% of the number of employees, plus one
parking space for every five persons who may legally be admitted to the
building at one time under the state fire prevention laws.
K. For auditoriums, stadiums, sports arenas or similar uses: one parking
space for each four seats, plus additional spaces equal in number to at
least 50% of the number of employees thereof. Where individual seats
are not provided, each 20 inches of benches or other similar seating
shall be considered as one seat for the purposes of determining the
required number of parking spaces.
L. For churches: one parking space for each four seats, plus one additional
space for each church official resident on the premises, plus additional
spaces equal in number to at least 50% of the number of permanent
employees thereof. Where individual seats are not provided, each 20
inches of benches or other similar seating shall be considered as one
seat for the purposes of determining the required number of parking
spaces.
M. For all schools: one parking space for each two employees, including
teachers and administrators, plus off-street space for the safe and
convenient loading and unloading of students, plus additional facilities
for student parking at the high school level and above at the ratio of one
space for every 50 students.
N. For restaurants, nightclubs, tearooms, lunch counters and the like: one
off-street parking space for each three seats and one off-street parking
space for each two employees on the shift of greatest employment.
O. For roadside stands, filling stations, repair shops or other roadside
service establishments: one parking space for each two employees, plus
additional spaces for customers-motorists in the ratio of one space for
every 50 linear feet of road frontage.
P. For industrial or manufacturing establishments: one parking space for
every two employees (based upon the maximum number employed at
any one time), plus one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area in the buildings for use by visitors to the building or
buildings.
§ 365-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-94
1:695
Q. For office, professional or public buildings: one parking space for each
250 square feet of gross floor area.
R. For general business, commercial and personal service establishments
not specifically covered in this section: one space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area.
S. For shopping centers and strip stores: 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
T. For automobile dealerships, wholesale stores, furniture stores, carpet
stores and similar uses: one space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one space for each employee on the maximum shift.
U. For any use not listed on this schedule, the developer shall submit an
estimate of the parking requirements generated by his use. This
estimate shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, traffic expert,
planner or architect and shall refer to one or more standards or studies
identifying the parking demand for his use. The calculations in this
estimate shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough
Engineer or Planner.
§ 365-94 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-94
1:696
ARTICLE XVIII
Fences
[Added 8-15-1983 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 365-95. Applicability.
All fences erected in the Borough of Lindenwold shall be subject to the
following requirements.
§ 365-96. Permit required; definitions; exception; permit
application.
§ 365-97. Fee.283
Upon application, prior to the issuance of a permit, there shall be paid to
the Borough of Lindenwold a fee in the amount prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-13.
§ 365-98. Height restrictions.
No fence erected on or around a residential lot or parcel of land shall exceed
six feet in height. Preconstructed fences must be installed as close to the
ground as possible. The total height of the fence shall not include any slight
undulation of the ground, provided that 80% of the fence does not exceed
the maximum height of six feet.
A. A fence permit issued by the Construction Official shall be required
prior to the erection of any fence, except a living fence, in the
Borough.281
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — Includes walls not part of other structures but shall not
include temporary planting enclosures intended for weather protection.
C. Except where specifically provided herein, none of the restrictions or
provisions herein shall apply to living fences.
D. The application shall include a copy of a survey, a statement as to the
height and location of the fence, the method to be employed in its
support and the materials used in its construction. In addition, the
applicant shall advise the Construction Official as to the date on which
said fence is to be constructed in order to provide for the inspection
thereof.282
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-98
1:697
§ 365-99. Fences on or near property lines.
A. Height regulation, 30 inches. At the intersection of two or more streets,
no hedge, fence or wall other than a single post or tree not exceeding
one square foot in cross section which is higher than 30 inches above
curb level nor any obstruction to vision shall be permitted in the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining
points each 20 feet distant from said intersection along said street lines.
In the event that the county regulations impose a greater requirement
where frontage is upon a county road, such greater requirement shall
prevail.
B. Height regulation, six feet. No fence or wall hereafter erected, altered
or reconstructed in any residential zone or on lots in any other zones on
which residential buildings are erected shall exceed six feet in height
above the adjacent ground level.
C. Height regulation, eight feet. No fence or wall hereafter erected,
altered or reconstructed in Business Zones B-1 and B-2 shall exceed a
height of eight feet above ground level.
D. Height regulation, 10 feet. No fence or wall hereafter erected, altered
or reconstructed in Industrial Zone I-1 shall exceed a height of 10 feet
above ground level.
E. Barbed-wire fences.
(1) Barbed-wire fences eight feet in height shall be permitted within
the commercial and industrial districts of the Borough upon
issuance of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Officer, where it
can be demonstrated that:
(a) The fences are needed to prevent entry into a hazardous area.
(b) The fences are needed to secure an area where materials,
equipment and/or machinery is stored.
(c) In such other situations where the Zoning Officer determines
that there are reasons justifying the construction of barbedwire
fencing.
(2) Where such fences are permitted, the fact that they are barbed
wire shall be clearly indicated on the fence at intervals of not more
than 75 feet.284
A. Fences shall not be erected on the property line without the approval of
the adjacent property owner submitted in writing with the application
for a fence permit, and in no event shall a fence extend beyond a
property line.
284. Editor's Note: Original § 205-75.5, Back-to-back fences, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 721.
§ 365-98 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-99
1:698
§ 365-100. Fences in front yards.
No fence shall be erected in a front yard of any lot in a residential district
or along a public right-of-way unless the fence is not more than 50% solid
and is not more than four feet in height.
§ 365-101. Prohibited types of fences.
The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
short-pointed fences, canvas fences, cloth fences or electrically charged
fences, poultry netting, temporary fences such as snow fences, expansible
fences and collapsible fences, except during construction on such property.
§ 365-102. Decorative side to face adjacent property; approval
required for multiple colors.
§ 365-103. Living fences.
Living fences or screens shall be planted no closer than three feet to the
property line and shall not encroach over a sidewalk or beyond a property
line. Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed condition.
§ 365-104. Effect on natural drainage.
Fences shall be erected in a manner as to permit the flow of natural
drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to
create ponding.
B. All fences must be erected six inches within the property lines, and no
fences shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
C. In zones where semidetached, twins or duplexes are permitted,
building setback lines shall govern locations of solid fences and shall
not exceed a height of four feet. In the event that there are building unit
separations of either duplex or multifamily units, the distance between
building-to-building requirements shall apply to solid fences, but in no
case shall a solid fence be permitted to extend forward of the house or
dwelling unit into or encroach upon the front yard setback
requirements.
A. All fences shall be erected with the most pleasant or decorative side
facing the adjacent lot or property and the structural side toward the
interior of the property, unless such structural posts or supports are an
integral part of the decorative design of the fence.
B. No fence shall be multicolored unless the colors are approved by the
Construction Official and specifically on the zoning permit.285
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-105
1:699
§ 365-105. Waiver of height restrictions.286
Fences higher than six feet, privacy fences, in the rear or side yards, may
be permitted in a residential district by the Construction Official. However,
such a fence will be considered a structure requiring a building permit. For
fences required around a swimming pool, see § 398-19 in the Borough of
Lindenwold Code.
§ 365-106. Maintenance.287
Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition and
in accordance with the approved plan on file with the Construction Official.
§ 365-107. Notification of defective condition.288
If the Construction Official, upon inspection, determines that any fence or
wall or portion of any fence or wall is not being maintained in a safe, sound,
upright condition, he shall notify the owner of such fence, in writing, of
his findings and order such fence or wall or portion of such fence or wall
repaired or removed within 30 days of the date of the written notice. Each
day that the person fails to obey the order referred to above shall constitute
a separate violation of this order.
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-105 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-107
1:700
ARTICLE XIX
Outdoor Sheds and Storage Facilities; Dish-Type Antennas
[Added 8-15-1983 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 365-108. Distance from property line; height restriction.289
No outdoor shed or storage facility may be erected closer than five feet to
any property line, nor may such structure exceed 12 feet in height.
§ 365-109. Fee. [Added 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 640290]
Upon application prior to the issuance of a permit, there shall be paid to the
Borough of Lindenwold, through the office of the Construction Official, a fee
for an outdoor shed or storage facility as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees,
Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-45.
§ 365-110. Dish-type antennas. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 692;
amended 3-5-1986 by Ord. No. 708]
A. Definition of dish antennas. A "dish-type antenna" is defined as a saucer
or circular-shaped antenna functioning as an antenna for reception of
television programming. Such objects are also known as "satellite
dishes," "satellite earth stations" and "home video earth stations."
B. Regulating dish-type antennas. Dish-type antennas shall be regulated in
the Borough of Lindenwold in accordance with this section.
C. Location. A property owner in the Borough of Lindenwold is permitted
to install and/or erect one dish-type antenna on such owner's property.
The dish-type antenna should be installed at ground level in the rear
yard of the property. If, however, installation of the dish antenna in the
rear yard at ground level would result in interference with reasonable
satellite television reception, then installation of the dish-type antenna
on the side yard would be permitted. If installation in the side yard still
produces interference with reasonable satellite television reception,
then the satellite may be mounted on the roof. Mounting on the rear
portion of the roof must first be explored. Only if rear mounting cannot
be done due to the interference with reasonable satellite television
reception signal will front roof mounting be permitted. The dish-type
antenna, its foundation pad and supportive structure must be a
minimum of 10 feet from the property line, provided that said
placement does not interfere with reasonable satellite television
reception. If said placement does result in interference with reasonable
satellite television reception, then the owner will be permitted to erect
the antenna, its foundation and supporting structure as close to the
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-110
1:701
property line as may be necessary to achieve reasonable satellite
television reception. [Amended 1-10-1990 by Ord. No. 838]
D. Height and area. The dish-type antenna, its foundation pad and
supportive structure may not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet
above ground level and may not exceed a maximum of 12 feet of
antenna surface area.
E. Construction permit. A construction permit must be obtained before the
installation or erection of a dish antenna.
§ 365-110 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-110
1:702
ARTICLE XX
Critical and Sensitive Areas
[Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1226]
§ 365-111. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the reasonable control of
construction in areas containing critical or sensitive environmental
features, where improper construction would result in a negative or
irreversible impact on the environment. Development control shall be by
means of special construction standards intended to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the public by minimizing adverse
environmental impact.
§ 365-112. Critical area requirements.
Lands in which any development will have an adverse impact on the
environment that cannot be mitigated shall be deemed critical and shall be
identified by the following characteristics:
§ 365-113. Construction limitations in critical areas.
A. Property in or on state open waters.
B. Freshwater wetlands.
C. Surface waters and floodways as delineated on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps of the Borough of Lindenwold prepared by FEMA.
Waterways with less than 50 acres of contributory drainage area to the
downstream-most point of the project site shall not be deemed to have a
critical floodway.
D. Critical steep slopes greater than or equal to 30%. Slopes with a
continuous vertical drop of less than four feet shall not be deemed
critical steep slopes for the purpose of this section.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development, of this Code, no building or structure shall be erected,
constructed or enlarged above or below ground level nor shall any soil
or vegetation be disturbed within a critical area, except as permitted in
this article.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or enlarged
above or below ground level within 50 feet of the top of a critical steep
slope as defined above. The Board may reduce the required distance
based upon a finding by the Municipal Engineer that design adequately
provides preservation of the slope.
C. A municipal construction permit shall be required prior to soil or
vegetative disturbance on or within 50 feet of the top of a critical steep
slope.
§ 365-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-114
1:703
§ 365-114. Permitted construction in critical areas.
The following may be permitted by the Board in critical areas:
§ 365-115. Considerations for development in critical areas.
In considering construction in critical areas the following standards will
apply:
A. Dams, culverts, bridges or other drainage structures for the control of
floodwaters, provided that all approvals of applicable agencies are
obtained and that the Board finds that the facilities are designed in such
manner so as not to result in unnecessary disturbance and the
destruction of the natural character of the area.
B. Natural open spaces, woodland preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and
arboretums.
C. Utility mains, sewage pumping or metering stations and electrical
transmission lines and appurtenances.
D. Reforestation in accordance with recognized conservation practices
and applicable agency approvals.
E. Recreation uses such as parks, picnic groves, golf courses and hunting
clubs.
F. Recreation uses related to water, such as swimming, boating, canoeing,
and fishing.
G. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above, but
excluding buildings and on-site sewage disposal or treatment facilities.
A. A complete site plan showing the location, grading, construction layout
and details, phasing, and method of construction shall be provided.291
B. An environmental impact statement (EIS) explaining the need for the
facility and the short- and long-range impacts on the environment shall
be provided.292
C. The proposed method of construction and any alternate methods
customary for the development proposed shall be provided.293
D. Unless an EIS is waived by the Board, endangered or threatened plants
and wildlife shall not be harmed.
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-114 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-115
1:704
§ 365-116. Sensitive area requirements.
Sensitive areas are lands wherein additional caution is needed for
development to take place, in order to protect against substantial detriment
E. The cost of providing and maintaining public facilities and services to
those areas where critical steep slopes may be disturbed shall not be
substantially increased as a result of such disturbance.
F. Critical steep slopes. The following standards shall apply to
construction in critical steep slope areas:
(1) The removal of trees within a critical steep slope shall be
prohibited except in accordance with a plan approved by the
Municipal Engineer and all applicable agencies. If a variance is
requested from the prohibition of removal of trees within a critical
steep slope, the Board may require replanting of trees or other
acceptable landscape materials in a ratio of one plant for every two
removed in order to mitigate the disturbance.
(2) The disturbance resulting from the development of any critical
steep slope shall be revegetated to the satisfaction of the Board and
the Board's professionals. The landscaping should provide longterm
stabilization, use vegetation native to Lindenwold and require
low maintenance.
(3) The development within a critical steep slope shall require the
disturbed areas to be graded and stabilized in accordance with
New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39
et seq., immediately following construction, even if the disturbance
is less than 5,000 square feet.294
(4) The flow of stormwater runoff above or upon the critical steep slope
shall be disbursed, conveyed or otherwise controlled in a manner
which will avert the concentration of surface flows. The applicant
shall demonstrate that there will not be a substantial increase in
the peak rate of runoff from the two-, ten- or one-hundred-year
storm from the proposed development onto any adjacent property,
even if the development does not meet the definition of "major
development" under the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
A substantial increase will be considered any flow greater than one
cubic foot per second (cfs) from a design storm event.295
(5) Driveways shall be prohibited on critical steep slopes unless it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that no feasible
alternative exists, in which case the driveway shall be graded to a
maximum of 10%.
294. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-116
1:705
to the environment. Development control shall be by means of special
performance standards intended to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the public by minimizing adverse environmental impact.
Sensitive areas shall be identified by the following characteristics:
§ 365-117. Construction limitations in sensitive steep slope areas.
§ 365-118. Requirements for construction in sensitive areas.
In considering construction in sensitive areas the following standards will
apply:
A. Sensitive steep slopes. Where the gradient is greater than or equal to
15% but less than 30%. Slopes with a continuous vertical drop of less
than five feet shall not be deemed sensitive steep slopes for the purpose
of this section.
B. Transition areas. Pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.).
C. Special flood hazard areas. As designated (Zones A and B) on the
current Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Borough of Lindenwold.
D. Flood hazard areas. But excluding the floodway of a stream or
waterway as delineated or approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
E. Nondelineated streams and waterways. With less than 50 acres of
contributory drainage area.
F. Shallow water table. Where the depth to the seasonal high-water table
is less than four feet below the surface of the ground.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development, of this Code, no building or structure shall be erected,
constructed or enlarged above or below ground level nor shall any soil
or vegetation be disturbed within a sensitive steep slope area, except as
permitted in this article.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or enlarged
above or below ground level within 35 feet of the top of a sensitive steep
slope as defined above. The Board may reduce the required distance
based upon a finding by the Municipal Engineer that the design
adequately provides for the safety of the structure as well as the
preservation of the slope.
C. Structures may be permitted in aquifer outcrop and shallow water
tables, provided that they comply with the requirements listed below.
A. A complete site plan showing the location, grading, construction layout
and details, phasing, and method of construction shall be provided.296
§ 365-116 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-118
1:706
B. The proposed method of construction and any alternate methods
customary for the development proposed shall be provided.297
C. Sensitive steep slopes. The following standards shall apply to
construction in sensitive steep slope areas:
(1) The removal of trees and the disturbance of soil shall be prohibited
except in accordance with a plan approved by the Municipal
Engineer and all applicable agencies.
(2) Disturbed areas shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with
New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act immediately
following construction, even if the disturbance is less than 5,000
square feet.
(3) The flow of stormwater runoff above or upon the slope shall be
disbursed, conveyed or otherwise controlled in a manner which will
avert the concentration of surface flows. The applicant shall
demonstrate that there will not be a substantial increase in the
peak rate of runoff from the two-, ten- or one-hundred-year storm
from the proposed development onto any adjacent property, even if
the development does not meet the definition of "major
development" under the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
A substantial increase will be considered any flow greater than one
cubic foot per second (cfs) from a design storm event.298
(4) Driveways shall be prohibited on sensitive steep slopes unless it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that no feasible
alternative exists, in which case the driveway shall be graded to a
maximum of 10%.
D. Transition areas. Construction may be permitted in New Jersey
freshwater transition areas to the extent allowed by, and in accordance
with, the standards of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
E. Nondelineated streams. Construction shall not be permitted to alter,
disrupt or otherwise impede the flow of water in a nondelineated
waterway except in accordance with a plan approved by the Municipal
Engineer, applicable municipal board, and any agency having
jurisdiction.
F. Shallow water table.
(1) Basements and cellars shall be prohibited in land containing a
shallow water table unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-118
1:707
the Municipal Engineer and Board that it will not significantly
affect the water table or result in seepage through or excessive
pressure on the foundation wall.
(2) Stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be designed so as
not to significantly affect nor be affected by the shallow water
table. All stormwater management facilities and best management
practices shall be designed in accordance with the New Jersey Best
Management Practices design standards.
(3) Filling to accommodate a septic system above the water table, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. (amendments to P.L.
1954, c. 199), may be permitted only where it is demonstrated that
the grading will not adversely affect runoff from the site or
otherwise negatively impact properties.
(4) Underdrain systems may be required to intercept and convey water
away from streets, parking areas and structures.
§ 365-118 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-118
1:708
ARTICLE XXI
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§ 365-119. Continuation of use.
The lawful use of a building or land or any structure existing at the effective
date of this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, and such use may be continued throughout
the building.
§ 365-120. Reversion of use prohibited.
Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or land has been changed to a
use of a more restricted classification or to a conforming use, such use shall
not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted classification.
§ 365-121. Restoration of use or building.
A nonconforming use or building which is partially destroyed by fire,
explosion, flood or other destructive force may be continued as the same
nonconforming use, provided that the building reconstruction shall be
completed within one year from the date when the building was destroyed
or condemned.
§ 365-122. Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use of a building or land is voluntarily abandoned and
ceases for a continuous period of six months or more, the subsequent use of
such building or land shall be, thereafter, a conforming use in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 365-123. Test of abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned:
§ 365-124. Lots. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
In case of a lot where the deed is recorded in the Register of Deeds' office
or laid out on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of Lindenwold prior to the
effective date of this chapter, having an area less than hereinafter required
or of such irregular shape that the owner would have difficulty in providing
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent;
B. When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not
been replaced by similar equipment within six months, unless other
facts show intention to resume the nonconforming use;
C. When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or
D. When it has been changed to another use by the governing body.
§ 365-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-124
1:709
the required side and rear yard setbacks for the zone in which such lot
is situated, the Joint Land Use Board may modify the requirements of this
chapter in accordance with its power as conferred by law and permit a
building or structure to be built thereon.
§ 365-125. Signs.
Any sign, billboard or advertising device existing prior to the effective date
of this chapter that does not conform in use, type, location, height or size
to the regulations of the district in which it is located may be maintained
or repaired; however, such sign, billboard or advertising device shall not be
replaced.
§ 365-126. Certificate of nonconforming use.
§ 365-127. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing
therein.
§ 365-128. Completion of structures.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or intended use of a building for which a building permit
has heretofore been issued and the construction of which shall have been
diligently prosecuted within six months of the date of such permit and the
entire building completed according to such plans as filed within 15 months
from the effective date of this chapter.
A. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall
issue a certificate of nonconforming use to all owners of property the
use of which does not conform to the provisions of the use zone in which
the property is located.
B. In accordance with the provisions of this section, no use of land,
buildings or structures shall be made other than that specified on the
certificate of nonconforming use unless the said use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of the use zone in which the property is
located.
C. A copy of each certificate of nonconforming use shall be filed with the
office of the Borough Clerk. No permit or license shall be issued to any
property for which a certificate of nonconforming use has been issued
until said permit or license has been approved by the governing body.
§ 365-124 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-128
1:710
ARTICLE XXII
Amendments
§ 365-129. Amendment procedure. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 1331]
§ 365-130. Protests against amendments.300
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning
ordinance may be filed with the Municipal Clerk, signed by the owners
of 20% or more of the area either: 1) of the lots or land included in
such proposed change; or 2) of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all
directions therefrom inclusive of street space, whether within or without
the municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective
following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all
the members of the governing body of the municipality.
A. The regulations and restrictions herein may be amended, changed,
modified or repealed, and the boundaries or districts may be changed
by ordinance, but no amendment or change shall become effective
unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change shall first
have been submitted to the Joint Land Use Board for approval,
disapproval or suggestions.
B. The Joint Land Use Board shall have 35 days for considering and
rendering a report to the governing body. In the case of an unfavorable
report by the Joint Land Use Board, such amendment shall not become
effective except by a favorable vote of 2/3 of the governing body.299
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-130
1:711

ARTICLE XXIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 365-131. Enforcement. [Amended 3-5-1986 by Ord. No. 709301]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 365-132. Duties of Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to ascertain whether the
proposed building, alteration or condition complies with the provisions
of this chapter; to issue permits only for such construction, alteration,
additions or uses as are in accordance with the provisions and requirements
of this chapter; to keep a record of all applications for permits and a record
of all permits issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved; to
file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted; to prepare a monthly
report for the Mayor and members of Borough Council, summarizing for
the period since his last previous report all building permits and certificates
issued by him and all complaints of violations and the action taken by him
consequently thereof; and to inspect and examine any building or structure
and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in
violation of any provisions or requirements of this chapter.
§ 365-133. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector shall have the right to enter any building or premises
during the daytime in the course of his duties.
§ 365-134. Permits required.302
A permit shall be required prior to the erection, conversion or structural
alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof and prior to the use
or change in use of any building or land. Applications for a permit shall
be made in writing on the forms supplied by the Borough of Lindenwold,
and the same shall be filled out by the owner or his duly authorized agent.
Said form shall then be filed with the Building Inspector, together with a
plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions, radius and angles
of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and the location of the building
or buildings in its or their exact relation to the lot and street line. Where
the average front yard depth of the existing buildings does not comply with
the district regulation, then the existing buildings in the same block front
within 200 feet on either side of the side lot lines of the premises of the
applicant shall be shown. The application above mentioned shall be in such
form as the governing body shall prescribe and shall contain the name and
address of the owner of the land, the exact nature of the work to be done,
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-134
1:713
the name of the contractor or builder, the cost of the work and such other
pertinent information as said governing body shall, by resolution, from time
to time designate. Said application shall then be approved and endorsed by
the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of a permit. A permit shall be
granted or refused within 10 days after the written application has been
filed with the Building Inspector.
§ 365-135. Certificate of occupancy.303
No building or structure hereinafter erected, constructed or structurally
altered shall be permitted by the person, firm or corporation who erected,
constructed or structurally altered the same to be used or changed in any
use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector, stating that the building or the proposed use thereof complies
with the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinances or statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 365-136. Issuance or nonissuance of certificate of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy, if required, shall be applied for coincident with
the application for a building permit and shall be issued within 10 days
after the erection or structural alteration of such building shall have been
completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. In case the
Building Inspector shall decline to issue a certificate of occupancy, his
reason for doing so shall be stated on one copy of the application and that
copy returned to the applicant. A record of all certificates shall be kept on
file by the Building Inspector and copies shall also be furnished to the owner
or builder, the Borough Assessor, Borough Tax Collector and Borough Clerk.
§ 365-137. Fees for certificates.304
The Building Inspector shall require the payment of the sum prescribed in
Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-17, upon an application
for a certificate of occupancy. All such fees shall be paid into the Borough
treasury.
§ 365-138. Temporary use permit.
A. It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the purpose of this
chapter to permit temporary activities for a limited period of time which
may be prohibited by other provisions of this chapter. Such uses are of
such a nature and are so located that at the time of petition they will:
(1) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the use of land and
activities normally permitted in the zone.
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-134 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-138
1:714
(2) Contribute materially to the welfare of the Borough of Lindenwold,
particularly in a state of emergency, under conditions peculiar to
the time and place involved.
B. The Mayor and members of Borough Council may, by resolution, after
written application, issue a permit for a period not to exceed three
months. Such period may be extended not more than once for an
additional period of three months.
§ 365-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-138
1:715

ARTICLE XXIV
Violations and Penalties; Additional Remedies
§ 365-139. Violations and penalties; notice of violation.
§ 365-140. Additional remedies.
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter or any regulation
made pursuant hereto, the Mayor and Borough Council, in addition to any
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in law
or equity to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation;
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises.
A. Failure to secure a variance, when required, previous to the erection,
construction, extension or addition to a building, or failure to secure an
occupancy permit shall be a violation of this chapter.305
B. When written notice of a violation has been served by the Building
Inspector upon the owner, lessee, agent, architect, contractor or
builder, such violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person or persons, firm or corporation who shall violate this
chapter or any of its provisions shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code. [Amended
10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 587306]
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-140
1:717

ARTICLE XXV
Adult Businesses
[Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 365-141. Restrictions on location.
No adult business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult
business, any business zoned area, any office and professional zoned area
or any residential zoned area. Distance shall be determined by measuring,
in a straight line, the closest points between the conditional use and the
heretofore-mentioned use or the actual walking distance, whichever is
greater.
§ 365-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-141
1:719

ARTICLE XXVI
Sustainable Energy
[Added 12-29-2010 by Ord. No. 1282]
§ 365-142. Solar panels and solar devices.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SOLAR DEVICE — Solar membranes, solar shingles, solar in glass, non-
PV technology, solar hot water systems and similar solar technology.
SOLAR PANEL — An electrical device consisting of an array of
connected solar cells which converts solar energy into electricity or hot
water/liquid for space heating or domestic hot water production. Also
referred to as "photovoltaic (PV) panel" or "solar array."
B. General regulations and standards. An application for a development
permit to install a solar panel or solar device will be reviewed under the
following requirements:
(1) Solar panels and solar devices are permitted as an accessory use in
all zoning districts. Accessory solar panels consume energy on site.
(2) Solar energy commercial operations are prohibited as a principal
use in all zoning districts. These are systems whose main purpose is
to generate energy back into the energy grid system, rather than
being consumed on site.
(3) The applicant shall provide proof that it has met any and all New
Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners' guidelines in
connection with the solar energy system proposed.307
(4) All rooftop-mounted solar panels and solar devices shall run closely
parallel to the original roofline and shall not exceed three feet
above the roofline of either a principal or accessory building. In no
instance shall any part of the system extend beyond the edge of the
roof.
(5) New structures are encouraged to include building integrated solar
panels and other solar devices into the initial design, rather than as
a later addition.
(6) Detached arrays of solar panels and solar devices (ground-mounted
systems) shall be located as follows:
(a) Ground-mounted systems may be located in the rear or side
yard, at the principal building setback required from the
property line in that zone.
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-142
1:721
(b) Ground-mounted systems are prohibited in front yards and
shall not be located past the front wall of the principal building.
(c) All solar energy systems which are permitted as ground arrays
or solar farms shall be located so that any reflection is directed
away from or is properly buffered from an adjoining property.
Buffering shall be per § 365-92.
(7) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be categorized as
accessory buildings.
(8) The height of ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not
exceed 12 feet from the ground surface to the top of the solar
energy system.
(9) No more than 20% of a lot may be covered with a ground-mounted
solar energy system.
(10) General requirements. All solar energy systems shall comply with
following:
(a) A structural report shall be provided for the design of the solar
panel systems, signed and sealed by a licensed New Jersey
professional engineer based on current industry and the
International Building Code. Any roof reinforcement that is
required must be submitted to and approved by the Borough
Construction Office prior to installation.
(b) All ground-mounted electrical or control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(c) Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any
identification be visible from the property line.
(d) The design of the solar energy system shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural
setting and existing environment.
(e) Applications for a solar energy system shall conform to all
provisions of this chapter.
(f) The installation of the solar energy system shall conform to the
National Electric Code and utility company requirements for
interconnection.
C. Abandonment.
(1) All solar energy systems that are out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
§ 365-142 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-142
1:722
(2) The Building Inspector may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record.308
(3) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months after the owner receives the notice of
abandonment from the Borough. If the system is not removed
within six months of the receipt of the notice from the Borough, the
Borough may remove the system under the conditions set forth
below.
(4) When an owner of a solar energy system has been notified to
remove the same and has not done so six months after receiving
said notice, then the Borough may remove such system and place a
lien upon the property for the cost of removal. If removed by the
owner, a demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility
completely removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned,
restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding
vegetation at the time of abandonment.
D. Administration and enforcement.309
(1) This section shall be administered by the Building Inspector or
other official as designated.
(2) The Building Inspector may:
(a) Enter any property for which a permit has been issued under
this section to conduct an inspection to determine whether the
conditions stated in the permit have been met.
(b) Issue orders to abate any violation of this section.
(c) Issue a citation for any violation of this section.
(d) Refer any violation of this section to legal counsel for
enforcement.
E. Penalties.310
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section
shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as stipulated in
Article XXIV of this chapter.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the governing
body from using any other lawful means to enforce this section.
308. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
310. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-142
1:723
§ 365-143. Wind energy. [Added 12-29-2010 by Ord. No. 1283]
F. The Borough hereby finds, determines and declares that this section is
necessary and proper to provide for the safety, preserve the health,
promote the prosperity, and improve the order, comfort and
convenience of the Borough of Lindenwold and the inhabitants thereof.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the
small wind energy system in accordance with this section.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system, as defined
herein, that is used to generate electricity and has a nameplate capacity
equal to or less than 100 kilowatts and is not supported by a tower
structure.
TOTAL HEIGHT — In relation to a wind energy system, total height is
the vertical distance from the ground to the tip of a wind generator
blade when the tip is at its highest point.
TOWER — A monopole, freestanding or guyed structure that supports
a wind generator.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind turbine and all associated
equipment, including base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower,
transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other components
necessary to fully utilize the wind generator.
WIND TURBINE — Equipment that converts energy from the wind
into electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated
mechanical and electrical conversion components necessary to
generate, store and transfer energy.
B. General regulations and standards. An application for a development
permit to install a wind energy system will be reviewed under the
following requirements:
(1) Wind energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all
zoning districts.
(2) Wind energy commercial operations are prohibited as a principal
use in all zoning districts. These are systems whose main purpose is
to generate energy back into the energy grid system, rather than
being consumed on site. The primary purpose of the wind energy
system will be to provide power for the principal use of the
property whereon the system is located. The sale of excess power is
prohibited.
(3) Small wind energy systems, located in residential zoning districts,
shall meet the following:
(a) Wind turbines are not permitted in front yards.
§ 365-142 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-143
1:724
(b) Wind turbines shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to 100% of the height of the structure including
the blades.
(c) Wind turbine towers shall not exceed a total height from
ground level to the highest point of the structure of 80 feet on
lots less than three acres. On lots of three acres or more, a
maximum total height of 150 feet from ground level to the
highest point of the structure is permitted. The maximum total
height shall include the height of the entire system at its
highest point.311
(d) Rooftop-mounted wind energy systems shall not exceed a
maximum height of 15 feet above the roof elevation. The
maximum height shall include the height of the entire system
from the roof elevation at the mounting location to the highest
point including blade tips.
(e) A maximum of one wind turbine tower is permitted per
property.
(f) Wind turbines on residential properties shall have a maximum
nameplate capacity of 100 kilowatts.
(4) Small wind energy systems located in nonresidential zoning
districts shall meet the following:
(a) Wind turbines are not permitted in front yards.
(b) Wind turbines shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to 100% of the height of the structure including
the blades. The maximum height shall include the height of the
entire system at its highest point.
(c) Rooftop-mounted wind energy systems shall not exceed a
maximum height of 20 feet above the roof elevation. The
maximum height shall include the height of the entire system
from the roof elevation at the mounting location to the highest
point including blade tips.
(d) A maximum of one wind turbine tower per acre is permitted
per property.
(5) Noise. All wind energy systems shall comply with following:
(a) Sound levels of the wind energy system shall not exceed 55 dba
at an adjoining residential property line or 50 dba at the
closest residential structure.
311. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-143
1:725
(b) Sound levels of the wind energy system shall not exceed 65 dba
at an adjoining nonresidential property line.
(6) General requirements. All wind energy systems shall comply with
following:
(a) A structural report shall be provided for the design of both
tower-mounted and rooftop-mounted wind energy systems,
signed and sealed by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer, based on current industry and the International
Building Code. For a rooftop-mounted system, the structural
report should include, but not be limited to, wind turbulence,
vibration and structural capacity of the roof. Any roof
reinforcement that is required must be submitted to and
approved by the Borough Construction Office prior to
installation.
(b) Wind energy systems must include a design for bird protection.
(c) Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic brake or
other similar device to prevent over-speeding and excessive
pressure on the tower structure.
(d) Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lit, except to the
extent as required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
(e) All ground-mounted electrical or control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(f) Any wind tower with a height greater than eight feet shall be
designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts, a ladder
or other publicly accessible means for climbing the tower.
(g) All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a minimum
of 10 feet above ground level.
(h) The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed of a
corrosive-resistant material.
(i) All guy wires or any part of the wind energy system shall be
located on the same lot as the energy system.
(j) Wind energy systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any
identification be visible from the property line.
(k) The design of the wind energy system shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural
setting and existing environment.
§ 365-143 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-143
1:726
(l) Applications for a wind energy system shall conform to all
provisions of the current ordinance.
(m) The installation of the wind energy system shall conform to the
National Electric Code and utility company requirements for
interconnection.
(n) Wind energy systems shall not extend into overhead utility
lines or aerial easements for the same, unless written
permission is granted by the utility company or entity that
owns/controls the lines.312
(7) Documentation.
(a) Small energy system.
[1] A wind energy system meeting the definition of a small
energy system in this section shall submit an application to
the Borough Construction Office for a small wind energy
permit accompanied by a plot plan which includes the
following
[a] Property lines and physical dimensions of the
property;
[b] Location, dimensions and types of existing major
structures on the property;
[c] Location of the proposed small wind energy system
tower or rooftop-mounted system;
[d] The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous
with the property;
[e] Any overhead utility lines; and
[f] Small wind energy system specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower
height, and tower type (freestanding or guyed).
[2] The application for a permit for a small wind energy
system must be accompanied by the fee required in
Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule.
[3] A permit issued for a small energy system pursuant to this
section shall expire if:
[a] The small wind energy system is not installed and
functioning within 12 months from the date the permit
is issued; or
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-143
1:727
[b] The small wind energy system is out of service or
otherwise unused for a continuous twelve-month
period.313
[4] Violations.
[a] It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or
operate a small wind energy system that is not in
compliance with this section.
[b] Small wind energy systems installed prior to the
adoption of this section are exempt from the
requirements of this section, except for the provisions
regarding abandonment.
(b) Wind energy system other than small wind energy. Any wind
energy system not meeting the definition of a small energy
system shall submit a site plan application to the Lindenwold
Joint Land Use Board per Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development. The jurisdiction of the application and the
determination as a minor or major site plan will depend on the
specifics of the wind energy application. [Amended
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1331]
C. Abandonment.
(1) All wind energy systems that are out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
(2) The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record.
(3) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months after the owner receives the notice of
abandonment from the municipality. If the system is not removed
within six months of the receipt of the notice from the Borough, the
Borough may remove the system under the conditions set forth
below.
(4) When an owner of a wind energy system has been notified to
remove the same and has not done so six months after receiving
said notice, then the Borough may remove such system and place a
lien upon the property for the cost of removal. If removed by the
owner, a demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility
completely removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned,
restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding
vegetation at the time of abandonment.
D. Administration and enforcement.314
313. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-143 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-143
1:728
(1) This section shall be administered by the Building Inspector or
other official, as designated.
(2) The Building Inspector may:
(a) Enter any property for which a permit has been issued under
this section to conduct an inspection to determine whether the
conditions stated in the permit have been met.
(b) Issue orders to abate any violation of this section.
(c) Issue a citation for any violation of this section.
(d) Refer any violation of this section to legal counsel for
enforcement.
E. Penalties.315
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section
shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as stipulated in
Article XXIV of this chapter.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the governing
body from using any other lawful means to enforce this section.
F. The Borough hereby finds, determines and declares that this section is
necessary and proper to provide for the safety, preserve the health,
promote the prosperity, and improve the order, comfort and
convenience of the Borough of Lindenwold and the inhabitants thereof.
314. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
315. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 365-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-143
1:729
Part III: Health Legislation
Chapter 375
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 365-143 LINDENWOLD CODE § 365-143
1:730
ARTICLE I
Local Health Services Provided
§ 375-1. Designation of County Health Department as local
provider.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-10, the Camden County
Department of Health is hereby designated as the entity responsible for
compliance with the Local Health Services Act for any and all functions
which would be performed by a local health services provider, including
meeting standards of performance.
§ 375-2. Cooperation with Health Services Advisory Board.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Lindenwold, County
of Camden and State of New Jersey, shall cooperate with the Camden
County Health Department to provide a program of health services in
compliance with the Health Services Act. Further, the Health Services
Advisory Board may serve as liaison between the Camden County Health
Department and the Mayor and Borough Council of Lindenwold in an effort
to promote the enactment and enforcement of any and all County health
ordinances.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:731

ARTICLE II
Health Services Advisory Board
§ 375-3. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established a Health Services Advisory Board
of the Borough of Lindenwold, County of Camden and State of New Jersey,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1.
§ 375-4. Members.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be
comprised of the Mayor of the Borough of Lindenwold and the Borough
Council with member of Council to be designated as the liaison.
§ 375-5. Term of service.
The terms of the Members of the Health Services Advisory Board shall be
staggered among terms of appointments for their respective offices.
§ 375-6. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled by the appointment or election of
the respective member of office.
§ 375-7. Duties.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Lindenwold shall
cooperate with the Camden County Health Department to provide a
program of health services in compliance with the Health Services Act.
Further, the Health Services Advisory Board may, from time to time, serve
as liaison between the Camden County Health Department and the Mayor
and Borough Council of Lindenwold in an effort to promote the enforcement
of any and all county health ordinances. The Health Services Advisory Board
shall perform any and all related functions necessary to meet the standards
of performance under the Health Services Act.
§ 375-8. Meetings.
Meetings shall be designated by the Mayor and the Borough Council
convening at least one time per year.
§ 375-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-8
1:733

ARTICLE III
Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq.
[Adopted 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-220]
§ 375-9. Adoption.
The State of New Jersey adopted the New Jersey State House Code, N.J.A.C.
5:28-1 et seq., that constitutes the standards to guide public officers such as
the Camden County Health Officer or the Lindenwold Health Officer and/or
their agents in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation,
use or occupancy.
§ 375-10. Standards.
The Borough of Lindenwold hereby adopts this chapter of the New Jersey
State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq., which shall set the health
standards to determine the fitness of buildings for human habitation, use or
occupancy in the Borough of Lindenwold, a copy of which shall be on file in
the office of the Lindenwold Borough Clerk for the use and examination of
the public.
§ 375-11. Enforcement.
The above-referenced Housing Code may be enforced by the Camden
County Health Officer or the Lindenwold Health Officer, and/or their agents.
§ 375-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is not in full compliance with this chapter or who otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and regulations issued
hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
§ 375-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:735
Chapter 381
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Chs. 238 and
240.
§ 381-1. Adoption of standards.316
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; requiring the proper heating of
apartments; prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings; prohibiting
spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing
the inspection of premises by an enforcing official; providing for the removal
or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by
the governing body in removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing
penalties for violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of
the Laws of 1950.317 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 381-2. Short title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 381-3. Copies on file.318
An electronic copy of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953) is available in the office of the Borough Clerk and will remain on file
there for use and examination by the public.
§ 381-4. Amendments, additions and deletions.319
Deleted from the code described and commonly known as the "Public
Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)" is Section 4, Prohibition of
Certain Nuisances or Sounds, and it is the intention of the governing body
that Section 4 not be adopted as part of this chapter.
316. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
317. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
318. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
319. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 375-12 LINDENWOLD CODE § 381-5
1:736
§ 381-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1981320]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or the code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
Chapter 386
SANITARY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, § 150-47.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 199.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 238 and
240.
Sewer connection — See §§ 260-20 and
260-21.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 287.
Tattooing and body piercing — See Ch. 301.
320. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-5
1:737

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 386-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSE — The formal written permission to perform certain acts or carry
on a certain business embodied in the document granting such permission,
issued by the Board in accordance with its rules and regulations and this
chapter.
MUNICIPALITY; OF THIS MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lindenwold.
PERMIT — Temporary permission in writing to cover the doing of a single
act or a series of acts, which permit may be revoked by the governing body
of the Borough of Lindenwold at any time although the act or acts for which
the permit was granted have not been completed.
§ 386-2. Right of entry.
It shall be lawful for the Camden County Board of Health, Inspector or
any person acting under and by the authority of the governing body of the
Borough of Lindenwold to enter upon any premises for any of the purposes
specified in this chapter or for any other purpose in connection with his
regular duties.
§ 386-3. Revocation of license.
The governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold shall have the right to
revoke any permit or license whenever the holder thereof or any of his
servants or agents violate the terms under which the same was issued.
Before any license or permit shall be revoked, a notice of the contemplated
action of the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold shall be served
upon the holder of said license or permit, setting forth such charges as may
be the reason for said revocation and the place, date and hour when the
governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold will hear the matter.
§ 386-4. Suspension of license.
Whenever any licensee or permittee shall violate the terms under which
said license or permit was issued, the governing body of the Borough of
Lindenwold or the Camden County Board of Health shall have the right to
suspend the operation of said license pending the hearing.
§ 386-5. Display of licenses and permits.
All licenses or permits shall be prominently displayed upon the premises for
which they were issued, and upon each and every vehicle or device used
in the business for which a license or permit is required, there shall be
displayed at all times in plain sight, upon each side of said vehicle or device,
§ 386-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-5
1:739
a current license or permit sign to be furnished by the governing body of
the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-6. Exhibition of licenses and permits upon demand.
Every holder of a license or permit shall exhibit same upon demand to any
member of the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold, the Camden
County Board of Health or other authorized representative of the governing
body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-5 LINDENWOLD CODE § 386-6
1:740
ARTICLE II
Nuisances
§ 386-7. Conditions and acts declared to be nuisances.
The following specific acts, conditions and things are each declared to be or
may become public health nuisance and are prohibited:
A. Depositing garbage.
(1) Permitting or disposing of garbage, leftovers or of dead animals or
parts thereof on the surface of the ground.
(2) The placing or depositing of garbage, leftovers or any dead animal
or vegetable wastes in containers not made of metal or plastic and
not firmly covered.
(3) The placing or depositing of garbage, leftovers or any animal or
vegetable wastes in open containers or in paper bags or cartons.
(4) Permitting or depositing of any fruit, leftovers or garbage on a
compost pile unless covered with at least two inches of soil.
B. Excremental matter.
(1) Permitting or allowing of any human excrement or waste to remain
or flow on the surface of the ground.
(2) Permitting or allowing of any animal waste to flow or accumulate
on the surface of the ground.
C. Rubbish or refuse.
(1) The dumping or depositing of cans, bottles, paper, cartons, rags,
metal and other rubbish or refuse on the surface of the ground.
(2) The placing of cans, bottles, paper, cartons, rags, metal and other
rubbish or refuse in receptacles not made of waterproof material.
(3) Permitting or accumulating of any junk, trash or refuse on porches
or in front, side or rear yards.
D. Privy vaults.
(1) Permitting or allowing of any privy vault or outhouse that is not
flyproof or not provided with self-closing doors and seat covers.
E. Sanitary facilities in buildings.
(1) Permitting or allowing of any person to work or to live in a building
without adequate supply of running water.
(2) Permitting or allowing of any person to work or to live in a building
without adequate toilet facilities.
§ 386-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-7
1:741
(3) Permitting any part of the plumbing system or the plumbing
fixtures to be in defective working order in a building used by
persons working or living therein.
F. Burning.
(1) The burning of any material resulting in unpleasant, offensive or
nauseating odor.
G. Insects and vermin.
(1) Permitting or allowing of any mosquito larvae or pupae to exist in
any body of water, such as a pond, ditch, pool or rain barrel.
(2) Permitting or allowing of any situation or condition to exist that is
beneficial to or engenders the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, rats
and other vermin.
H. Drinking water.
(1) Polluting of any wells, streams, springs or lakes, the water of which
is used for drinking purposes.
I. Poisons.
(1) The selling of or the giving away of any poisonous substances
unless such substances are clearly and legibly labeled.
(2) Permitting or using poisonous gas for the extermination of insects
or vermin inside of buildings without first obtaining a permit from
the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
J. Uncovered food.
(1) The selling of or giving away or the displaying of uncovered or
unprotected bread, rolls, pastry, candy or other food which requires
no washing or cooking before being eaten.
K. Poisonous plants; weeds.
(1) Permitting or allowing poison ivy, poison oak or other poisonous
plant to be grown within 25 feet of any public sidewalk, public
street, party line or building.
(2) Permitting or allowing of weeds or underbrush to grow more than
six inches above the ground from the first day of May to the last day
of October.
(3) Permitting or allowing the flowering of any ragweed or other
noxious weed.
L. Food establishments.
(1) Permitting or allowing the floors, the walls and the ceilings of food
establishments to be unsanitary and in poor repair.
§ 386-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 386-7
1:742
(2) Using stoves, grills, ranges, deep fat fryers or broilers in food
establishments without an adequate exhaust ventilating system or
without a hood and fireproof rear wall.
M. Medicines.
(1) The selling or distribution of medicine, remedies, medical literature
or remedial, curative or prophylactic devices upon the streets or
from house to house or from vending machines without a permit
from the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
N. Spitting.
(1) Expectorating in public places except in a handkerchief or in a
paper tissue.
(2) Permitting or allowing of dirty cuspidors or spitting troughs in
public places.
O. Obnoxious trades.
(1) The carrying on of any trade or business in such a manner as to be
obnoxious or offensive.
P. Common towels and cups.
(1) Permitting or supplying of any common towels in public places.
(2) Permitting or allowing of common drinking cups in public places.
Q. Public vehicles.
(1) Permitting or maintaining of any vehicle used for public
transportation in unsanitary condition.
R. Contamination of food.
(1) The keeping of food or drink which is sold or dispensed in such a
manner as to allow insects, animals, dirt or other foreign or
injurious contamination to come in contact with it.
(2) Permitting or allowing of any animals, flies, insects, roaches, rats or
any vermin in establishments where food or drinks are served,
processed, stored or prepared.
S. Vicious dogs.
(1) The keeping of any dog that molests or bites pedestrians without
provocation.
T. Noises.
(1) Permitting or causing of any noise that is objectionable, annoying
or aggravating.
U. Gases or odors.
§ 386-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-7
1:743
(1) Permitting or causing of any gases, fumes, coal dust or odors that
are offensive, annoying, poisonous or nauseating.
V. Beehives.
(1) Permitting or allowing of beehives to be less than 150 feet from any
adjacent building occupied by human beings except that of the
owner.
W. Smoke.
(1) The burning of any material resulting in a smoke density greater
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart.
X. Endangering health.
(1) Permitting or allowing of any matter, thing, condition or act which
is or may become detrimental, annoying, offensive or a menace to
the health of the inhabitants of this municipality.
Y. Burning of animals.
(1) Permitting or allowing of burning or incineration of animals.
§ 386-7 LINDENWOLD CODE § 386-7
1:744
ARTICLE III
Communicable Diseases
§ 386-8. Reporting communicable diseases.
All communicable diseases recognized by the New Jersey State Department
of Health shall be promptly reported to the governing body.
§ 386-9. Isolation and quarantine.
The Camden County Board of Health may isolate all cases of communicable
diseases and may quarantine all contacts according to the rules and
regulations prescribed by the New Jersey Department of Health.
§ 386-10. Animal bites.
A. It shall be the duty of every physician or of any person having been
bitten by any animal to report said bite promptly to the governing body
of the Borough of Lindenwold.
B. Whenever any animal shall have bitten any person, the owner thereof
shall confine such animal until released by the Camden County Board of
Health.
§ 386-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-10
1:745

ARTICLE IV
Dairy Products
§ 386-11. Pasteurization required; exception.
No milk or milk products shall be sold or delivered in this municipality
unless the same have been pasteurized, provided that nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit the sale of certified raw milk.
§ 386-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MILK — The lacteal secretion, practically free from colostrum, obtained
from one or more healthy dairy animals properly fed and kept, which
contains no less than 3% milkfat and not less than 8 1/4% of milk solids not
fat.
§ 386-13. Compliance with state standards.
All milk and milk products sold, delivered or given away in this municipality
shall comply with all standards, definitions and regulations promulgated by
the New Jersey State Department of Health or as prescribed by New Jersey
public health laws.
§ 386-14. Prohibition of sales.
Whenever any milk supply or milk product endangers the public health of
this municipality, the Camden County Board of Health shall prohibit the sale
of said product.
§ 386-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-14
1:747

ARTICLE V
Food and Drink
§ 386-15. License required for public food establishments.
No person or persons shall operate a public food establishment without first
obtaining a sanitary code license from the governing body of the Borough
of Lindenwold.
§ 386-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place where food or drink is stored,
prepared, processed or served for human consumption.
§ 386-17. Storage of food or drink.
§ 386-18. Oysters, clams and mussels.
All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from sources certified by the New
Jersey State Department of Health.
§ 386-19. Meat and meat products.
Meat and meat products sold or given away in this municipality shall be
from an approved source.
§ 386-20. Protection from contamination.
All food sold or given away in this municipality shall be protected from
possible contamination.
§ 386-21. Storage of perishable foods.
All perishable food shall be stored at 45° F. or below or 140° F. or above,
except when being prepared or served.
§ 386-22. Compliance with federal and state standards.
All food or drink sold or given away in this municipality shall comply with
standards, definitions and regulations promulgated by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Meat Inspection Division, or by the United
States Food and Drug Administration or by the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
A. All food or drink shall be kept clean, wholesome, free from spoilage,
free from adulteration and misbranding and safe for human
consumption.
B. All food or drink shall be stored in a sanitary manner.
§ 386-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-23
1:749
§ 386-23. Eating and drinking utensils.
Eating and drinking utensils shall be washed and sanitized before each use
in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the County
Board of Health.
§ 386-24. Food establishment operators.
Food establishment operators shall comply with all sanitary regulations
adopted by the governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-25. Toilet room required in food establishments.
Each food establishment shall have at least one separate toilet room with
a washbasin, soap dispenser, individual towels and a flush toilet. The toilet
room shall be conveniently located.
§ 386-26. Entrance from living quarters to establishment
prohibited.
No sleeping or living quarters shall have direct entrance to a food
establishment.
§ 386-27. Prohibition of sales of condemned food.
The Camden County Board of Health shall forbid or condemn the sale of any
food or drink which is or is suspected of being unwholesome, contaminated,
adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of the New Jersey State Pure
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
§ 386-28. Closing of food establishments.
Whenever the owner or operator of any food establishment shall fail to
comply with any regulation of this chapter after being notified so to do, the
Camden County Board of Health shall close the said establishment until the
owner or operator has complied with the said health regulation.
§ 386-23 LINDENWOLD CODE § 386-28
1:750
ARTICLE VI
Housing
§ 386-29. Heating.
§ 386-30. Janitorial services required.
The owner, agent or other person in charge of any building, tenement or
apartment house occupied by four or more families shall provide janitor
service at all times for the purpose of keeping the premises in a sanitary
condition.
§ 386-31. Conformity with standards.
All buildings shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Heating of residences. Every owner of a building or buildings occupied
as residences by two or more families, and where such owner has
agreed to supply heat, shall provide heat from the first day of October in
each year to the first day of May of the succeeding year so that the
temperature of the apartment where one or more persons reside shall
always be kept at 70° F. or above between the hours of 6:00 a.m. in the
morning and 10:00 p.m. in the evening.
B. Heating of business buildings. Every person, whether he be the owner,
lessor or agent of a building to be used for offices or business purposes,
who shall have agreed to supply heat to the tenant, shall provide heat
from the first day of October in each year to the first day of May of the
succeeding year so that the temperature of said office or place of
business shall always be kept at 70° F. or above between the hours of
7:00 a.m. in the morning and 6:00 p.m. in the evening; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to buildings or portions
thereof used and occupied for trades, businesses or occupations where
high or low temperatures are essential or unavoidable.
A. Water supply.
(1) All buildings used for living therein shall have potable running
water on each floor and in each apartment.
(2) All buildings used for working therein shall have potable running
water available on each floor.
B. Toilet facilities. Every building used in any way for occupation by
human beings, whether for business or dwelling purposes, shall be
provided with a sufficient number of water closets, washbasins and
urinal accommodations in good working order. When the interest of the
public health requires additional water closets, washbasins or urinal
accommodations in any house, store, apartment, flat or any other
building, it shall be lawful for the governing body of the Borough of
Lindenwold, by notice to the owner, to direct the installation of such
§ 386-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-31
1:751
§ 386-32. Occupancy permit for mobile homes and commercial
buildings.
No person or persons shall live or sleep in any mobile home or in any part of
a commercial building without first obtaining a permit from the governing
body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-33. Stormwater prohibited from sanitary sewers.
Stormwater shall not be permitted to empty into any sanitary sewers.
§ 386-34. Sewer connection.
additional toilets as it shall deem necessary. There shall be one water
closet for each separate family.
C. The basement or cellar of any building shall be so constructed as to be
reasonably dry and adequately ventilated, and the foundation walls and
floor shall be rodentproof.
D. If a room in a residence building is overcrowded, the Camden County
Board of Health shall order the number of persons sleeping or living in
said room to be so reduced that there shall be not less than 480 cubic
feet of air to each person over the age of 12 years and 300 cubic feet of
air to each child under 12 years of age occupying such room.
E. All business establishment operators and all apartment house owners
shall keep all garbage and trash in well-covered containers made of
metal, plastic or waterproofed material.
F. All rooms used for living or working therein shall be properly lighted,
adequately ventilated and in good repair.
A. All owners of property along the line of any sewer constructed for the
purpose of carrying off sewage in the streets of this municipality shall
connect their houses and other buildings with the sanitary sewer in the
street adjoining said property upon notice from the governing body of
the Borough of Lindenwold to make such connection.
B. The Borough of Lindenwold shall be empowered to give notice to any
property owner by sending said notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and regular mail or by delivery of said notice personally at
the property owner's usual place of abode and leaving it with a member
of his or her family 18 years of age or older.
C. Said notice shall specifically advise the property owner of his or her
obligations to connect to the sanitary sewer and that, if said connection
is not made within 30 days from receipt of said notice, a complaint will
be filed with the Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold. After
the expiration of the thirty-day notice, violations shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
§ 386-31 LINDENWOLD CODE § 386-34
1:752
§ 386-35. Condemnation as unfit for human habitation.
The governing body of the Borough of Lindenwold shall have the right
to condemn any building or part thereof as unfit for human habitation
whenever conditions detrimental to health exist therein, whether such
condemnation be for insanitation, dilapidation, overcrowding of persons or
for other reasons detrimental to health.
D. Notwithstanding the penalty provisions contained in § 386-49, the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Lindenwold shall order any person
convicted of violation of the Sewer Connection Ordinance to pay fines
as set forth in Subsection C above.
§ 386-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-35
1:753

ARTICLE VII
Septic Tanks and Privy Vaults
§ 386-36. Construction permit required.
No privy vault, septic tank or other receptacle for human excrement shall
be constructed in this municipality without a permit for that purpose being
first obtained from the County Health Department.
§ 386-37. Compliance with regulations.
The construction or installation of privy vaults, septic tanks or other
receptacles for human excrement shall comply with all regulations
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Health or the governing
body of the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-38. Scavenger's permit required; approval of apparatus.
No person shall clean or empty any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool
without first obtaining a scavenger's permit from the County Health
Department. All apparatus, means, appliances, vehicles or conveyances to
be used in said business shall be approved by the governing body of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-38
1:755

ARTICLE VIII
Garbage and Offal
§ 386-39. License required for collection.
No person shall collect garbage or offal in the Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-40. Storage and removal.
All garbage or offal in this Borough shall be stored in waterproof, wellcovered
containers and removed from the premises at least once a week.
§ 386-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-40
1:757

ARTICLE IX
Child Day-Care Establishments
§ 386-41. License required.
No person or persons shall operate any school or day-care establishment
for children without first obtaining a license from the governing body of the
Borough of Lindenwold.
§ 386-42. Compliance with regulations.
All schools or day-care establishments for children shall comply with all
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Health.
§ 386-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-42
1:759

ARTICLE X
Boardinghouses, Nursing or Rooming Homes
§ 386-43. License required.
No person or persons shall conduct or operate a boardinghouse, nursing
or rooming home without first obtaining a license from the Borough of
Lindenwold.
§ 386-44. Compliance with regulations.
All person or persons conducting or operating boardinghouses, nursing or
rooming homes shall comply with all regulations promulgated by the New
Jersey State Department of Health.
§ 386-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-44
1:761

ARTICLE XI
License or Permit Fees
§ 386-45. Sanitary inspection prerequisite to license or permit.
All food establishments and vehicles indicated in this chapter must first pass
sanitary inspection by the Camden County Board of Health before a license
or permit shall be issued.
§ 386-46. Payment of annual fees.
All of the fees required to be paid, or paid, under the terms hereof are
intended to be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only the balance of
the year during which the same are so paid or payable unless otherwise
herein provided.
§ 386-47. Schedule of fees.
The annual fees for the licenses or permits referred to in this chapter shall
be as established in Chapter 150, Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-47.
§ 386-48. License expiration.
Each license issued shall expire the last day of March of each calendar year.
§ 386-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-48
1:763

ARTICLE XII
Penalty
§ 386-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or refusing or neglecting to comply with any article
or part of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code.
§ 386-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-49
1:765
Chapter 390
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
§ 390-1. Adoption of state standards.
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A et seq., entitled "Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems" are hereby adopted by reference.
Chapter 398
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 150, §§ 150-8 and 150-48. Zoning — See Ch. 365.
§ 386-49 LINDENWOLD CODE § 390-1
1:766
ARTICLE I
Public Swimming Pools
[Adopted 3-16-1976 (Ch. 232 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 398-1. Adoption of standards.321
Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing, of the State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C.
8:26-1.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety.
§ 398-2. Permit to locate, construct or alter; application; fee.
[Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 789322]
Permits to locate, construct or alter swimming pools shall be applied for
through the Municipal Building Inspector. Applications must comply with
the provisions of the code adopted herein before said permit shall be issued.
The fee accompanying an application or reapplication to locate, construct
or alter swimming pools shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article
I, Fee Schedule, § 150-48, and is intended to defray the cost of processing
the application and inspection of the site. This fee is not refundable in the
event that said application is denied.
§ 398-3. License for operation required; expiration and fee.323
Licenses to operate swimming pools shall be applied for through the
Lindenwold governing body. Said license shall be renewed annually and
expire on the 31st day of March of the year following the issuance thereof.
The fee for such license shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150, Fees, Article
I, Fee Schedule, § 150-48, and is exclusive of any fee charged under § 398-2.
§ 398-4. Hearings.324
All hearings referred to in the state code adopted in § 398-1 shall be before
the Lindenwold governing body. Any inspectors or other duly authorized
officials who have knowledge regarding the substance of said hearings shall
be in attendance on behalf of the Lindenwold governing body.
§ 398-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1981325]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of said code or this article,
including §§ 398-2 and 398-3 above, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code
321. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
322. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
323. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
324. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
325. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:767
§ 398-6. Copies on file.326
Three copies of Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing, of the State
Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq., shall be placed and remain on file
in the office of the Borough Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.4.
326. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-6 LINDENWOLD CODE § 398-6
1:768
ARTICLE II
Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted 5-4-1976 (Ch. 230 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 398-7. Purpose.327
Since the Lindenwold governing body has adopted N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.,
and said code only pertains to public swimming pools as defined therein328
it is the desire of the Lindenwold governing body to enact the following
provisions to regulate those swimming facilities which must meet the State
Uniform Construction Code, as adopted and in use within the Borough.
§ 398-8. Scope.
This article is applicable to private swimming or wading pools and to
naturally or artificially constructed outdoor ponds, rivers or lakes as defined
below.
§ 398-9. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases hereinafter used in this article shall be defined
and interpreted as follows:
APPROVED — Accepted or acceptable under applicable specifications
stated in this article, or accepted or suitable for the proposed use under the
procedures and powers of administration outlined in this article.329
CONSTRUCT — Includes the construction, building, erection, creation or
installation of a new swimming pool, portable pool or wading pool, as herein
defined, or the enlargement of an existing pool, as aforesaid, or of any of its
facilities.
INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector or his duly authorized
representative.
LICENSE — The written authorization by the municipality or its agents to
use, maintain or operate a pool, as herein defined.
MAINTAIN AND OPERATE — The maintaining, operating or using of a
swimming pool after its construction, if an artificial one, or its establishment
as such, if a natural pond, river or lake.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lindenwold.
PERMIT — The written authorization granted by the municipality or its
agents to any person to construct, install or alter a pool, as herein defined.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, companies,
associations, partnerships and joint-stock companies.
327. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
328. Editor's Note: See Ch. 398, Art. I, Public Swimming Pools.
329. Editor's Note: The definition of "Board of Health," which immediately followed, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-9
1:769
PORTABLE POOL — Any pool consisting of a watertight container open at
the top, made of fabric, plastic or any other material and supported by a
frame and resting on the ground, capable of being wholly or partly filled
with water and so constructed or erected that it may be taken apart and
stored when not in use. The term "portable pool" shall further mean and
include portable pools capable of being filled to a water depth in excess of
15 inches, with sides higher than 24 inches, with access made by ladder,
ramp, step or steps or any other means.
PRIVATE POOL — Includes a pool, as herein defined, that is designed, used,
maintained and intended for swimming, bathing or wading by an individual
for use by himself and by the members of his household and guests and
which is located on such person's land as an accessory use to a residence,
and includes all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances
thereto. The term "guests" used above is not intended to mean any person
who directly or indirectly pays rent or other consideration to the owner of
the pool and is invited onto the owner's property to use said pool. "Private
pools" shall also mean pools restricted to members of a club or association
whose members pay a fee solely for the right to use the swimming facilities
and unconnected with apartment pools.330
SWIMMING POOL — Includes either outdoor or indoor pools, above or
below grade level, including those which are artificially constructed as
well as natural outdoor ponds, rivers or lakes and which are installed,
constructed, established and used to provide recreational facilities for
swimming, bathing and wading, and all buildings, equipment and
appurtenances thereto, and the depth of which pool is more than 18 inches
below the level of the surrounding land or rim of such pool, or in the case of
an above-surface pool, said pool has a depth of more than 24 inches below
the surrounding rim thereof and is capable of being filled to a water depth
in excess of 15 inches.
§ 398-10. Exceptions; enlargement of facilities; compliance with
certain regulations.
A. This article shall not be applicable to those permanently installed
swimming pools which have been constructed prior to the passage of
this article, nor to natural outdoor ponds, rivers or lakes which have
been in use as swimming pools prior to the passage hereof, except that
as to such permanently installed pools they shall be subject to the
requirements herein if an enlargement of such facilities is sought and to
the requirements set forth in Subsection B hereof.
B. Pools as mentioned in Subsection A herein shall be subject to all of the
provisions and regulations relating to safety and sanitation as
hereinafter set forth and those which may hereafter be enacted by the
municipality or any of its agencies.
330. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-9 LINDENWOLD CODE § 398-10
1:770
§ 398-11. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful hereafter for any person to construct, maintain, install
or create a swimming or bathing pool or portable pool in the municipality
without first having complied with the provisions of this article.
§ 398-12. Permit required; application.331
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to portable pools and
wading pools unless specific reference is made in any section herein to
such type of pool.
A. No person hereafter shall construct or maintain any permanent or
stationary type of swimming or bathing pool or establish one at a
natural outdoor pond, river or lake without first having obtained a
permit therefor.
B. Applications for a permit as required by this section shall be made to
the Building Inspector of the municipality or designee.
C. The application shall be executed in duplicate and shall contain the
following information:
(1) Plans and specifications for the proposed swimming or bathing
pool, showing and explaining all the details of such proposed pool
and of the auxiliary structures and appurtenances relating thereto.
(2) A plot plan showing the property lines of the land upon which the
proposed swimming or bathing pool is to be constructed, installed,
established, located and maintained, and also showing all of the
existing houses or structures thereon, the specific location and
dimensions of the proposed pool and auxiliary structures, the
distance of the pool from all existing or proposed buildings thereon
and also the distance from the property lines and abutting streets.
The distances referred to shall not be less than the minimum
standards provided in § 398-15 of this article.
(3) A clear description of the fence or other enclosure proposed to
surround the swimming or bathing pool, the type of material to be
used, the height thereof and the number of gates or doors therein;
said fence or other enclosure shall conform to the minimum
standards provided in § 398-19 of this article.
(4) The method proposed to dispose of wastewater from artificially
constructed swimming or bathing pools and the means of disposal
as proposed shall be subject to the provisions of § 398-18 of this
article and to the approval of the governing body as hereinafter
provided.
331. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-12
1:771
§ 398-13. Approval or rejection of application.332
§ 398-14. Permit fees. [Amended 10-20-1981; 9-19-1988 by Ord. No.
788333]
§ 398-15. Location of pools.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by payment of the permit fee
therefor as provided for in § 398-14 of this article.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a permit hereunder, properly
executed, the Building Inspector shall forthwith file the duplicate
application and accompanying plan with the governing body for its
recommendations and approval.
B. The Building Inspector, after receiving the recommendations or
approval from the governing body, shall act upon the same in the
following manner:
(1) Approve the application as submitted and cause a permit to be
issued therefor;
(2) Approve the application subject to any correction, modification or
any additional information required to be furnished in order to
assure proper compliance with the provisions of this article, and
upon receipt of such amended application the Building Inspector
shall issue such permit; or
(3) Reject the application when it is determined that a permit should
not be issued; in case of such a rejection, the applicant may appeal
therefrom in the manner hereinafter provided in § 398-20.
A. The fee accompanying an application for a permit to construct, install,
enlarge or establish a swimming or bathing pool as aforesaid,
authorized under this article, shall be as prescribed in Chapter 150,
Fees, Article I, Fee Schedule, § 150-8.
B. The fees required in Subsection A of this section are intended to defray
the cost of processing the application and the cost of inspection of the
site before and after issuance of the permit.
C. The permit issued and the fee paid hereunder shall be in addition to any
permits and fees which may be required by the governing body for the
location and operation of a swimming or bathing pool in a sanitary
manner and to defray the inspection and examination costs incidental
thereto.
332. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
333. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-12 LINDENWOLD CODE § 398-15
1:772
§ 398-16. Materials and construction.
All materials used in the construction of an artificial swimming or bathing
pool permitted hereunder shall be of a durable quality and waterproof and
shall be so designed as to facilitate the emptying and cleaning thereof; the
bottom and sides thereof shall be either white or a light color, except that
aluminum paint shall not be used as a finish; the bottom thereof shall be
smooth and free from cracks and open joints; inlets shall be so located and
spaced as to secure satisfactory dispersion of inflowing waters throughout
the pool and to permit the draining, cleaning and disinfecting of the bottom
and sides; sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 398-17. Filtering and disinfecting equipment; quality of water;
prohibited connections.334
In addition to the provisions of this article, the construction, installation,
establishment and/or maintenance of any swimming pool, bathing pool,
portable pool or wading pool as aforesaid shall be subject to the regulations
and standards now or hereafter established by the governing body of the
Borough of Lindenwold regarding construction, installation, establishment
and maintenance of equipment for chlorinating, disinfecting and filtering
of such pools and the physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the
pool water, and there shall be no physical connection between a potable
(public or private) water supply system and such pools at a point below the
maximum flow of the pool or to a recirculating or treatment system of a pool
unless such physical connection is so installed and operated that no pool
water can be discharged or siphoned into a potable water system.
A. A swimming pool, bathing pool or wading pool of a permanent or
stationary type of construction, a portable pool or the swimming or
bathing area of any natural outdoor pond, river or lake shall not be
constructed, installed, located or established within six feet of any
property line nor nearer to any street line upon which a residence
fronts than the existing setback line of said residence building, but in no
case, regardless of the building setback line, shall a pool be located less
than 30 feet from the front and/or side street line. [Amended
9-21-1990 by Ord. No. 864]
B. A swimming or bathing pool or portable pool or wading pool shall not be
constructed, installed, located or maintained on any land unless a
residence building is also located thereon, except for land on, in or at
which a natural outdoor pond, river or lake is located.
334. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-18
1:773
§ 398-18. Wastewater discharge.335
Swimming pools or wading pools as aforesaid shall not be connected to the
sanitary sewer system nor shall they be permitted to drain into the sanitary
sewer system nor into a public street. The drainage waste from any pool
shall be dispersed upon the premises wherein such pool is located or into
a sand filtering pit; if not practical to do so, then, with the approval of
the governing body, into a seepage pit or storm sewer, if accessible, or as
the governing body shall otherwise require or specify. The discharge of any
wastewater shall in no case be done in such a manner as to cause or create
a nuisance to the abutting property or to the public.
§ 398-19. Fencing; ladders; lights; electrical fixtures.
A. Every swimming pool or bathing pool and portable pool as defined in
§ 398-9 shall, within 30 days from the enactment of this article, be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall of substantial construction
not less than four feet in height, which shall be so constructed as to not
have any openings, holes or gaps larger than two inches in dimensions,
except for doors and gates; picket fences shall not be erected or
maintained for such purpose; a dwelling or accessory building may be
used and considered as part of such enclosure.
B. Said fence or wall enclosure shall be so designed and constructed as to
reasonably prevent any person from gaining access beneath, through or
over the same and shall be provided with one or more substantial gates
or doors of the same height as the fence or wall enclosure.
C. Every gate or door opening through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing and self-latching device capable of keeping such
gates and doors securely closed.
D. It shall be deemed that there is sufficient compliance with this section
when the owner's entire property is completely enclosed around said
pool by a fence with a gate or gates of the type above mentioned.
E. Any municipal ordinance requiring the obtaining of a permit for the
erection of a fence shall not apply to the fence erected pursuant to the
provisions of this article except in those instances where a fence is
erected along a property line.
F. Any access ladder or step used in connection with the above-surface
type of swimming pool, bathing pool or portable pool shall be removed
from the pool when the same is not in active use.
G. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool, bathing pool or portable
pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect the light away from
the adjoining premises so as not to become a nuisance or source of
annoyance to adjacent property owners.
335. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-18 LINDENWOLD CODE § 398-19
1:774
§ 398-20. Appeals from refusal to grant permit.336
§ 398-21. Sanitary regulations.337
Swimming, bathing, portable or wading pools shall also be subject to any
sanitary regulations now or hereafter established by the governing body of
Lindenwold or by the State Department of Health.
§ 398-22. Lifeguards.
Any naturally or artificially constructed outdoor ponds, rivers or lakes which
are open to the public for swimming shall have at least one senior lifeguard
on duty at all times who holds, as a minimum, a valid senior lifeguard
certificate issued by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other equivalent
rating. There should be at least one lifeguard for every 150 patrons in
attendance.
§ 398-23. Loud and disturbing noises.
H. Electrical fixtures, wiring and installation thereof used in connection
with the pools shall conform to the standards of the National Board of
Fire Underwriters for electrical wiring and apparatus.
A. An appeal from the refusal by the Building Inspector to grant a permit
under this article may be made to the governing body, provided that an
appeal is filed with the Borough Clerk within 15 days from the denial of
a permit by the Building Inspector. Said appeal shall be a written
request signed by the applicant for the permit and filed in duplicate.
B. Appeals not filed within 15 days will be permitted only upon request to
the governing body for good cause shown.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued at any such family swimming pool any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others. In the operation of a family swimming pool, the use or
permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing
or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person or
persons who are in the swimming pool premises shall be unlawful.
B. The reasonableness of said noise shall be determined by the Municipal
Judge of the Borough of Lindenwold, taking into consideration the
circumstances surrounding the incident.
336. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
337. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-24
1:775
§ 398-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1981338]
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-1, of this Code
338. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-24 LINDENWOLD CODE § 398-24
1:776
Appendix
Chapter A405
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A405-1. Purpose of the ordinance.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A405-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Comcast of Garden State, L.P.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lindenwold, County of
Camden, State of New Jersey.
§ 398-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A405-3
1:777
§ A405-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A405-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A405-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount required by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A405-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A405-7. Extension of service.
. The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall commence as
of March 3, 2011, the date of expiration of the previous certificate of
approval issued by the Board, and shall expire 15 years from said date,
with a ten-year automatic renewal thereafter, as provided by N.J.S.A.
48:5A-19 and 48:5A-25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A405-3 LINDENWOLD CODE § A405-7
1:778
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy of 35 homes per mile.
§ A405-8. Construction requirements.
§ A405-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the municipality's Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A405-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A405-10
1:779
§ A405-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A405-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A405-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A405-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A405-14. Commitments by the company.
§ A405-15. Educational and governmental access.
A. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials-plus-labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
B. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management facility
and public library in the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials-plus-labor basis by the
municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets.
§ A405-10 LINDENWOLD CODE § A405-15
1:780
A. The company will continue to provide one channel for educational and
governmental ("EG") access for the shared use by the residents of
Lindenwold Borough, Berlin Township, Pine Hill Borough and
Clementon Borough (collectively, "municipalities").
(1) Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval
(notwithstanding that the terms of said renewal certificate of
approval will not become operational until March 3, 2011), the
company shall provide a second education and government access
channel originating from Lindenwold High School. The channel will
be located on a digital channel space. The company shall construct
a dedicated fiber-optic return line to Lindenwold High School
located at 801 Egg Harbor Road, Lindenwold, for the purpose of
cablecasting live and/or recorded programming on this second
educational and government access channel. The company will not
be responsible for providing or for the maintenance of any studio
equipment used for the access channel, including but not limited to
cameras, editing decks, monitors, character generators, etc.
(2) The governing bodies of Lindenwold Borough, Berlin Township,
Pine Hill Borough and Clementon Borough or a designated
educational institution shall provide educational access video
programming. The governing bodies of Lindenwold Borough, Berlin
Township, Pine Hill Borough and Clementon Borough shall provide
government video programming. Unused capacity may be utilized
by the company subject to the provisions for "fallow time" below.
B. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to Borough Hall, each police, fire, emergency
management facility and public library in the municipality, provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials-pluslabor
basis by the municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived
on all additional outlets.
C. The company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except the company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency or nudity.
D. The governing bodies of Lindenwold Borough, Berlin Township, Pine
Hill Borough and Clementon Borough shall be responsible for
developing, implementing and enforcing rules for EG access channel
use which shall ensure that the EG access channel and the EG access
equipment, which shall be provided by the municipalities, will be
available on a first-come, first served, nondiscriminatory basis.
E. Educational access. "Educational access "shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
home schools, community colleges, and universities.
§ A405-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A405-15
1:781
§ A405-16. Emergency uses.
§ A405-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A405-18. Incorporation of the application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A405-19. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
F. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing bodies of Lindenwold Borough, Berlin Township,
Pine Hill Borough and Clementon Borough for showing the public local
government at work.
G. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or under-utilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the municipalities or
other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, the company may program unused time on those channels (at
its discretion and for any purpose), subject to reclamation by the
municipality upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
H. Indemnification. The municipalities shall indemnify the company for
any liability, loss or damage it may suffer due to violation of the
intellectual property rights of third parties on the EG channel and from
claims arising out of the municipalities' rules for or administration of
access.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein.
§ A405-15 LINDENWOLD CODE § A405-19
1:782
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A405-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A405-21. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A405-22. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect March 3, 2011, the date of expiration of the
previous certificate of approval issued by the Board, following issuance of a
renewal certificate of approval from the BPU, which shall also take effect on
March 3, 2011.
Chapter A406
GAS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 296, Art. I.
§ A406-1. Renewal.
Exclusive consent and permission is hereby renewed and granted to South
Jersey Gas Company to lay and construct its pipes and mains and related
appurtenances and facilities within the streets, alleys, squares and public
places within Lindenwold in the manner prescribed by N.J.S.A. 48:9-21, and
subject to reasonable regulations imposed by ordinance or resolution with
respect to the opening of streets and public places, subject to approval of
such consent and permission by the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A405-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A406-2
1:783
§ A406-2. Applicability; term.
This consent is granted for the entire geographical area of Lindenwold and
extends to the boundaries of Lindenwold and shall remain in effect for a
period of 50 years from the date of final adoption of this ordinance.
§ A406-3. Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance
is for any reason held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this ordinance.
§ A406-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon posting, publication, final
passage in the manner prescribed by law, and acceptance by South Jersey
Gas Company.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1981 Code to 2014 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1981 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; See Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 6, Claims Approval Procedure Ch. 10
Ch. 7, Condominium Conversion Review and
Appeal Board
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ch. 8, Court, Municipal
Art. I, Court Established Ch. 16, Art. I
Art. II, Public Defender Application Fee Ch. 16, Art. II
Ch. 14, Environmental Commission Ch. 145, Art. I
Ch. 16, Fire District Ch. 22
Ch. 20, Health, Board of REP
§ A406-2 LINDENWOLD CODE § DT-1
1:784
Chapter/Title From 1981 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 26, Library
Art. I, Public Library Ch. 28, Art. I
Art. II, Advisory Library Board Ch. 28, Art. II
Ch. 30, Municipal Utilities Authority Superseded by Ord. No.
980; see Ch. 57
Ch. 35, Officers and Employees
Art. I, Prosecuting Attorney Ch. 34, Art. I
Art. II, Deputy Municipal Court Clerk Ch. 34, Art. V
Art. III, Deputy Municipal Clerk Ch. 34, Art. IV
Art. IV, Administrative Assistant Ch. 34, Art. VI
Art. V, Public Information Officer Ch. 34, Art. II
Art. VI, Secretary of Board of Health and
Registrar of Vital Statistics
Ch. 34, Art. III
Art. VII, Community Relations Officer Ch. 34, Art. VII
Art. VIII, Aide to Council Ch. 34, Art. VIII
Art. IX, Public Relations Officer Ch. 34, Art. IX
Art. X, Senior Citizens Advisor Ch. 34, Art. X
Art. XI, Administrator Ch. 34, Art. XI
Art. XII, Assistant Prosecutor Ch. 34, Art. XII
Art. XIII, Municipal Compliance Officer Ch. 34, Art. XIII
Art. XIV, Deputy Court Clerk/Typist Ch. 34, Art. XIV
Art. XV, Deputy Director of Public Works Ch. 34, Art. XV
Art. XVI, Supervisor of Accounts Ch. 34, Art. XVI
Art. XVII, Sanitation Driver Ch. 34, Art. XVII
Art. XVIII, Principal Clerk/Typist Ch. 34, Art. XVIII
Art. XIX, Assistant Violations Clerk Ch. 34, Art. XIX
Art. XX, Automotive Mechanic Ch. 34, Art. XX
Art. XXI, Mechanic's Helper Ch. 34, Art. XXI
Art. XXII, Deputy Compliance Officer Ch. 34, Art. XXII
Art. XXIII, Chief Financial Officer Ch. 34, Art. XXIII
Ch. 37, Parks and Recreation Commissioners,
Board of
Ch. 5, Art. II
Ch. 38, Payroll Account Ch. 38
Ch. 40, Pensions REP; see now Ch. 42
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:785
Chapter/Title From 1981 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 43, Police Department Superseded by Ord. No.
1132; see now Ch. 46,
Art. II
Ch. 51, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 52
Ch. 52, Sewer Services Ch. 57
Ch. 53, Shade Tree Commission Repealed by Ord. No.
1311; see now Ch. 145,
Art. I
Part II, General Legislation
Ch. 61, Alarm Systems Ch. 65
Ch. 63, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Licenses and Fees Ch. 69, Art. I
Art. II, Purchase and Consumption by Minors Ch. 69, Art. II
Art. III, Sale and Distribution Ch. 69, Art. I
Art. IV, Sales on New Year's Day Ch. 69, Art. I
Art. V, Open Containers in Public Places Ch. 69, Art. III
Ch. 72, Brush, Grass and Weeds Superseded by Ord. No.
1341; see now Ch. 240
Ch. 74, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 92
Ch. 75, Buildings, Unfit Superseded by Ord. No.
1341; see now Ch. 240
Ch. 77, Burning of Rubbish Ch. 100
Ch. 81, Certificates of Occupancy
Art. I, Certificate Required Ch. 105, Art. I
Art. II, Occupancy Certification for Change
in Ownership
Ch. 105, Art. II
Ch. 85, Construction Code, Uniform Ch. 119
Ch. 89, Curfew Ch. 127
Ch. 93, Delivery Personnel Ch. 132
Ch. 97, Dogs and Other Animals Ch. 75, Arts. I and II
Ch. 101, Drive-in Restaurants and Shopping
Centers
Ch. 137
Ch. 104, Drugs and Drug Paraphernalia
Art. I, Drug-Free School Zones Ch. 141
Ch. 107, Fees Ch. 150, Art. I
Ch. 109, Hunting Ch. 184
Ch. 110, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 156
§ DT-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § DT-1
1:786
Chapter/Title From 1981 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 111, Fire Lanes Ch. 220, Art. II
Ch. 113, Fire Prevention
Article I, Adoption of Fire Prevention Code REP
Article II, Investigation by Fire Marshal Ch. 160, Art. II
Article III, Fee for Fire Marshal's Report REP
Article IV, Uniform Fire Safety Code Ch. 160, Art. IV
Ch. 117, Flood Hazard Areas Ch. 164
Ch. 124, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Superseded by Ord. No.
1295; see now Ch. 276
Ch. 129, Handicapped Parking Ch. 220, Art. III
Ch. 132, Housing Standards Superseded by Ord. No.
1341; see now Ch. 240
Ch. 136, Junk Storage Ch. 238, Art. I
Ch. 139, Land Use and Development Ch. 190
Ch. 143, Loitering Ch. 195
Ch. 146, Mercantile Licenses Ch. 199
Ch. 151, Noise Ch. 205
Ch. 154, Nuclear-Free Zone REP
Ch. 157, Parental Responsibility REP
Ch. 160, Parks and Recreation Areas Ch. 224
Ch. 163, Peace and Good Order
Art. I, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 229, Art. II
Art. II, Indecency; Damaging Property Ch. 229, Art. I
Ch. 167, Property Maintenance Superseded by Ord. No.
1341; see now Ch. 240
Ch. 170, Recycling Superseded by Ord. No.
1295; see now Ch. 276
Ch. 172, Rent Control Repealed by Ord. No.
1213; see now Ch. 250
Ch. 173, Resource Extraction Ch. 253
Ch. 174, Sewer Use Ch. 260
Ch. 176, Smoke Detectors and Alarms
Art. I, Hotels and Multiple Dwellings Ch. 160, Art. III
Art. II, Residential Structures Ch. 160, Art. V
Ch. 178, Soil Removal Ch. 273
Ch. 181, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 296, Arts. I, II and III
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:787
Chapter/Title From 1981 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 183, Tattooing and Body Piercing Ch. 301
Ch. 185, Tax Abatement
Art. I, Home Improvements Superseded by Ord. No.
1127; see now Ch. 305,
Art. II
Art. II, Commercial and Industrial Property Ch. 305, Art. I
Ch. 188, Taxicabs Superseded by Ord. No.
1275; see now Ch. 309
Ch. 191, Trains REP
Ch. 193, Vehicle Operation and Maintenance Ch. 335, Art. I
Ch. 194, Vehicles, Abandoned and Junk Ch. 339
Ch. 195, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 345, Art. I
Ch. 198, Vehicles, Motor-Driven Ch. 349
Ch. 200, Vehicles, Storage of Ch. 220, Art. I
Ch. 202, Water
Art. I, Water Emergencies Ch. 358
Ch. 205, Zoning Ch. 365
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Ch. 208, General Provisions, Board of Health
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Board of Health REP
Ch. 214, Food Establishments, Retail REP
Ch. 219, Nuisances, Public Health Ch. 381
Ch. 222, Sanitary Standards Ch. 386
Ch. 225, Sewage Disposal Systems, Individual Ch. 390
Ch. 227, Sewer Connections REP
Ch. 230, Swimming Pools, Private Ch. 398, Art. II
Ch. 232, Swimming Pools, Public Ch. 398, Art. I
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § DL-1
1:788
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014-01
11-5-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
2014-02
11-5-2014 Bond ordinance NCM
Ord. No.
2014-03
11-5-2014 Bond ordinance NCM
Ord. No.
2014-04
11-5-2014 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2014-05
11-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
traffic regulations
NCM (see Ch. 345,
Art. I)
Ord. No.
2014-06
12-3-2014 Rental registration
amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No.
2015-01
3-11-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 309
Ord. No.
2015-02
4-8-2015 Exceed budget
appropriation limits;
establish cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2015-03
5-13-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 309
Ord. No.
2015-04
5-13-2015 Fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2015-05
5-13-2015 Property
maintenance:
foreclosed property
Ch. 238, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2015-06
5-13-2015 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2015-07
6-10-2015 Solid waste utility
amendment
Ch. 276
Ord. No.
2015-08
7-8-2015 Parking: general
regulations
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
Ord. No.
2015-09
6-10-2015 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2015-10
8-12-2015 Solid waste utility
amendment
Ch. 276
Ord. No.
2015-11
8-12-2015 Bond ordinance NCM
Ord. No.
2015-12
8-12-2015 Bond ordinance NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:789
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2015-13
8-26-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2015-14
9-9-2015 Board of Health Ch. 375
Ord. No.
2015-15
9-23-2015 Fire prevention:
securing of firedamaged
buildings
and structures
Ch. 160, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2015-16
10-14-2015 Fire prevention:
dangerous, damaged
and unfit structures;
nuisance properties
Ch. 160, Art. VII;
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2015-17
11-11-2015 Solid waste utility
amendment
Ch. 276
Ord. No.
2015-18
11-11-2015 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2015-19
12-9-2015 Bond ordinance NCM
Ord. No.
2015-20
12-29-2015 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-01
2-24-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-02
3-9-2016 Rental property
inspection
Ch. 250
Ord. No.
2016-03
3-24-2016 Fees: fee schedule Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-04
4-13-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-05
4-13-2016 Solid waste and
recycling
amendment
Ch. 276
Ord. No.
2016-06
4-27-2016 Exceed budget
appropriation limits;
establish cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2016-07
5-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 365
Ord. No.
2016-08
6-22-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-09
6-22-2016 Solid waste and
recycling
amendment
Ch. 276
§ DL-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § DL-1
1:790
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2016-10
6-22-2016 Animals: pet store
sales
Ch. 75, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2016-11
7-13-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-12
8-24-2016 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-13
9-14-2016 Solid waste and
recycling
Ch. 276
Ord. No.
2016-14
8-24-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2016-15
12-28-2016 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
2016-16
Tabled
Ord. No.
2016-17
12-28-2016 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2017-01
2-8-2017 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-02
3-8-2017 Certificates of
occupancy: change
of ownership
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. II
Ord. No.
2017-03
3-22-2017 Property
maintenance: vacant
property
amendment;
foreclosed property
amendment
Ch. 238, Art. III;
Ch. 238, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2017-04
3-22-2017 Rental property
inspection
amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No.
2017-05
4-12-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2017-06
5-10-2017 Salaries and
compensation
NCM (see Ch. 52)
Ord. No.
2017-07
5-10-2017 Mercantile licenses
amendment
Ch. 199
Ord. No.
2017-08
5-10-2017 Clothing bins
amendment
Ch. 109
Ord. No.
2017-09
5-10-2017 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:791
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-10
6-28-2017 Taxation: exemption
for residential
property amendment
Ch. 305, Art. II
Ord. No.
2017-11
7-26-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2017-12
7-26-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2017-13
8-9-2017 Streets and
sidewalks:
excavations
amendment
Ch. 296, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-14
8-9-2017 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-15
8-9-2017 Redevelopment plan
adoption
NCM
Ord. No.
2017-16
11-8-2017 Condominium
Associations
Repealer
Ch. 115, reference
only
Ord. No.
2017-17
12-13-2017 Property
Maintenance:
Emergency
Situations
Amendment
Ch. 238, Art. II
Ord. No.
2017-18
12-13-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2017-19
12-27-2017 Mercantile Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 199
Ord. No.
2017-20
12-27-2017 Burning, Outdoor
Amendment
Ch. 100
Ord. No.
2017-21
12-27-2017 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 296, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017-22
12-27-2017 Fees: Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
Ord. No.
2018-01
3-14-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 150
Ord. No.
2018-02
4-25-2018 Exceed Budget and
Establish Cap Bank
NCM
§ DL-1 LINDENWOLD CODE § DL-1
1:792
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2018-03
4-25-2018 Parks and
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 224
Ord. No.
2018-04
5-23-2018 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2018-05
6-27-2018 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2018-06
8-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 365
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2018-116 12-12-2018 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 296,
Art. I
6
2018-117 12-12-2018 Fees: Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. 150,
Art. I
6
2019-1 2-27-2019 Fees: Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. 150,
Art. I
6
2019-119 2-27-2019 Salaries See Ch. 52 6
2019-154 4-24-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 6
2019-155 6-12-2019 Parking: Fire Lanes
Amendment
Ch. 220,
Art. II
6
2019-156 6-12-2019 General Provisions:
General Penalty;
Construal of
Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I 6
2019-183 6-12-2019 Salaries See Ch. 52 6
2019-220 8-14-2019 Board of Health
Amendment
Ch. 375 6
2019-221 9-11-2019 Certificates of
Occupancy:
Nonconforming
Dwelling Units
Ch. 105,
Art. IIA
6
2019-222 9-11-2019 Fees: Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. 150,
Art. I
6
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:793