Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Long Branch of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City
of Long Branch (including the provisions of the 1971 Code), as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 345, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the City of Long Branch," hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, including the
provisions of the 1971 Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Long
Branch by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Long Branch" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Long Branch, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Long
Branch to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in § 1-16 hereof.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 1-12
1:4
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and
not contained in the Code, including the provisions of the 1971 Code, are
hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Adopting Ordinance, except
as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-8-1998.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. Definitions; word usage.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and the provisions of the
1971 Code for adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. Nomenclature changes.
(1) Throughout the Code, the terms "Construction Official," "Building
Inspector" and "Code Enforcement Officer" are changed to
"Construction Code Official."
(2) Throughout Chapter 177, Flood Damage Prevention [Ord. No. 902
(Ch. XXV of the 1971 Code)], references to the "Federal Insurance
Administration" are changed to "Federal Emergency Management
Agency"; and any references to "mobile home" or "mobile homes"
are changed to "manufactured home" or "manufactured homes."
A. As used in this Code, except as specifically defined elsewhere or where
the context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHARTER — Mayor and Council Plan A under the Optional Municipal
Charter Law, specifically N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 through 40:69A-48,
40:69A-26 through 40:69A-30 and 40:69A-150 through 40:69A-210
(excepting those provisions which have been repealed).
CITY — The City of Long Branch in the County of Monmouth and the
State of New Jersey.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts, articles and sections which
were amended, added, deleted or adopted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the
Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 1-15
1:6
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Long
Branch; the Council persons of the City of Long Branch.
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The Municipal Clerk of the City of Long
Branch duly appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the City government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the City government
assigned to such organizational unit by the City Council.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted, including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as
it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any kind of personal representatives of any
thereof in any capacity, acting for himself or for any other person, under
either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
STREETS — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk; and
includes every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field
used by the general public.
YEAR — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Construction. As used in this Code, except as specifically provided
elsewhere or where the context may otherwise require, the following
phrases and usage of words shall be construed as follows:
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the
future tense includes the present.
(2) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(3) The singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular.
(4) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(5) Generally, the time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the
last day is a Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the offices of
the City are closed, that day shall be excluded.
(6) "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material
which is in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Violations and penalties.
Except where specifically provided otherwise in this Code, the following
provisions shall prevail.
(7) Whenever a specific time is used, it shall mean the prevailing and
established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day
in any year.
A. Maximum penalties. For the violation of any provision of the Code of the
City of Long Branch, where no specific maximum penalty is required
under applicable state law, the maximum penalty for any such violation
shall be one or more of the following, upon conviction and in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same: a fine of not more than
$2,000; imprisonment for not more than 90 days; and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. [Amended 7-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 25-04; 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4-06]
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of this Code exists shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of this Code shall be considered a
separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
C. Applicability. The maximum penalty provisions stated herein are not
intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation.
Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all
(except where a mandatory statutory penalty is set forth in any part of
the Code or required by state law), may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
§ 1-15 LONG BRANCH CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 21. Personnel — See Ch. 75.
§ 5-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the City of Long Branch" and is herein referred to as the "code."2
§ 5-2. Elected officials; terms of office; vacancies.
§ 5-3. Council; powers and duties.
A. Election; terms. Pursuant to the Charter, the elected officials of the City
shall be a Mayor and five Councilmen, all of whom shall serve for terms
of four years beginning on the first day of July next following their
election.
B. Vacancies. Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled by election for
the remainder of the unexpired term at the next general election
occurring not less than 60 days after the occurrence of the vacancy. An
election to fill a vacancy shall be upon direct nomination by petition in
the manner provided by law for the filling of vacancies in municipal
offices where candidates are nominated by direct petition for a general
election. Council shall fill such vacancies temporarily by appointment,
to serve until the qualification of a person so elected.
A. The legislative power of the City shall be exercised by the City Council,
except as may be otherwise provided by general law.
B. The Council in addition to other powers and duties conferred upon it by
the Charter or by general law may:
(1) Require any municipal officer to prepare and submit sworn
statements regarding his official duties and the performance
thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any
department, office or agency of the municipal government.
(2) Remove, by at least two-thirds vote of the whole number of the
Council, any municipal officer, other than the Mayor or a member
2. Editor's Note: The Administrative Code has been drafted in conformity with the Charter
more specifically defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions. Other enabling laws relating to
this chapter are N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 et seq., Local Board of Health; N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.,
Municipal Courts; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., Zoning Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 et seq,, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., Shade Tree Commission; and
N.J.S.A. 44:8-115 et seq., Local Assistance Boards. In addition, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29(a)
invests in the municipality the power to organize and regulate its internal affairs.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:9
§ 5-4. Office of Mayor.
of the Council, for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be
heard. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. Duties of Mayor. The executive power of the City shall be exercised by
the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Charter and ordinances of the
City and all general laws applicable thereto. He shall annually report to
the Council and the public on the work of the previous year and on the
condition and requirements of the City Council and shall from time to
time make such recommendations for action by the Council as he may
deem in the public interest. He shall supervise all the departments of
the City and shall require each department to make an annual and such
other reports of its work as he may deem desirable. Except as otherwise
provided by the Charter or this chapter, contracts, deeds and leases by
the terms of which the City is a party shall be negotiated, executed,
delivered and accepted by the Mayor on the approval of the Council.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Chief Administrative Officer.
(1) Within the Office of the Mayor there shall be a Chief Administrative
Officer, and until such time as shall be otherwise provided by
ordinance, the Business Administrator shall serve as Chief
Administrative Officer without additional compensation. Under the
direction and supervision of the Mayor, the Chief Administrative
Officer shall:
(a) Assist the Mayor in the preparation of the City budget and
otherwise as the Mayor may require.
(b) Supervise the administration of each of the departments of the
City government.
(c) Prescribe and install uniform forms and procedures for budget
preparation by all departments.
(d) Prepare a job classification and pay plan and other uniform
personnel policies for the departments in the City government.
(e) Install and maintain a complete system of personnel records
for all officers and employees of the City government.
(f) Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the City government not inconsistent with the
Charter and codes.
(g) Coordinate the operation and administration of the various
departments, divisions, offices and agencies of the City
government.
(h) Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget
operations, work programs and costs of City services.
§ 5-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-4
1:10
§ 5-5. City Clerk.
(i) Perform such other duties as the code may require or as the
Council may otherwise prescribe.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by the Charter or this chapter, real
and personal property owned, leased or held by the City shall be
managed, controlled and disposed of pursuant to law by the
Business Administrator.
(3) Casualty insurance and surety bonds required for City purposes
shall be by the Business Administrator upon the approval of Council
and within the limits of available appropriations, and the bonds and
policies of insurance shall be lodged with the City Clerk for
safekeeping. All insurance agreements, whether group or personal,
are to be deposited with the City Clerk's office, if public tax paid
dollars have been expended thereon. All insurance agreements,
whether group or personal, are to be deposited with the City
Clerk's office, if public tax paid dollars have been expended
thereon. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No. 718]
A. Appointment. A City Clerk shall be appointed by the Council, pursuant
to the Charter, for a term of four years beginning on the 1st day of July,
1966, and every four years thereafter, provided that any appointment to
fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term only, and provided further
that such appointment shall be subject to state statute providing tenure
for municipal clerks. Prior to his appointment, the City Clerk shall be
qualified by training or experience, or a combination thereof, for the
duties of his office.
B. The City Clerk shall have the following functions, powers and duties:
(1) He shall serve as Clerk of the Council, keep its minutes and records
of its proceedings and maintain and compile its ordinances and
resolutions as required by the Charter.
(2) Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Councilmen in the
discharge of their official duties.
(3) Have custody of the City's seal and affix it to such books, papers
and documents as may be authorized pursuant to law.
(4) Have and take custody of all official books, papers and documents
of the City, for which no other depository is provided by charter or
ordinance, and preserve and keep them safely.
(5) Perform such functions as are vested in the Clerk by the licensing
provisions of state law or ordinance.
(6) Have such other, different and additional powers, functions and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
C. Searches, permits. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:11
§ 5-6. Tax Assessor. [Added 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 92-89]
§ 5-7. Department heads.
(1) The City Clerk shall issue certificates as to approval of subdivisions
of land as authorized by law when a land subdivision has been
approved in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the City,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56. Prior to the issuance of such certificate, he shall
secure from the Secretary of the Planning Board his
countersignature, which shall indicate that, according to the
records of the Board and his knowledge, information and belief, the
certificate is correct.
(2) The City Clerk shall administer the license and permit provisions of
all regulatory ordinances not expressly assigned by this code to any
department and not required by statute or ordinance to be
administered by another City officer.
D. Deputy City Clerk. The Clerk shall appoint a Deputy Clerk, who shall
perform the functions, powers and duties of a Clerk in the absence or
upon the direction of the latter and who shall perform such other
functions, powers and duties as may be directed by the Council.
A. Appointment.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.30, no person shall on or after July 1,
1971, be appointed or reappointed as an Assessor unless he shall
hold a tax assessor certificate. This shall not apply, however, to an
Assessor who has served continuously in office from July 1, 1967, to
the date of reappointment.
(2) Any person reappointed as Assessor subsequent to receiving a tax
assessor's certificate, and having served the duties of Tax Assessor
for not less than four consecutive years, shall hold immediately
prior to such reappointment; or who, on or before June 30, 1969,
has received a tax assessor's certificate while actually in office as
an Assessor or performing the duty of an Assessor, and who, on or
before June 30, 1969, has served as Assessor or performed the
duties of Assessor for not less than four consecutive years shall
hold his position during good behavior and efficiency
notwithstanding that such reappointment or re-election was for a
fixed term of years, and he shall not be removed therefrom for
political reasons but only for good cause shown and after a proper
hearing after due notice.
B. Duties. The City Tax Assessor shall perform and discharge all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed for assessors by general law
and rules and regulations adopted by the County Tax Board, State
Division of Taxation and the New Jersey Tax Court.
§ 5-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-7
1:12
§ 5-8. Department of Law.
A. Appointment. Department heads shall be appointed and removed as
provided by the Charter. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of a
department head, the Mayor may designate the Chief Administrative
Officer or the head of any other department to serve as acting
department head for as long as such vacancy shall remain unfilled.
B. Powers and duties. Under the supervision and direction of the Mayor,
and subject to the Charter and code, each department head shall:
(1) Subject to the provisions of the Revised Statutes, Title 11, Civil
Service,3 appoint subordinate officers and employees within the
respective departments and may, with the approval of the Mayor,
remove such officers and employees.
(2) Prescribe the internal organization of the department.
(3) Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments as
need appears.
(4) Direct and supervise the work of the department and its employees
through the divisions established by the code and such other
organizational units as the head of the department may find
necessary or desirable.
(5) Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
(6) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as
shall be approved by the Business Administrator on the work of the
department during the preceding year.
A. Department generally. There shall be a Department of Law, the head of
which shall be the City Attorney.
B. City Attorney; general duties. The City Attorney shall represent the City
in all legal matters and shall advise and assist the Mayor, the Council
and the other departments as required. He shall attend meetings of the
Council, draft ordinances and resolutions and give opinions and rulings
on questions of law which may arise at Council meetings. He shall
prepare or approve all legal instruments relating to the business of the
City. He shall represent the City in any litigation and conduct trials,
appeals and other proceedings affecting the interests of the City as he
may in his discretion determine to be necessary or desirable or as
directed by the Mayor or Council.
C. City Attorney; additional duties. The City Attorney shall also:
3. Editor's Note: L. 1986, c. 112 enacted the new Title 11A, Civil Service, and repealed
former Title 11, Civil Service.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:13
(1) Maintain records of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the City's interest and report thereon from time to
time as the Mayor or Council may require.
(2) Have power to enter into any agreement, compromise or
settlement of any litigation in which the City is involved, subject to
the approval of the Council.
(3) Upon the termination of his service with the City, forthwith
surrender to his successor all City property, papers and records,
including all correspondence, together with a written consent to
substitution of his successor in any pending actions or proceedings.
D. City Attorney; Special Council. Whenever he deems the interests of the
City so require, the City Attorney may recommend to the Mayor and
Council the appointment of Special Counsel to assist him in the
preparation, trial or argument of any issue or in such other capacity as
he may determine.
E. Assistant City Attorney. Within the Department of Law there shall be an
Assistant City Attorney, who shall serve as City Prosecutor. He shall
serve for a term of one year.
(1) As City Prosecutor, he shall assist the Court Clerk to prepare
complaints, arrange for and prepare cases for trial in advance of
the trial date and, wherever possible, make a thorough pretrial
investigation of defendants who may be found guilty and eventually
sentenced. He shall serve as counsel to the Local Assistance Board
and shall attend upon the Municipal Court and prosecute on behalf
of the City:
(a) All indictable offenses, for presentation at arraignment or
preliminary hearing, and aid the County Prosecutor where the
County Prosecutor assumes to act at arraignment or
preliminary hearing.
(b) All bastardy proceedings, poor act (welfare) prosecutions for
nonsupport and all nonsupport matters of indigents, deserted
wives and children.
(c) All drunken driving, reckless driving and careless driving cases
where initiated by police; leaving the scene of an accident;
driving while on revoked list.
(d) All narcotics matters, including disorderly persons charges
involving legend drugs.
(e) All disorderly persons charges involving public places and
streets.
(f) All shoplifting cases, bad checks and commercial frauds
practiced upon local commercial enterprises.
§ 5-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-8
1:14
§ 5-9. Department of Administration.
§ 5-10. Department of Finance.
(g) All assaults and batteries involving knives, instruments,
weapons of any and all kinds, whether on private or public
property, and all assaults and batteries or common fights in
public places, on public streets or public property.
(h) All violations of City ordinances.
(i) In the event of the temporary absence, disability or
disqualification of the City Attorney, the Assistant City Attorney
may act in his place until the absence, disability or
disqualification is terminated.
F. City Public Defender. Within the Department of Law there shall be a
City Public Defender. He shall serve for a term of one year. He shall be
an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey and shall serve as Public
Defender in all cases as may be required; provided, however, that such
Public Defender shall be available at the call of the Municipal Judge,
who shall assign the Public Defender for a specific case where the
interest of justice so requires. [Added 12-12-1989 by Ord. No.
150-89]
A. Department generally. There shall be a Department of Administration,
the head of which shall be the Business Administrator. Prior to his
appointment, the Business Administrator shall be qualified as required
by the Charter and in particular shall have had at least three years of
responsible experience in public administration. [Amended 3-8-1977
by Ord. No. 865]
B. Duties of Department; budget and personnel. The Department shall
assist the Mayor in the preparation of the budget, shall assist the
Council in the analysis and consideration of the budget and shall
administer and control the budget after it is adopted subject to the code
and the requirements of statutory law. The Department shall also
administer the city's personnel system and oversee the function of the
Division of Community and Economic Development. [Amended
5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 14-05]
C. The Department should also engage in such other responsibilities as
may be delegated by the City Council pursuant to resolution and
ordinance. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance, who shall also act as the City's Chief Financial
Officer. Within the Department there shall be divisions of accounting
and control, revenues and purchasing. Except as otherwise required by
law, the Director shall allocate and assign the functions, powers and
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:15
duties among and within such division. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 92-89; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Division of Accounting and Control. Within the Department of Finance
there shall be a Division of Accounting and Control, the head of which
shall be the City Comptroller, and who, under the direction, delegation,
control and supervision of the Director of Finance, who is the Chief
Financial Officer of the City of Long Branch, shall perform the following
duties as outlined in Subsection B(1) and (2) below if so delegated by
the Director of Finance. [Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1037]
(1) Maintain the City's central bookkeeping and accounting records,
preaudit and control all claims and demands against the City and
maintain an encumbrance system of budgetary control, and do
related work as required.
(2) Keep and maintain books and records of all financial transactions of
the City in accordance with the standards and all requirements of
the Division of Local Finance in the Department of Community
Affairs of the State of New Jersey; have custody of all public moneys
of the City, make monthly reports to the Director of Finance of all
receipts, expenditures, commitments and unexpended
appropriations and have custody of all investments and invested
funds of the City or in possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity
except as otherwise provided by law; and have the safekeeping of
all bonds and notes of the City. He does related work as required.
(3) All moneys, including moneys collected by taxation, received from
any source by or on behalf of the City or any board or department
thereof shall, within 48 hours after the receipt thereof, either be
paid to the Comptroller of the City, who shall deposit all funds
within 48 hours after the receipt thereof to the credit of the City in
its designated legal depository, or shall be deposited to the credit of
the City in its designated legal depository. All rents respecting Cityowned
property shall be paid directly to the comptroller. He does
related work as required.4
C. Division of Revenues. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a
Division of Revenues. The head of the Division shall be the Tax
Collector, who shall be appointed pursuant to law. [Amended
10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1037]
(1) The City Tax Collector shall have, perform and exercise all the
functions, powers and duties as are provided by state statute and
municipal ordinance relating to City property taxes. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
4. Editor's Note: Former reserved Subsection 2-8A.2 was deleted 2-14-1989 by Ord. No.
92-89.
§ 5-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-10
1:16
(2) The Tax Collector shall receive and collect all moneys assessed or
raised by taxation or assessment for any purpose. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(3) The Tax Collector shall keep proper records and report to the
Director of the Department at least monthly all receipts and
deposits made by him and shall in such report account for all
moneys for which he is responsible. He shall keep a current record
of all tax title liens, advising the Director promptly as liens become
subject to foreclosure under the law. He shall enforce the payment
of delinquent taxes by the means provided by law as soon as the
same become delinquent. He shall also serve as Municipal Tax
Search Officer and Collector of Easement.
D. Division of Purchasing.
(1) Within the Department there shall be a Division of Purchasing, the
head of which shall be the City Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing
Agent shall purchase all materials, supplies and equipment and
work and labor under contract required by any department, office
or agency of the City, subject to the requirements of the Charter
and code. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(2) Purchases shall be authorized only upon requisition of a
department head, which shall be made to the Purchasing Agent at
such times and in such form as he may prescribe or approve.
Except as the Business Administrator may specifically authorize in
case of emergency, no purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or
voucher shall be approved unless the procedures prescribed by or
pursuant to the Administrative Code have been followed. Where
the law requires that purchases be made after public bidding, such
purchases shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The
Purchasing Agent shall control any general store rooms or stock
rooms. He may make transfers of supplies, materials and
equipment among departments, offices and agencies; sell surplus,
obsolete, unused or waste supplies, material and equipment; and
may make any other sales authorized pursuant to law. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(3) The Purchasing Agent shall establish and enforce suitable
specifications and standards for all supplies, material and
equipment to be purchased for the City; shall inspect deliveries to
determine their quality, quantity and compliance with these
specifications and standards; and shall accept or reject the
deliveries in accordance with the results of his inspection.
(4) The City Council of the City of Long Branch hereby authorizes the
participation by the City in any Monmouth County Cooperative
Pricing Purchasing Program which is established prior to or after
the adoption of this chapter. [Amended 5-27-1975 by Ord. No.
781]
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:17
(a) The participation by the City in the program referred to in
Subsection D(4) of this section will be governed by the
provisions of New Jersey law.
(b) All orders from the City of Long Branch would be sent to the
vendor directly indicating the county contract number.
(c) Invoices would be sent to the local body, with the county
assuming no obligation for payment of bills.
(d) It would be the responsibility of the local political body to make
sure the vendor has complied with all conditions of delivery
and quality established in the specifications.
(5) Contracts.
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 to 40:23-6.29,
as amended, and 40A:11-11, the City of Long Branch is hereby
authorized to enter into contracts with the County of
Monmouth for the joint use by the City of Long Branch and
other municipalities in the County of Monmouth of
administrative services and facilities of the Office of
Purchasing Agent of the County of Monmouth appropriate to
the procurement of certain materials, supplies and equipment
which may be determined to be required from time to time by
the City and which the City may otherwise lawfully purchase
for itself. The services and facilities of said Office of County
Purchasing Agent shall be provided without cost to the City.
(b) The proper municipal officials of the City are hereby
authorized and empowered to execute, on behalf of the City,
such contracts with the County of Monmouth as may be
authorized and approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the City.
E. Prepayment of bills. The Finance Director shall be authorized to prepay
any of the following municipal obligations prior to the City Council
voting on the bill list upon which such obligation shall be listed: [Added
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 101-89]
(1) Payments under contractual agreements previously approved by
and authorized by the City Council. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
(2) Payments required by specific statute.
(3) Payment of utility bills.
(4) Payment of any other item deemed necessary by the Director of
Finance that does not exceed $2,500 per item and has been
reviewed and authorized for payment by the City Council.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 5-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-10
1:18
§ 5-11. Department of Building and Development.
(5) Debt service items. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. Department generally. There shall be a Department of Building and
Development, the head of which shall be the Department Head/
Director. Prior to his appointment, the Department Head/Director shall
be qualified by at least three years' experience in a responsible capacity
in urban renewal work or equivalent experience. [Amended
11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 38-91; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 31-00]
B. Divisions. Within the Department there shall be a Division of Planning
and Division of Construction/Inspections. Except as otherwise provided
by the Code or required by law, the Department Head/Director shall
allocate and assign functions, powers and duties of the Department
among and within these Divisions. [Amended 8-8-2000 by Ord. No.
31-00; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 14-05]
C. Department powers and duties generally. The Department, subject to
the Charter and ordinances, shall:
(1) Advise and assist the Mayor and Council in regard to planning and
public improvement aspects of all matters related to the
development of the City.
(2) Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the City and report thereon to the Mayor and
Council.
(3) Administer and execute urban renewal and redevelopment plans
and programs authorized pursuant to law.
(4) Acquire, clear and dispose of project lands in accordance with the
terms of authorized urban renewal projects.
(5) Prepare, review, revise and modify plans and programs as defined
by N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. for utilizing appropriate private and
public resources to eliminate and prevent the development or
spread of blight and deterioration, to encourage needed
conservation or rehabilitation, to provide for the redevelopment of
blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating areas and to undertake such
of these activities or other feasible activities as may be suitably
employed to achieve the objectives of such a program, provided
that the workable program may be adopted, revised or modified
only with the approval of the Mayor. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
(6) Plan, execute and administer urban renewal or redevelopment
programs authorized and approved pursuant to agreement with the
federal or state government, provided that no project shall be
undertaken except upon the approval of the Council. Nothing in
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:19
§ 5-12. Department of Public Works.
this section shall be construed to authorize any expenditure except
pursuant to an appropriation made by the Council.
(7) Appoint or contract with technical and professional advisers and
assistants as may be required and approved for any federally or
state aided planning, renewal, development or redevelopment
project, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize the making of any contract without the approval of
Council where such approval is required by law.
(8) Constitute and appoint advisory committees, neighborhood
councils and other forms of citizen participation in urban
rehabilitation and redevelopment.
(9) The Division of Construction/Inspections, in addition to all other
functions set forth in § 177-4 regarding Construction Official, shall
have in addition all other functions set forth in § 173-4.
D. Staff to the Planning Board. The Department shall provide within the
limits of available appropriations such staff services as the Planning
Board may require, including a secretary and professional, technical
and office services.
E. Local public agency for federal purposes. The City shall be the local
public agency for the purposes of any federal law referring to such an
agency, and the Council, Mayor and various departments shall have,
exercise and discharge their functions, respectively, as they may be
applicable to urban renewal and redevelopment.
F. Relocation Officer. Within the Division of Community and Economic
Development there shall be a Relocation Officer who shall provide
relocation assistance and services to any person or business displaced
as a result of the execution of an urban renewal project, and the
carrying out of such duties and powers as provided by the state statute
regarding relocations. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98;
8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 31-00 ]
G. Zoning Officer. The Construction Code Official, Director Head/Director
of the Building and Development Department and/or Administrative
Director of City Planning may also serve as Zoning Officer under the
zoning ordinance of the City. [Amended 11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
38-91; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 31-00]
A. Department generally; Director of Public Works. There shall be a
Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the Director of
Public Works. He shall be qualified in the planning and execution of
public works and improvements and in responsible management of
technical personnel. The Director shall be responsible for the proper
and efficient conduct of all public works functions of the City
government, shall supervise and direct the work of the Department and
§ 5-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-12
1:20
shall provide technical and engineering assistance to all other
departments as needed. He shall have the power, with the approval of
the Mayor and within the limits of available appropriations, to engage
such specialized and consulting engineers for specific projects and
purposes as he may deem necessary for the proper administration
of the functions of the Department. He shall maintain liaison with
state and federal officers and agencies concerned with matters of
conservation of natural resources and, subject to the direction of the
Mayor, shall be responsible for the execution and enforcement of all
laws relating to the conservation of the natural resources of the City.
B. Bureau of Street Construction and Maintenance. Within the
Department of Public Works there shall be a Bureau of Street
Construction and Maintenance, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent of Street Construction and Maintenance. Subject to the
direction and supervision of the Director, he shall be responsible for:
(1) The construction, repair and maintenance of all public buildings,
streets, storm sewers and drains, parking facilities and lots,
storage facilities and incinerators.
(2) Control and supervision of the use, storage, repair and
maintenance of all City equipment used by the Department.
(3) Planning, administration and control of snow removal on public
streets and roads as need appears and within the limits of available
appropriations.
(4) Performances of such other functions and duties as may be
required by ordinance or by the Director.
C. City Engineer. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 945]
(1) Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a City
Engineer. He shall serve for a term of three years. He shall be a
duly licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey and
shall receive such compensation and reasonable fees as may be
agreed upon and determined by the Mayor, within the limits of
available appropriations. The City Engineer shall have, possess and
exercise all the powers, functions and duties prescribed by general
law and ordinance with respect to a Municipal Engineer.
(2) The City Engineer shall furnish and file with the Department of
Public Works copies of all maps, plans, surveys and other
engineering data and documents hereafter prepared at public
expense.
D. Bureau of Solid Waste Handling. Within the Department of Public
Works there shall be a Bureau of Solid Waste Handling, the head of
which shall be the Supervisor of Solid Waste Handling. Subject to the
direction and supervision of the Director, he shall be responsible for:
§ 5-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12
1:21
§ 5-13. Department of Public Safety. [Amended 9-10-1991 by Ord.
No. 35-91]
(1) Planning, administration and control of municipal collection,
recycling and disposal of garbage, waste, refuse, ashes, trimmings,
clippings, trash and all other items designated by the Director,
subject to the rules and regulations established by the Director.
[Amended 2-24-1983 by Ord. No. 1091]
(2) Control and supervision of the use, storage, repair and
maintenance of all municipal equipment used by the Bureau.
(3) Control and supervision of municipal employees assigned to the
Bureau.
(4) Maintenance of records pertaining to the operation of the Bureau
and of records pertaining to municipal employees assigned to the
Bureau.
(5) Performance of such other functions and duties as may be required
by ordinance or by the Director.
E. Bureau of Parks and Public Property. Within the Department of Public
Works there shall be a Bureau of Parks and Public Property which shall
be responsible for the maintenance and horticultural services for all
City- owned or operated community centers, parks, playfields,
playgrounds, public buildings and public property. This shall also
include custodial services for City Hall, City Hall Annex and the
municipal garage and jail, together with such other functions and duties
that may be required by this section. [Added 2-24-1983 by Ord. No.
1091]
A. Department generally; Director of Public Safety. There shall be a
Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be the Director of
Public Safety. Unless and until the Council shall authorize by resolution
the appointment of a separate Director, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall serve as Director of Public Safety without additional
compensation. The Director shall be responsible for the proper and
efficient conduct of the City Police Department and City Fire
Department. He shall supervise and direct the work of the Department
and shall provide such technical and other assistance necessary to all
other departments for their proper functioning. Subject to the
supervision and direction of the Mayor, he shall administer the work of
the Department through such divisions and bureaus as are authorized
by the code or other ordinance.
B. Divisions. Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a
Division of Police, governed and administered in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 78, Police Department, of this Code, and the
Division of Fire, governed and administered in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 45, Fire Department, of this Code.5
§ 5-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-14
1:22
§ 5-14. Department of Health.
A. Department generally. There shall be a Department of Health, the head
of which shall be the City Health Officer. Subject to the supervision and
direction of the Mayor, the Director shall supervise and direct the work
of the Department and administer such work through such bureaus as
are provided by ordinance. In the event of a vacancy in the office or in
the absence or disability of the City Health Officer, the Ranking
Inspector shall act temporarily as City Health Officer until the vacancy
is filled or the absence or disability terminates. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Powers and duties. The legislative functions, powers and duties of a
Municipal Board of Health under Title 26 of the Revised Statutes shall
be vested in and exercised by the City Council, and the powers of
administrative direction and supervision and of appointment and
removal of the City Health Officer and subordinate officers and
employees within the Bureau shall be exercised by the Mayor as
required by the Charter.
C. Advisory Health Board. Within the Bureau of Health there may be an
Advisory Health Board. The Board shall consist of such number of
members as the City Council shall authorize and appoint by resolution.
The members of the Advisory Health Board shall serve without
compensation. The City Physician shall be a member ex officio of the
Board during his term of office. The Board shall consult with the City
Health Officer on matters of public health and shall also study the
health needs of the City and make reports and recommendations to the
City Council for local legislative action.6
D. City Physician. There shall be a City Physician who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and receive such compensation as provided by ordinance.
He shall assist the Bureau of Health in an advisory capacity on public
health and medical plans and problems and shall further possess and
exercise all of the powers, function and duties prescribed by general
law and ordinance and as may be prescribed by the Mayor.
E. Bureau of Welfare; Local Assistance Board. [Amended 4-12-1977 by
Ord. No. 868]
(1) The Local Assistance Board shall be composed of five persons. At
least one of the five persons shall be a woman. The members shall
be appointed by the Mayor upon the approval of the governing
body and shall serve without compensation, but shall be allowed
their necessary and actual expenses.
5. Editor's Note: Subsection 2-11.3, Civil Defense; Disaster Control Director, and 2-11.4,
Parking Coordinator, containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 475 and 480, were repealed
9-10-1991 by Ord. No. 35-91.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 5-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:23
§ 5-15. Department of Recreation and Human Services.
(2) The term of one member of the Local Assistance Board shall be for
one year, and such member only may be appointed from among the
membership of the governing body of the municipality, and the
terms of the other members shall be for four years each, one term
expiring in each year. The term of each member of the Local
Assistance Board shall begin on the first day of January, and each
member shall continue in office until his successor shall be
appointed and qualified.
F. Dog licenses. The administration of dog licenses shall be handled in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2 by the City Health Officer, and all
regulations adopted before July 14, 1970, not inconsistent with this
subsection shall be administered by the Health Officer regardless of the
name of the City official referred to therein, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2 through 4:19-15.7, but not as to any other statute and
ordinance regulating dogs, dog kennels, pet shops and the like.
G. Health Officer.7 The Health Officer of the City shall be qualified and
licensed in accordance with law. The Health Officer shall be the general
agent of the City for the enforcement of this chapter and any other
ordinances of the City relating to health, the sanitary law of the state
and rules and regulations of the State Department of Health.
H. Other employees. There may also be employed in the Health
Department public health laboratory technicians, food and drug
inspectors, sanitarians and such other personnel as are deemed
necessary, all of whom shall hold the necessary licenses.
I. Removal from office. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-26, no employee in the
Bureau of Health holding a license issued in the name of the State
Department of Health, who has served continuously in the Bureau for
five consecutive years, shall be removed from office or reduced in pay
or position except for just cause after public hearing as provided by law.
J. Registrar of Vital Statistics. A local Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be
appointed for a term of three years pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:8-11 et seq.
The Registrar shall forward original birth, marriage and death
certificates to the State Department of Health and perform other duties
as required by law and as assigned by the Director of Health.
A. Department generally. [Amended 2-8-1992 by Ord. No. 78-92]
(1) There shall be a Department of Recreation and Human Services,
the head of which shall be the Director of Recreation and Human
Services to serve full-time. Subject to the supervision and direction
of the Mayor, the Director shall supervise and direct the work of the
Department.
7. Editor's Note: Subsections G through J constituted Sec. 18-1 of the 1971 Code.
§ 5-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-15
1:24
(2) The Director of Recreation and Human Services shall have the
benefit of advice rendered to him/her by an Advisory Council on
recreation which shall consist of 13 members, 11 of which shall be
appointed by the City Council, one by the Mayor and one by the
Superintendent of Schools. The City Council's appointees shall be
one member from each of the following community groups/
disciplines: housing authority, business group, arts and crafts,
senior citizens, youth group, cultural, dance theater, police, Pop
Warner and Little League or other organized team sport. Each
member shall be appointed for four years. Any members missing
three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the Advisory
Council may, in the discretion of the City Council, upon
recommendation of the Advisory Council on recreation, be removed
from the Council. Any person appointed to the Council may be
removed, at any time in the discretion of the City Council, upon a
determination that the person is not satisfactorily performing the
duties of the position to which he or she has been appointed. Prior
to removal of such person, he or she shall be given an opportunity
to address the City Council; however, this informal appearance
before the City Council shall not be considered an adversary
hearing. No right of written charges, cross examination or
requirement of just cause for removal shall be required.
(3) The Department of Human Services also consists of the Long
Branch Drug Alliance which serves as a committee and advisory
board for alcohol and drug prevention, education and drug core
treatment programs. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Functions of the Department. [Amended 2-8-1992 by Ord. No.
78-92]
(1) The functions of the Department shall relate to the planning,
operation and coordination of recreation and human services
programs, beaches, including lifeguard services, community
centers, cultural affairs, youth and adult activities, senior citizens
activities, fairs, special events, winter festivals and summer
festivals, together with such other functions and duties that may be
required by ordinance.
(2) The functions of the Department shall relate to the planning,
operation and coordination of human services, to include: [Added
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(a) Monitoring and compliance with the Federal Department of
Transportation, CDL Drug Testing Program;
(b) Monitoring and compliance with the Federal Drug-Free
Workplace Act;
(c) Drug and alcohol assessment evaluation or referrals for
community residents;
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-15
1:25
(d) Monitoring and compliance in the Long Branch Drug Court
Program;
(e) Provide prevention/education drug and alcohol awareness for
community youth; and
(f) Insurance compliance for such other functions and duties that
may be required by ordinance or law.
C. Director of Recreation and Human Services. There shall be a full-time
Director of Recreation and Human Services who shall:
(1) Administer the work of the Department with the assistance of such
policy guides as may be provided by the Advisory Council.
[Amended 2-8-1992 by Ord. No. 78-92]
(2) Conduct studies of the present and future recreational needs of the
City and develop immediate and long-range plans, in consultation
with the Advisory Council for recommendation to the Mayor and
Council.
(3) Maintain records as may be required to control departmental
receipts, property and personnel to evaluate programs and to
provide information for budgeting, public reporting, planning and
financing of recreational programs.
(4) Plan and develop public recreational areas and facilities and
promote and direct a year-round program of leisure activities for
children, youth and adults of the City; and stimulate the
constructive use of leisure time of residents of the City and work
toward the reduction of delinquency and the optimum coordination
and development of public and private recreational facilities within
the City.
(5) The Director shall make advisory recommendation as to approval
or disapproval of any request made to the Mayor and Council for
public funds, donations and contributions to any civic, charitable or
nonprofit group in the City for recreational activities, special
events, parades and similar activities. If the Mayor and Council
grant any such request for funds or donations, the Director shall be
required to obtain from each recipient an itemized accounting of
the disbursements and shall report such accounting to the Mayor
and Council.
D. Charges and fees. The Department may sponsor, arrange and provide
for the giving of indoor and outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and
contests and may use and employ public property for such purposes.
The Department may charge and collect for the use of the City a
reasonable admission fee for each person entering or using facilities,
exhibitions, concerts, games or contests provided under this section,
except that the Department may not use or employ public playgrounds
or recreation places with an admission charge or fee for more than
§ 5-15 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-15
1:26
§ 5-16. Agencies and advisory councils.
§ 5-17. Public records.
eight hours in any week, nor on more than two days in any week,
and when such playground or recreation place is for such purpose, no
admission fee shall be charged or collected from children under 12
years of age.
E. Rules and regulations.
(1) The Department shall control all playgrounds and recreation places
and may adopt suitable rules, regulations and bylaws for the
conduct of all persons while on or using such property. Any person
who shall violate any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be
adjudged to be a disorderly person.
(2) The custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed by the
Director shall, while on duty and for the purpose of preserving
order and the observance of the rules, regulations and bylaws of
the Department, have the power and authority of special police
officers of the City.
A. Allocation generally. The administrative functions, powers and duties of
statutory boards, commissions and other agencies of the City
government shall be subject to the supervision of the Mayor except as
otherwise specifically required by the Charter, and for this purpose
such bodies are allocated and assigned to the Office of the Mayor.
B. Advisory councils. Advisory councils as heretofore established and
empowered pursuant to law or ordinance are continued, and any of
them may be altered or abolished pursuant to the Charter and
Administrative Code.
C. Consumer Affairs Local Assistance Officer. There is hereby established
the position of Consumer Affairs Local Assistance Officer in the City of
Long Branch, such position to be nonsalaried and to be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council and
to expire with the term of the Mayor. The function of the Consumer
Affairs Local Assistance Officer shall be to receive complaints from
consumers pursuant to the Consumer Affairs Laws of the State of New
Jersey and to process the same and coordinate the investigation and
action with respect to the same with the State Consumer Affairs Agency
of the State of New Jersey. [Added 5-23-1972 by Ord. No. 638]
D. Notwithstanding any section of this Code to the contrary, appointments
or reappointments to any advisory council, board or commission of the
City of Long Branch by the Mayor or City Council shall be limited to
bona fide residents of the City of Long Branch. [Added 9-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 19-18]
A. Inspection and fees.
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-17
1:27
(1) Public records of the City shall be open for inspection by members
of the public as provided by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1. Such inspection shall
be made only at reasonable times during business hours and
without interference to the conduct of the affairs of the office or
other place where such records are kept or maintained.
(2) The following fees shall be charged for copies of public records:
[Amended 1-26-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93; 8-26-1997 by Ord. No.
26-97]
(a) Birth, marriage, civil union and death certificates: $15 each;
marriage and civil union certificates $ 10; burial permit fee: $5
each. [Amended 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 7-04; 5-11-2004
by Ord. No. 14-04; 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 30-04;
12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 39-06; 3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
5-07; 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 7-09; 2-26-2020 by Ord. No.
10-20]
[1] A certificate pursuant to registration under N.J.S.A.
26:8A-1 et seq., known as the "Domestic Partnership Act":
$28 each; $5 for certified copy.
(b) In the event that correction forms are required for any of the
foregoing documents, the following charges shall apply:
[Amended 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 39-06; 5-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 7-09; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 6-11]
[1] Death certificate corrections: no charge for funeral
directors only; all others must pay a fee of $10 each.
[2] Marriage, civil union, domestic partnership certificate
corrections: $10. No charge for officiants.
[3] Birth certificate correction forms 34, 35, 56 and 60:
nonrefundable processing fee of $10.
[4] There will be a two-dollar fee for an amendment of a
recorded name via legal name change or naturalization.
(c) Permit to purchase pistol or revolver and firearms purchaser
identification cards: applicable NJ firearms fees. [Amended
2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(d) Police accident reports: $5 each.
[1] Police reports: $5 each. [Added 2-26-2020 by Ord. No.
10-20]
[2] Background check: $5 each. [Added 2-26-2020 by Ord.
No. 10-20]
(e) Certificate of judgment from the Municipal Court: $4 each.
§ 5-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-17
1:28
(f) A certified copy of any paper filed with the Municipal Court as
a public record: $4 each, and $1 for each additional page
thereof.
(g) For official searches for municipal liens (tax searches) or for
improvements authorized but not assessed: $2 each.
(h) For a continuation of an official search for municipal liens or
for improvements authorized but not assessed within three
years from the date of the original search: $1.50 per year.
(i) For a certificate as to approval of subdivisions: $2 each.
(j) For duplicate tax, water and sewer bills: $1 each.
(k) All other documents where multiple copies are not available:
$0.25 per 10 pages or fraction thereof.
(l) Fire Prevention Bureau records. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
[1] Fire report: $5 each.
[2] Certificate of occupancy: $2 each.
(m) All other documents defined as public records pursuant to
N.J.S.A. § 47:1A-56: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
16-10]
[1] Each reproduced government record shall be charged to
the requestor of said application at $0.05 per page for
letter-size pages and smaller and $0.07 per page for legalsize
pages and larger.
[2] If the City's actual costs to reproduce paper copies exceed
the rates of $0.05 or $0.07, then the City may charge the
actual cost of duplication.
[3] The City of Long Branch shall provide electronic records
(i.e., records sent via e-mail or facsimile) free of charge.
[4] The City of Long Branch shall charge the actual costs
incurred to provide records in any other medium (i.e.,
records on computer disc, CD-ROM, DVD).
(n) The requester shall pay the actual cost of labor or other
overhead expenses associated with making a duplicate, if said
actual cost can be demonstrated to exceed the rates stated in
Subsection A(2)(m). The City shall provide the requested
notice that rates will exceed those in Subsection A(2)(m) and
the reasonable estimate of the costs for such duplication prior
to the duplicate being made, so that the requester may have
§ 5-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-17
1:29
the opportunity to review and object to the charge prior to it
being incurred. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03]
[1] Providing of records in forms other than paper shall be
charged as follows:
[a] Computer discs: no less than $10 per hour, "hour"
being defined as any time expended between one
second and 60 minutes, for the compilation and
copying of the information requested;
[b] Via e-mail: no less than $10 per hour, "hour" being
defined as any time expended between one second
and 60 minutes, for the compilation and copying of the
information requested;
[c] The hourly rate is set by the Clerk or Department of
the City after examining the request and the form the
information is to be provided pursuant to the request.
Such quote shall include, if applicable, the
outsourcing for labor and technology costs as they will
be incurred by the City in producing said request.
(o) To the extent that a request is made for a record in the medium
other than paper, the City shall provide a copy of the record in
the medium requested, or, if the City does nor maintain the
record in medium requested, the record shall be converted to
the medium requested or a copy of the record shall be provided
in some other meaningful medium by the City. If the medium is
not routinely used by the City, not routinely developed or
maintained by the City, or requires a substantial amount of
manipulation or programming of information technology, the
City may charge, in addition to the actual costs of duplication,
a special charge that shall be reasonable, which is based on the
costs for any extensive use of information technology, or the
labor cost of personnel providing the service that is actually
incurred by the City or attributable to the City for the
programming, clerical and supervisory assistance required, or
both. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03]
(p) Reproduction of images. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No.
5-03]
[1] Fees for reproduction of images shall be:
Size
(inches) Cost per Page/Sheet
11 x 17 $1.30
18 x 24 $1.95
24 x 36 $3.00
§ 5-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-17
1:30
Size
(inches) Cost per Page/Sheet
30 x 42 $4.00
[2] There shall be a charge of $0.10 to dismantle and prepare
maps for reproduction. There shall be an additional fee of
$0.10 per sheet for collating and assembling maps.
(q) Under certain circumstances, to be determined by the
department head who has control of the records requested and
such a request is made to the department, the department
head shall notify the Business Administrator that a requestor
has made a type of request that will require, in the opinion of
the department head, an individual in that department to
remain with the requestor. In that event, the Business
Administrator of the City of Long Branch is empowered to
advise the requestor the hourly rate paid to the employee
assigned by the department head to monitor the examination
of the books and records requested and shall set forth a
requirement of a deposit of three hours of the employee's
hourly rate, to be paid in advance and held by the Clerk of the
City of Long Branch. In the event that the examination takes
less than three hours, the requestor shall be reimbursed for
any deposit; and, in the event it takes longer than three hours,
the requestor shall be required, prior to having copies of any
documents made, to pay the additional fees deemed necessary,
or the department head may terminate the inspection of the
records until such additional deposits are made by the
requestor. Should the requestor object to the fee, then the
requestor shall be entitled to a hearing conducted by the
Business Administrator as soon as is practicable. [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 11-03]
(3) Where the document in question is more than 100 pages in length,
the Clerk may permit the person requesting copies to use his own
copying machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or
mutilation of the documents and it would not be incompatible with
the transaction of public business. Such determination shall be
completely within the discretion of the Clerk. The fee in such case
shall be $15 per day.
B. Preservation of records. All the books, maps, papers, accounts,
statements, vouchers and other documents whatsoever acquired or
produced in any department shall be carefully and conveniently filed,
kept and preserved and shall remain the sole property of the City and
shall not at any time be removed from the offices of such department
except when required for use in official business and shall then be
returned to such office without delay. Each department head shall be
responsible for enforcing the requirements of this section in his
§ 5-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-17
1:31
§ 5-18. Redevelopment Zone.8 [Added 9-23-1997 by Ord. No. 32-97;
amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
28-16]
department. This section shall be subject to the provisions of
Destruction of Public Records Law (1953), N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.
C. Procedure for Clerk to follow to provide responses to requests
specifically as they relate to minutes of meetings lawfully closed to the
public: [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 26-07]
(1) The City Clerk of the City of Long Branch or his or her designee be
and is hereby authorized to provide, pursuant to a proper request
under local and state law, a redacted copy of the minutes of
meetings lawfully closed to the public pursuant to N.J.S.A.
10:4-12b.; and
(2) The City Clerk of the City of Long Branch or his or her designee be
and is hereby authorized and required to provide, pursuant to a
proper request under local and state law, unredacted minutes of
meetings that are lawfully closed to the public pursuant to N.J.S.A.
10:4-12b. as of the date and only when the reason for maintaining
confidentiality of the meeting and the minutes ceases to exist, and
at that time and only at that time shall the City Clerk or his or her
designee be authorized and required to provide said documents in
an unredacted form; and
(3) As to any and all requests that are made to the City of Long Branch
pursuant to a proper open public records request, the City Clerk of
the City of Long Branch or his or her designee be and is hereby
authorized and required to produce a sworn statement setting forth
in detail the following information:
(a) The search undertaken to satisfy the request;
(b) The documents found that are responsive to the request;
(c) The determination of whether the document or any part
thereof is confidential and the source of the confidential
information;
(d) A statement of the City’s document retention/destruction
policy and the last date on which documents that may have
been responsive to the request were destroyed.
(4) The sworn statement identified above shall have appended to it an
index of all documents deemed by the City of Long Branch to be
confidential in whole or in part, with a description of the documents
deemed confidential.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning, Art. X, Redevelopment Plan.
§ 5-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 5-18
1:32
Chapter 6
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair Housing Task Force — See Ch. 41.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 56.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 69.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
A. The City of Long Branch has, by virtue of ordinances adopted and
published, established a Redevelopment Zone.
B. The Redevelopment Zone is governed by design guidelines which have
been created by rule with the Department of Environmental Protection.
C. By virtue of said ordinances, the City of Long Branch has provided to
the City Clerk Design Guidelines books for the Redevelopment Zone.
Copies of each Design Guidelines book for the Redevelopment Zone
may be obtained from the City Clerk, subject to payment for copying
costs by cash, check or money order payable to the City of Long Branch.
D. The City of Long Branch also offers to the public copies of the
Oceanfront Master Plan, subject to payment for copying costs payable
to the City of Long Branch by cash, check or certified funds.
E. Additionally, copies of requests for qualifications and proposals and
requests for designation of developers are available from the City Clerk,
subject to payment for copying costs by cash, check or money order.
F. All of the above documents pertain to the Redevelopment Zone.
§ 5-18 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 5-18
6:33

ARTICLE I
Creation of Agency
[Adopted 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2-05]
§ 6-1. Agency established.
There is hereby created an Affordable Housing Agency of Monmouth County
of the City of Long Branch.
§ 6-2. Membership.
The Agency shall consist of five members and two alternate members, all of
who shall be appointed by the Mayor. No more than two of the membership
of the Agency shall be municipal officials. All remaining members must be
residents of the municipality. However, one appointment shall be reserved
for a tenant or owner/occupant of a low- or moderate-income unit who is not
a municipal official.
§ 6-3. Powers of alternate members.
Alternate members shall have all of the powers of regular members when
sitting in place of a regular member.
§ 6-4. Designation of Chairperson.
The Mayor shall designate one regular member to serve as Chairperson.
§ 6-5. Attendance; voting.
Attendance by three regular members or alternates shall constitute a
quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by a majority of
the members present.
§ 6-6. Terms of office.
The initial term of office of the Agency members shall have one-, two-, or
three-year terms, to be designated by the Mayor making the appointment.
The terms of office shall thereafter be three years. The appointments shall
be made in such a manner so that the terms of approximately 1/4 of the
members shall expire each year.
§ 6-1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 6-6
6:35

ARTICLE II
Powers of Agency
[Adopted 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 3-05]
§ 6-7. Powers created.
There is hereby created the Powers of the Affordable Housing Agency for
Violations Monmouth County of the City of Long Branch.
§ 6-7 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 6-7
6:37

ARTICLE III
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 34-07]
§ 6-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanism
needed for the execution of the City of Long Branch's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 6-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the City of Long Branch to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIASON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the City of Long Branch.
§ 6-10. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison Officer. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison Officer for
the City of Long Branch.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison Officer shall be appointed by the
governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison Officer shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the
City of Long Branch, including the following responsibilities which may
not be contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6), which may be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as the City of Long Branch's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of Long
Branch's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 6-8 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 6-10
6:39
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the City of Long Branch as described in
Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the City of Long Branch may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
City of Long Branch, except for those responsibilities which may not be
contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the City of Long
Branch contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of the
affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison Officer shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison Officer.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison Officer:
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Long Branch and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
§ 6-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 6-10
6:40
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Long Branch when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental upon availability of the information to
the Municipal Housing Liaison Officer; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental upon availability of the information to the
Municipal Housing Liaison Officer.
(5) Processing request from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving, in conjunction with the City
Attorney, requests from owners of restricted units who wish to
§ 6-10 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 6-10
6:41
take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of
their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving, in conjunction with the City
Attorney, requests to increase sales prices from owners of
restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the
units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to
be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations, in
conjunction with the City Attorney, on requests by owners of
restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) The posting annually in all rental properties when the
information becomes available to the Municipal Housing
Liaison, including two-family homes, of a notice as to the
maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number
of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent
can by made;
(b) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(c) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 6-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 6-10
6:42
Chapter 8
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT COMMITTEE
§ 8-1. Establishment.
There shall be established an Americans With Disabilities Act Committee,
whose membership shall be comprised of individuals listed below, as well
as other individuals appointed by the Mayor, all of whom shall participate
without compensation.
§ 8-2. Members.
The Committee shall consist of a representative from the City Council,
nominated by the City Council, the Business Administrator, the Public
Safety Director, the Director of Health, the Director of Public Works, the
Director of the Planning Department, the Chief of the City Fire Department,
a representative of the Long Branch Board of Education, as nominated by
the Board, a senior citizen and two disabled residents of the City of Long
Branch. The Mayor shall be authorized to appoint other members to the
Committee, who shall preferably be residents of the City of Long Branch;
however, this shall not preclude the appointment of a nonresident member
of exceptional qualifications and interest in the City of Long Branch. Any
individual appointed to the Committee who is not an employee of the
city shall be appointed by the Mayor, unless otherwise authorized by this
section. All appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the authority
appointing said individual.
§ 8-3. Powers and duties.
The Americans With Disabilities Act Committee shall make
recommendations to the administration of the City of Long Branch as
concerns services, practices and policies in furtherance of a self-evaluation
to be implemented by the City of Long Branch pursuant to Public Law
101-336; 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.
§ 8-4. Coordinator.
The Mayor shall select a member of the Committee who shall be designated
as the ADA Coordinator and a member who shall be designated as the ADA
Deputy Coordinator, both of whom should be employees of the City of Long
Branch.
§ 8-5. Adoption and statement of policy.
The City of Long Branch hereby adopts a policy of nondiscrimination on the
basis of disability. The City of Long Branch does not discriminate on the
basis of disability in the admission or access to or treatment or employment
in its programs or activities.
§ 6-10 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT § 8-5
8:43
Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
Chapter 15
CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A350.
§ 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Cable Television Commission
that shall report to the Mayor and Council on its findings and
recommendations, which findings and recommendations shall be for
informational purposes only.
§ 15-2. Establishment; powers and duties.
The municipality hereby establishes a Cable Television Commission. The
Commission shall have the following functions:
§ 15-3. Members; appointment; term of office. [Amended 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 22-95]
A. To solicit comments and recommendations from the public and other
city officials concerning the quality of cable television service provided
by the company9 and suggestions on how to improve said service and
report the same to the Mayor and City Council.
B. To review and study all the procedures and operations of the company10
and render semiannual reports to the Mayor and City Council.
C. To review the construction and operation of the local access studio and
the type of programs which may be transmitted to other municipalities
and report any recommendations of the same to the Mayor and City
Council.
D. To meet with the company11 on a regular basis to discuss the operations
of the company and possible ways to improve its service to the residents
of the municipality and report any recommendations to the Mayor and
City Council.
9. Editor's Note: For the definition of "company" see § A350-1.
10.Editor's Note: For the definition of "company" see § A350-1.
11.Editor's Note: For the definition of "company" see § A350-1.
§ 8-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 15-3
10:44
§ 15-4. Powers and duties; quorum.
Chapter 19
CONTRACTS
A. The Commission shall consist of 13 Commissioners to be appointed in
the following manner: [Amended 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 18-00]
(1) One Commissioner appointed by the Mayor.
(2) One Commissioner appointed by the Board of Education of the City.
(3) Nine Commissioners appointed by the City Council, with each City
Council member having the right to recommend one appointment
to the Commission subject to the approval of the City Council.
(4) Two members who shall be members of the City Council.
B. The initial members of the Commission shall have a term of office to July
1, 1982. Each member of the Council shall initially have an opportunity
to appoint one member. After all initial appointments, the term of the
appointment shall be for the term of the appointing party. However, in
no event shall an appointment be for longer than four years, except
upon renewal of an appointment by the party who originally appointed
said member pursuant to Subsection A, or one who has filled that
party's position. [Amended 100-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. The Commission shall review and study the procedures and operation
of the company, the local access studio and those programs which may
be transmitted to other municipalities. It shall also solicit comments
from the public and city officials concerning the quality of the cable
television service and recommendations on how to improve it. The
Commission shall report all its findings directly to the Mayor and
Council of the municipality. The Commission may make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council of the municipality. The
Commission shall have the power to set its own procedural rules and
the power to elect its own officers. The powers of the Commission shall
be specifically limited to those powers enumerated herein and as set
forth in § 15-1, Purpose. It is the intent of this section for the
Commission to be advisory only, with no delegation of those duties,
powers and authority to be given to said Commission presently and
hereafter belonging to the Mayor and City Council.
B. In order for the Commission to hold a meeting and conduct any
business, a quorum of no less than three Commissioners must be
present. Once a quorum is established, a majority of those present is
necessary for the Commission to take any action or make any
recommendation as authorized by this chapter. [Added 6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 18-00]
§ 15-3 CONTRACTS § 15-4
19:45

ARTICLE I
Professional Service Contracts
[Adopted 5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05; amended in its entirety
6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 18-05]
§ 19-1. Prohibition on awarding professional contracts to certain
contributors.
A. The City of Long Branch shall not enter into an agreement for
professional services with any individual and/or professional business
entity if that individual or entity has solicited or made any contribution
of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
a campaign of any City of Long Branch candidate for Council or Mayor
in excess of the threshold specified in Subsection D of this section
within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement unless cured pursuant to § 19-3. The prohibition
set forth in this subsection shall also apply to any solicitation or
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, made during the applicable time period to any City of
Long Branch or Monmouth County party committee, or to any political
action committee (PAC) that is organized for the primary purpose of
promoting or supporting City of Long Branch candidates for Council or
Mayor, so long as the solicitation or contribution was made with the
intention on the part of the contributor to conceal or misrepresent the
source of the contribution.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contact or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or any of its independent authorities for
the rendition of professional services shall knowingly solicit or make
any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any City of Long Branch candidate or holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, in
excess of the amount set forth herein. This subsection is to include any
and all professionals who provide political contributions to any
candidate for an office whether or not that candidate is presently in
office or seeks office. The prohibition set forth in this subsection shall
also apply to any solicitation or contribution of money or pledge of a
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any City of Long
Branch or Monmouth County party committee, or to any political action
committee (PAC) that is organized for the primary purpose of promoting
or supporting City of Long Branch candidates for Council or Mayor, so
long as the solicitation or contribution was made with the intention on
the part of the contributor to conceal or misrepresent the source of the
contribution.
C. For purpose of this article, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract means an individual, including the individual's spouse,
if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation;
professional corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The
§ 19-1 CONTRACTS § 19-1
19:47
§ 19-2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council, or to any municipal or county party
committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that is organized
for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting City of Long Branch
candidates for Council or Mayor, shall be deemed a violation of this article,
nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services, of any kind
whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 19-3. Violations and penalties.
definition of a business entity includes all principals who own 10%
or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners
and officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this section may annually contribute a maximum of $500 per
candidate for Mayor and/or Council Member on an annual basis,
whether or not that individual has a professional services contract in
place or not, to the maximum extent of $3,000 per annum per business
entity. This subsection shall apply to any presently sitting
Councilperson and/or the Mayor of the City of Long Branch and shall
also apply to any individual who seeks to run for the office of Council
person and/or Mayor of the City of Long Branch.
(1) Any individual that owns less than 10% of a professional business
entity which contracts with the City of Long Branch shall not be
treated as a part of that entity.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The City of Long Branch, if the contract requires approval or
appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of the City of Long Branch, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. All City of Long Branch professional service agreements shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional business entity, as defined in § 19-1C to violate § 19-1B or
to knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received,
or to make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution.
§ 19-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 19-3
19:48
§ 19-4. Reporting requirements.
Any contribution received by a candidate committee, joint candidates
committee or political committee during an election fund report period of
more than $50 or aggregate contributions received by such a committee in
an election from a contributor totaling more than $50 during such a report
period shall be reported by providing the information set forth in N.J.A.C.
19:25-10.2.
B. Any professional business entity, as defined in § 19-1C and D, who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this article,
or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution, shall be subjected to a fine in the sum of
$2,500 so far as the first offense and, for any second offense, shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future City of Long Branch contracts for
a period of four calendar years from the date of the violation.
C. There shall be no breach of contract in the event a contribution is
questioned and as a result of the questioning of the contribution the
individual and/or business entity who makes the contribution requests
that the contribution be returned by the campaign committee, the
candidate or the political action committee to whom such contribution
was made. In the event of any disputes as to whether or not a campaign
contribution is proper, the matter shall be submitted to arbitration
before a retired Judge of the Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 19-3 CONTRACTS § 19-4
19:49
Chapter 21
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 19-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 19-4
21:50
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 2-15 of the 1971 Code]
§ 21-1. Establishment; powers and duties.12
There shall be a Municipal Court in the city pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City
of Long Branch, Monmouth County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal
bearing the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held in
the City Hall or such other place as the Council shall designate from time to
time and shall exercise all the functions, powers and duties and jurisdiction
conferred by law upon municipal courts.
§ 21-2. Municipal Judge.
§ 21-3. Municipal Court Administrator.13
There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the appointing authority and who shall perform the functions
and duties prescribed for him by law, the rules applicable to municipal
courts and by the Municipal Judge. His duties shall include, but not be
limited to:
A. There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The Municipal
Judge shall serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment
and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications and shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. He need not be a resident of
the city. He shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey.
Whenever the Municipal Judge is unable to sit as such, he may
designate any other judge of any municipal court (except a nonattorney
judge) or an attorney at law to sit for him temporarily and hold the
Municipal Court. Any such designation shall be made in writing and
shall be filed in the Court, and any person so designated, while sitting
temporarily, shall possess all the powers of the Municipal Judge.
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in this regard; receiving complaints
and dispensing information relating to court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-3
21:51
§ 21-4. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator.14
There shall be a Deputy Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Council and who shall perform the functions assigned to
him by the Municipal Judge and by the Municipal Court Administrator.
D. Attending court; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing court documents; preparing and
issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances and security in lieu
thereof; making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and equity;
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
requiring court appearances; maintaining and classifying records and
files.
G. Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records, reports
and files as are required by the Director of Motor Vehicles.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 21-4
21:52
ARTICLE II
Representation by Public Defender
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 2-37 of the 1971 Code]
§ 21-5. Application fee. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 13-94;
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98]
Any person applying for representation in the Long Branch Municipal Court
by the Municipal Public Defender shall be required to pay an application fee
of $200 for such representation. The Municipal Court Judge may waive the
required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Judge determines, in his/
her discretion, that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden
on the person seeking representation by the Municipal Public Defender.
§ 21-5 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-5
21:53
Chapter 25
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 21-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 21-5
25:54
ARTICLE I
Indemnity Against Civil and Criminal Actions
[Adopted 12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 1257 (Sec. 2-33 of the 1971
Code)]
§ 25-1. Indemnity against civil actions.
Whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against any person
holding office, position or employment under the jurisdiction of the City of
Long Branch for any act or omission arising out of and in the course of
the performance of the duties of such office, position or employment, the
city shall defray all costs of defending such action, including reasonable
counsel fees and expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any, and shall
save harmless and protect such person from any financial loss resulting
therefrom. Where allowed by law, said defense shall be provided by the
city's Department of Law. When the City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney
is unable to participate in that defense, the official, officer or employee shall
have the name of the person of his or her choice submitted to the city for
approval and agreement as to the cost of services. In the event that any
official, officer or employee engages an attorney without the approval of the
city and an agreement as to the cost of services, any and all such costs shall
be the responsibility of that official, officer or employee.
§ 25-2. Indemnity against criminal actions. [Amended 4-12-1988 by
Ord. No. 24-88]
Whenever any criminal action is instituted against any person holding
office, position or employment under the jurisdiction of the City of Long
Branch for any act or omission arising out of or in the course of the
performance of the duties of such office, position or employment, and
should such proceeding be dismissed or result in a final disposition in favor
of such person as to all charges, the city shall reimburse such person for the
cost of defending such proceeding, including reasonable counsel fees and
expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any. Prior to engaging counsel for
defense, the official, officer or employee shall have the name of the person
of his or her choice submitted to the city for approval and agreement as
to the cost of services. In the event that any official, officer or employee
engages an attorney and makes an agreement as to the cost of services
without the approval of the city, any and all costs shall be the responsibility
of that official, officer or employee.
§ 25-3. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in §§ 25-1 and 25-2
hereinabove, the city shall not be responsible for indemnification under the
following conditions:
A. The judgment or settlement of the civil cause of action relates to a claim
based upon willful fraud, malice or misconduct.
§ 25-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 25-3
25:55
B. The judgment calls for punitive or exemplary damage. Only that portion
of a judgment based on compensatory damages shall be indemnified.
C. Any insurance coverage is available for payment.
§ 25-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 25-3
25:56
ARTICLE II
Legal Counsel and Indemnification
[Adopted 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03]
§ 25-4. Municipality to provide indemnification and legal defense.
§ 25-5. When provided; refusal.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the municipality shall, upon the request
of any present or former official, employee or appointee of the
municipality provide for indemnification and legal defense of any civil
action brought against said person or persons arising from an act or
omission falling within the scope of their public duties.
B. For purpose of this article, the municipality's duty and authority to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
C. The terms of this article and definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the
purposes of this article, except that these terms shall not mean any
person who is not a natural person; any person while providing goods or
services of any kind under any contract with the municipality; any
person while providing legal or engineering services for compensation
unless said person is a full-time employee of the municipality; and any
person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the municipality and/or secure
insurance.
D. The municipality shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal
defense of such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein.
A. The municipality shall provide for defense of and indemnify the
defendant or defendants in a civil action if the person or persons
involved acted or failed to act in a matter in which the municipality has
or had an interest; acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty
imposed or authorized by law; and acted or failed to take action in good
faith.
B. The municipality may refuse to provide for the defense and
indemnification of any civil action referred to herein if the Council
determines that the act or omission did not occur within the scope of a
duty authorized or imposed by law; the act or failure to act was the
result of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice of the person
requesting defense and indemnification; or the defense of the action or
proceeding by the municipality would create a conflict of interest
between the municipality and the person or persons involved.
§ 25-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 25-6
25:57
§ 25-6. Other actions or proceedings.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
municipality may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee if the Council concludes that such representation is
in the best interest of the municipality and that the person to be defended
acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in § 25-5 of this
article.
§ 25-7. Exclusive control over representation.
Whenever the municipality provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the municipality may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended. Any
such person shall cooperate fully with the municipality.
§ 25-8. Provision of defense.
The municipality may provide for the defense pursuant to this article by
authorizing the municipal attorney to act in behalf of the person being
defended or by employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the
municipality's right under any appropriate insurance policy which requires
the insurer to provide defense.
§ 25-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 25-8
25:58
Chapter 29
EDUCATION, BOARD OF
§ 29-1. Members; term of office.15
There shall be an elected Board of Education of the city consisting of nine
members. The term of office shall be three years.
Chapter 32
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL
§ 32-1. Establishment; members.
There shall be an Emergency Management Council consisting of not more
than 15 members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and hold office at
the Mayor's will and pleasure (N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41).
§ 32-2. Emergency Management Coordinator.16
An Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor
and serve as Chairman of the Emergency Management Council (N.J.S.A.
App. A:9-40.1). The Emergency Management Coordinator reports to the
Business Administrator.
§ 32-3. Tenure; powers and duties.
The Emergency Management Council and the Emergency Management
Coordinator shall have such official tenure and such functions, powers and
duties as are provided by state statute and executive orders, rules and
regulations thereunder (N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.).
Chapter 35
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 247.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 25-8 EDUCATION, BOARD OF § 35-1
29:59
§ 35-1. Establishment; members; compensation; terms of office;
vacancies. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 1-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 2-11]
The City of Long Branch hereby establishes an Environmental Commission
for the protection, development or use of natural resources, including water
resources located within its territorial limits. The Commission shall consist
of five to seven members and up to two alternate members appointed by
the Mayor or other Chief Executive Officer of the municipality, one of whom
shall also be a member of the Municipal Planning Board and all of who shall
be residents of the municipality of the City of Long Branch. Members shall
serve without compensation.
§ 35-2. Powers and duties of Commission.
An Environmental Commission shall have power to conduct research into
the use and possible use of the open land areas of the municipality and
may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized from similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time
to time recommend to the Planning Board or, if none, to the Mayor and
governing body of the municipality plans and programs for inclusion in a
Municipal Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 35-3. Acquisitions by Commission.
An Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the governing
body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
municipality by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of
its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right) (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 35-4. Records and annual report.
An Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the governing body of the
municipality.
§ 35-5. Appropriation of funds.
The governing body may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint such clerks and
§ 35-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 35-5
32:60
other employees as it may from time to time require and as shall be within
the limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 35-6. Scope of powers.
An Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 35-7. Conservation Commission.
Any Conservation Commission established pursuant to law shall be an
Environmental Commission.
Chapter 38
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 38-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Code of Ethics to regulate the conduct and
activities of the officials and employees of the City of Long Branch, County
of Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly
authorized salary or compensation for his services to the municipality) to
the official or employee of the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of the City of Long Branch.
OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — Any person elected or appointed to, or
employed or retained by, any public office or public body of the municipality,
whether paid or unpaid, and whether part-time or full-time.
PUBLIC BODY or PUBLIC OFFICE — Any agency, board, body, authority,
commission, committee, department or office of the municipality.
§ 38-3. Conflicts of interest.
A. No official or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or
shall have any financial or personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the
public interest.
(1) "Interest" is defined as having the ownership or control of more
than 10% of the profits, assets or stock of a business organization
§ 35-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 38-3
38:61
§ 38-4. Fair and impartial treatment.
§ 38-5. Disclosure of confidential information.
§ 38-6. Gifts and gratuities.
No official or employee shall accept any gift or gratuity, whether in the form
of service, loan or corporation, the acceptance of which would influence him
in the discharge of his official duties on behalf of the municipality.
§ 38-7. Private interests.
No official or employee shall represent private interests, other than those of
himself, before any public body in the municipality.
but shall not include the control of assets in a nonprofit entity or
labor union. [Added 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 68-02]
B. No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or
render services for private interests where such employment of service
is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties.
C. No official or employee shall solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept
employment with any person, firm or corporation with which he is
engaged on behalf of the municipality in the transaction of business
which may be affected by his official action and which gives said person,
firm or corporation an advantage.
A. No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any
consideration, treatment or advantage beyond that which is in the
general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
B. No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any
publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment,
labor or services for the personal convenience or the private advantage
of himself or any other person. This subsection shall not, however,
operate to prohibit an official or employee from using, requesting or
permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supported
property, vehicle, equipment, labor or services which is the general
practice to make available to the public at large or which is provided as
a matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in
the conduct of official business.
A. No official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization,
disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or
employee or any other person or any property of governmental affairs
of the municipality.
B. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official or employee shall
use or permit the use of any such confidential information to advance
the personal or financial interest of himself or any other person.
§ 38-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 38-8
38:62
§ 38-8. Interest in legislation.
§ 38-9. Contracts with municipality.
§ 38-10. Financial disclosure statement. [Added 5-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 1066]
A. No official or employee shall vote for the adoption or defeat of any
legislation for the payment or nonpayment of any indebtedness owing
or allegedly owing by the municipality in which he has any financial
interest, directly or indirectly, nor shall any official or employee
recommend or lobby for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or for
the institution of defense of any legal or quasi-legal action whatever in
which he has or may have a financial interest, whether said interest be
direct or indirect.
B. Any official or employee who has or may have such interest in such
legislation, indebtedness or action and who participates in discussion
with or gives an official opinion to the Council or to any board or agency
of the municipality with respect thereto shall disclose on the records of
the Council or said board or agency the nature and extent of such
interest.
A. No official or employee who has financial interest in any transaction or
contract with the municipality or in the sale or purchase of materials,
real estate, supplies or services to or from said municipality shall vote
in favor or in opposition to said transaction or contract, irrespective of
whether said financial interest be direct or indirect.
B. Any official or employee who has or may have such interest in such
transaction or contract and who participates in discussion with or gives
an official opinion to the Council or to any board, agency or authority of
the municipality with respect thereto shall disclose on the records of
said Council or said board, agency or authority the nature and extent of
such interest.
A. The following persons holding the municipal offices or positions are
required to file a financial disclosure statement with the office of the
City Clerk concerning any financial interest in the City of Long Branch:
[Amended 6-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1105]
(1) Mayor and members of the City Council.
(2) Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Planning Board, Local
Assistance Board and its executive director.
(3) Municipal department heads.
B. Said disclosure statement, which shall be provided in writing in
conformance with a form to be provided by the office of the City Clerk,
shall include: [Amended 6-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1105]
§ 38-8 ETHICS, CODE OF § 38-10
38:63
(1) A list of any and all real property owned, leased or in which a
security interest is held by the person(s) listed in Subsection A.
Each description shall include the lot and block number, street
address, use to which the property is put and the assessed value
thereof. Nothing herein shall require the reporting of the identity
and value of the residence of the person concerned or any of the
aforementioned interests if the title or interest is held in a
corporate name or in the name of a partnership or joint venture
when the individual filing the report holds a ten-percent or less
interest in said entity.
(2) Business relationships, whether the same be a financial interest in
a partnership, corporation, sole proprietorship or any other
association of persons in which each individual holding more than a
ten-percent interest may be involved where said firm or association
provides a service to the City as a direct contractor or
subcontractor. Said individual shall further set forth the name of
the firm or business and whether or not the individual is employed
by such firm or firms.
C. Said disclosure statement shall further contain certification to the
effect that, in the event that there should be any change or modification
in the disclosure of interest, that such individuals shall amend said
disclosure within 30 days from the date that such individual is
knowledgeable thereof.
D. Said disclosure statement shall further certify that all officials and
employees acknowledge that the delivery and execution of the
disclosure of interest in no way relieves such individual from
compliance with the statutes made and provided in this state relating to
conflict of interest nor the ethics of any profession of which he or she
may be a member.
E. Compliance with provisions.
(1) Each individual affected by the provisions of this section who is
presently serving in any of the categories set forth in Subsection
A(1) through (3) shall comply with the requirements herein no later
than 10 days after the effective date of this section. Each individual
affected by these provisions who is elected or appointed
subsequent to the effective date of this section shall comply with
the requirements herein within 30 days of the date of their election
or appointment.
(2) It shall be the obligation of each affected individual to complete the
financial disclosure statement, place it in a sealed envelope and
deliver the same to the City Clerk's office where, upon receipt, the
Official Seal of the City shall be affixed and the date and time of
receipt shall be recorded upon the envelope. All materials required
to be filed with the City Clerk shall be deposited in a safe deposit
§ 38-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 38-10
38:64
§ 38-11. Compliance a condition of employment.
Compliance with this chapter shall be deemed to be a condition of
employment or continued employment of all municipal employees and
officials.
§ 38-12. Exceptions.
In the event that any action complained of has been approved by or has
been taken pursuant to a state statute or local ordinance or said action has
been approved by the courts of the State of New Jersey, then no charges of
possible violation of this chapter shall be brought against any such officer
or employee of the city.
§ 38-13. Violations and penalties.
box retained by the City to utilize the same exclusively for said
purpose. [Amended 6-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1105]
F. Confidentiality.
(1) It is the intent and purpose of this section that the filings and
disclosures required hereunder shall be filed with the City Clerk
and held confidential subject to review by the City Attorney and
Assistant City Attorney and, as such, shall not be subject to public
disclosure unless there arises a question presented to the City of
Long Branch concerning an officer or employee of the City required
to comply with any provisions of this section. In that event, then
said questions shall be turned over to the office of the City Attorney,
who shall have the right, at said time, to review the records filed by
the individual in question and shall render an opinion surrounding
whether or not there might exist a possible violation of any section
of this chapter. In no event, however, shall the City Attorney make
any disclosure as to the contents of the requirements in this section
unless there is a violation of said section, in which event the City
Attorney's opinion, which may be disclosed as a result of said
investigation, may contain information required to be filed under
this section.
(2) In the event that a court of law or any other person or entity with
jurisdiction to rule on the validity of this section should determine
that the information required to be filed with the office of the City
Clerk is not a proper subject matter for confidentiality, then, and in
that event, this section shall be void ab initio, and any and all
documents filed with the City Clerk shall be returned to those
individuals who filed the same without the disclosure of said
documents to any party.
A. Any person who willfully and knowingly, or with intent to conceal or
misrepresent any financial transaction or relationship required to be
disclosed pursuant to this chapter, files a disclosure statement which is
§ 38-10 ETHICS, CODE OF § 38-13
38:65
Chapter 41
FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE
§ 41-1. Preamble.
Whereas the City of Long Branch, County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey is receiving or applying for federal subsidies administered by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the purpose
of improving housing and services of the community, including community
development, for its low and moderate income residents, and the city is
required in receiving federal subsidies to meet certain conditions to provide
fair housing for people of all races, colors, creeds, national origins and
sexes:
§ 41-2. Selections of members.
false, inaccurate or incomplete in any material particular or who fails to
or refuses to file any such financial disclosure statement when required
to do so pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in violation
of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Each violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.17
B. In addition to the penalty provided hereinabove, any officer or
employee who is determined to have violated any provision of this
chapter or of any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest
shall be liable to removal from office. [Amended 6-9-1983 by Ord.
No. 1105]
A. The City of Long Branch has determined that the HUD-sponsored New
Horizons Fair Housing Assistance Project and its activities can enable
the community to go beyond the basic requirements in promoting fair
housing and fair lending, and the city has entered or is in the process of
entering into a voluntary relationship with HUD's Office of Fair Housing
and Equal Opportunity to participate in the New Horizons Fair Housing
Assistance Program, and successful implementation of the New
Horizons Program requires community leaders to be involved in the
program, committed to it and accountable for their actions on behalf of
New Horizons. The implementation of a Fair Housing Task Force is
perceived as the means by which diverse elements of the community
may be brought together to develop a fair housing strategy.
B. The creation of a Fair Housing Task Force is hereby authorized, subject
to the terms and conditions herein specified.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 38-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 41-2
41:66
A. The chief elected official of the City of Long Branch shall, in
consultation with HUD staff, appoint representatives of the Task Force.
Said Task Force shall consist of no more than 12 members and no less
than six members.18
B. The Fair Housing Task Force shall include one representative from each
of the following groups:
(1) Municipal government.
(2) Banking and lending community.
(3) Real estate sales industry.
(4) Fair housing/civil rights agency.
C. Additional appointments to the Fair Housing Task Force may be
selected from among, although not limited to, the following groups and
organizations:
(1) Clergy.
(2) Educational institutions.
(3) Corporate employees.
(4) Tenants organizations.
(5) Homeowners' associations.
(6) Legal profession.
(7) Planning organizations.
(8) Local AFL-CIO Council.
(9) Handicapped organizations.
(10) Insurance organizations.
(11) Home builders' associations.
(12) Consumer groups.
(13) Human relations organizations.
(14) Senior citizens' organizations.
(15) Institute of real estate managers.
(16) Chamber of Commerce.
(17) Citizen action councils.
(18) League of Women Voters.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 41-2 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 41-2
41:67
§ 41-3. Function, goals and initiatives.
§ 41-4. Compensation.
All members of the Fair Housing Task Force shall serve without
compensation.
§ 41-5. Removal of members.
All members of the Fair Housing Task Force shall be subject to removal for
cause upon written charges after public hearing by Council.
§ 41-6. Rules and regulations.
The Fair Housing Task Force may adopt and enforce rules and regulations
governing its internal operation and the conduct of its members not
inconsistent with law.
(19) Press and community media.
D. The above-noted list is not intended as exclusive or exhausting, but is
merely intended as exemplary. All appointments shall be for a period of
one year.
A. The function of the Fair Housing Task Force is to design a fair housing
strategy which will accomplish both short- and long-range goals. The
goals shall be determined locally, but are to anticipate measurable
results and must address the objective of expanded housing choice for
minorities and women. The goals shall have targeted dates for goal
accomplishment.
B. Fair housing strategy shall include initiatives in four major areas:
(1) Educational programs, designed to inform and educate citizens,
housing-related industries and/or be incorporated into formal
educational institutions (high schools), regarding fair housing
issues.
(2) Assistance to minority families, designed to assure that specific
activities are developed for minority families.
(3) Local compliance activities, designed to obtain substantial
uniformity with federal law.
(4) Special programs designed to obtain substantial uniformity at the
municipal level, with initiatives currently enacted at the federal
level.
§ 41-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 41-7
41:68
§ 41-7. Powers and duties.19
The Fair Housing Task Force shall, as soon as is expediently possible
following the signing of the memorandum of understanding between the
City of Long Branch and HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity Office of Voluntary Compliance, meet and commence an
assessment of housing patterns within the city. Following said assessment,
the Fair Housing Task Force shall develop a fair housing strategy and
timetable for implementation, as provided in § 41-3, and identify funding
sources. Said material shall be submitted for approval by the Office of
Voluntary Compliance no later than six months following the signing of said
memorandum of understanding. Following approval of said material, the
Fair Housing Task Force shall meet thereafter no less than two times per
year to monitor the implementation thereof. The Fair Housing Task Force
shall function in conjunction with the Office of Community Development.
The Director of Community Development shall monitor the activities of the
Fair Housing Task Force. The Fair Housing Task Force shall report to and/
or advise the Mayor and Council on its actions and findings periodically.
Chapter 45
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 100. Fire prevention — See Ch. 173.
§ 45-1. Establishment; companies and members.
There is hereby established in the City of Long Branch a division of fire,
commonly known as the "Fire Department," the membership of which shall
consist of not more than 600 active members duly enrolled and distributed
among the different companies as follows:
A. The Oceanic Fire Engine Company No. 1 shall consist of 100 members
as follows: 60 members on the engine and 40 members on the truck of
the company.
B. The Atlantic Engine and Truck Company No. 1 shall consist of 100
members as follows: 60 members on the engine and 40 members on the
truck of the company.
C. The Independent Engine and Truck Company No. 2 shall consist of 100
members as follows: 60 members on the engine and 40 members on the
truck of the company.
D. The West End Engine Company No. 3 shall consist of 60 members.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 41-7 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-1
41:69
§ 45-2. Election of officers.
E. The Elberon Engine Company No. 4 shall consist of 60 members.
F. The Oliver Byron Engine Company No. 5 shall consist of 60 members.
G. The Neptune Hose Company No. 1 shall consist of 40 members.
H. The Phil Daly Hose Company No. 2 shall consist of 40 members.
I. The Branchport Hose Company No. 3 shall consist of 40 members.
J. Uniformed Fire Division (UFD). [Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
13-17]
A. Certified list of members. By the first Monday in November of each
year, the recording secretary of each respective company shall furnish
the City Clerk with a certified list of names of all active members of the
company whose dues are paid to October 1 of that year and who are
members in good standing, with the exception of § 45-1J. No member
whose name does not appear on the list shall be entitled to vote for any
officer at the ensuing election of officers of the Fire Department. If no
list is supplied, that company shall not be eligible to vote. [Amended
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
B. Nomination of candidates.
(1) Each respective company, with the exception of § 45-1J wishing to
place a candidate in the field for Second Assistant Chief shall
nominate and certify a candidate by September 1 of each year and
submit the name of that person to the City Clerk. Each person
nominated for Second Assistant Chief must meet the requirements
set forth in § 45-3C(2) and, on or before September 1, have all of
the necessary certifications as required. [Amended 2-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 2-07; 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 1-15; 6-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 13-17]
(2) There shall be no waiting period for a fire company to nominate a
candidate for Second Assistant Chief, except that no company shall
have more than one candidate serve as Chief, First Assistant Chief
or Second Assistant Chief at any time. [Amended 6-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 16-05]
C. Elections.
(1) On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in December of each
year, the members of the Fire Department whose names have been
furnished to the City Clerk and certified as required in Subsection
A shall elect a Second Assistant Chief of the Fire Department. The
individuals serving in the positions of Second Assistant Chief and
First Assistant Chief for the year shall automatically assume the
positions of First Assistant Chief and Chief respectively.
§ 45-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-2
41:70
§ 45-3. Officers; powers and duties.
(2) The election shall be held in fire headquarters. The polls shall be
open from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. of the day appointed for holding
the election. A challenger representing every company having a
candidate for office shall have the right to be present at the
Election Board, with a certified list of qualified voting members
furnished by the City Clerk, and shall have the right to challenge
any disputed vote. At the time of voting, each qualified voter shall
sign his/her name on a separate list furnished by the City Clerk. A
statement that outlines the results of the election, including the
names of all persons who voted, shall be signed by the Judge and
members of the Election Board and shall be forwarded to the City
Clerk immediately after tabulating. Voting shall be by paper ballot
in uncontested elections, and by voting machines in contested
elections. The statement shall be compared by the City Clerk with
the certified lists furnished to him/her and submitted to the Council
at its next regular meeting after the election. The Council shall
have the power to check the returns and declare the results. The
person declared to be elected as Second Assistant Chief and the
persons automatically assuming the positions of First Assistant
Chief and Chief shall hold office for one year from the first day of
January ensuing. In the event of a tie vote for Second Assistant, a
new election shall be held one week later.
D. Election Board. Each fire company, with the exception of § 45-1J shall
elect an Election Board member from its members in good standing,
which Board shall conduct the succeeding election. The members of the
Election Board shall choose a Judge, Inspector and Clerk. Sample
ballots shall be printed by the City Clerk and approved by the Fire Chief
at least one week prior to the election. Said sample ballots shall be
distributed, one to each company. The election shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Chief. If any member of the Election Board is
unable to serve, the company may appoint an alternate. [Amended
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
A. Enumeration.
(1) The officers of the Long Branch Fire Department shall consist of a
Chief, First Assistant and Second Assistant Chiefs, Captains,
Assistant Captains and Lieutenants of respective companies.
Members of § 45-1(J) will not be eligible for any of the beforementioned
officer positions. These members will be governed by
the New Jersey Civil Service Commission for hiring and
promotions. When on duty all officers shall wear hats on which
shall be emblazoned the names of their respective offices.
[Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
(2) The Captains, Assistant Captains and Lieutenants shall be elected
by their respective companies as prescribed by their bylaws, in
§ 45-2 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-3
41:71
addition to meeting the current mandatory requirements of the
State of New Jersey.
B. General duties of the Chief. The Chief of the Fire Department shall:
(1) Have full and complete control of all Fire Department equipment
and personnel, being held accountable for his/her actions to the
Director of Public Safety, and make such written and verbal reports
as the Director of Public Safety may require; be responsible at all
times for the maintenance and distribution of all city-owned
equipment, apparatus and housing; and be responsible for all
budgeting matters concerning the Long Branch Fire Department.
All other officers affiliated with the Long Branch Fire Department
shall be accountable to the Chief or such officer as shall be
appointed Acting Chief in his/her absence.
(2) Formulate rules and regulations to govern the Department, subject
to approval of the Director, and be responsible for the personnel,
morale and general efficiency of the Department.
(3) Be responsible for all volunteer appointments, including all Acting
Chiefs, and oversee all inter-Department groups, agencies,
committees and divisions. Acting chiefs must be appointed from the
roles of the former Department fire chiefs and conform to
§ 45-3C(2).
(4) Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by
investigating or causing to be investigated the origin and
circumstances of all fires of questionable origin.
(5) (Reserved)20
(6) The Chief shall report to the Director of Public Safety as to the
supplies requested and recommend purchase of necessary items
under the circumstances. The retiring Chief shall give to the
Incoming Chief a copy his/her recommendations.
(7) The Fire Chief shall provide to the Public Safety Director a periodic
report as to the status of all fire apparatus and the buildings in use
for the protection of same.
(8) The Chief of the Department shall report in writing, on a quarterly
basis, to the Council of the City of Long Branch regarding activities
involving repair and/or replacement of equipment. Said reports
shall cover both paid and volunteer portions of the Department.
Copies of said reports shall be reported to the Director of Public
Safety.
C. Chief and Assistant Chief; eligibility; removal; succession.
20.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), which required the Fire Chief, between his/her
election and the start of his/her term, to establish a schedule of designations, was
repealed 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 1-15.
§ 45-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-3
41:72
(1) The Chief and Assistance Chiefs shall at no time be members of the
same company or of § 45-1J. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
13-17]
(2) No persons shall be eligible for the office of Chief or Assistant Chief
unless he/she is a resident of the City of Long Branch or a
bordering town, said bordering towns to be considered as the
following: Oceanport, West Long Branch, Deal, Monmouth Beach
and Oakhurst; and shall remain a resident of said community
during his/her term of office. No persons shall be eligible for the
position of Chief or Assistant Chief until he/she has been an active
firefighter of the City at least five years next preceding his/her
election and has served his/her respective company as a line officer
for three years, one of which as company captain. No person shall
be eligible for the office of Chief or Assistant Chief unless he/she
has a high school diploma or equivalent and, in addition to meeting
the current mandatory requirements of the State of New Jersey, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:73-1.6. Each candidate running for the
position of Chief or Assistant Chief shall supply to the Public Safety
Director on or before September 1 the necessary certifications as
outlined below. The Public Safety Director shall certify, by October
1, that said candidate(s) have met all the necessary requirements.
[Amended 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 15-13; 2-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 1-15]
(a) Firefighter 1: certificate issued by the New Jersey Division of
Fire Safety.
(b) Pump operations. Certificate issued by an accredited fire
service organization.
(c) Truck company operations. Certificate issued by an accredited
fire service organization.
(d) Aerial placement class. Certificate issued by an accredited fire
service organization.
(e) Instructor 1: certification issued by the New Jersey Division of
Fire Safety. The requirement for this certification is to take
effect September 15, 2016.
(f) Fire Officer 1: certification issued by the New Jersey Division
of Fire Safety.
(g) Incident Management Level 1: certificate issued by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(h) Incident Management Level 2: certificate issued by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(i) Incident Management Level 3: certificate issued by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
§ 45-3 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-3
41:73
(3) In the event that a vacancy occurs in the position of Chief during
the term of office, the next ranking officer may become Chief or an
ex-Chief may be appointed Acting Chief by the Director of Public
Safety, upon recommendation and advice of the Advisory Council,
to finish the remaining term of office. In the event that a vacancy
occurs in the position of First Assistant Chief during the term of
office, the next ranking officer shall become the First Assistant
Chief and automatically become Chief at the next election. The
Company whose member occupied the position of First Assistant
Chief shall have the privilege of nominating a candidate for the
office of First Assistant Chief at the next election. If the office of
Second Assistant Chief becomes vacant because of this succession,
an ex-Chief may be appointed Acting Second Assistant Chief by the
Director of Public Safety, upon recommendation and advice of the
Advisory Council, to serve until the next election. All appointees
shall comply with § 45-3C.
(4) In the event that a vacancy occurs in the position of Second
Assistant Chief during term of office, the Company whose member
occupied that office shall appoint a Second Assistant Chief to fill
the vacancy. That person shall be approved by the City Council and
comply with § 45-3C.
(5) In the event of the death of all three Fire Chiefs, the Director of
Public Safety, upon recommendation and advice of the Advisory
Council, shall appoint three ex-Chiefs from the respective
companies of the deceased officers to fill the vacant offices as
follows: Chief for the unexpired term of the deceased; First
Assistant Chief for 30 days; Second Assistant Chief for 30 days; at
which time a new election shall be held for the election of a new
First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief.
(6) A Chief may be removed from his/her office by the Public Safety
Director, with advice of the Advisory Council, for cause, upon
written charges, after an opportunity to be heard provided before
the Director. A Chief may also be recalled from office for cause
connected with his/her office upon the filing of a recall petition
signed by at least 25% of the active fire fighters of the City as
determined by the list on file with the City Clerk. The petition shall
set for a statement of the cause upon which the removal is sought.
The procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 through and including
N.J.S.A. 40-69A-173 on signatures, removal, notice and ballots, and
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-177 on publication and results, shall apply to any
such recall. In the event of a successful recall, succession in office
shall be as provided in this Subsection C.
(7) In the event that no candidate is certified by the Public Safety
Director to have met the requirements to run for second Assistant
Chief as outlined in § 45-3C(2) by October 1, the Public Safety
Director may call for a Special Election at a later date. The Public
Safety Director will provide the fire companies with 30 days' notice
§ 45-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-3
41:74
§ 45-4. Fire fighters Uniformed Fire Division (UFD).
in which to present all qualified candidates for certification. A
Special Election will then be held within 30 days of a candidate(s)
being certified following the procedures outlined in § 45-2C.
[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 1-15]
D. Duties at fires.
(1) The Chief and Assistant Chief shall attend fires and are hereby
empowered and required to take charge of any structure or area
which may be on fire or endangered by fire. They shall admit only
fire fighters, officers of the law and such people as they may
designate to be necessary to aid in the extinguishment of the fire
and the preservation of life or property. They shall give orders for
and supervise the removal of all property endangered by fire and
may lawfully enter and examine any building or place on the
premises or vessel where any gunpowder or other explosive,
inflammable or hazardous materials may be kept. The Chief or
Assistant Chiefs may, in writing, direct the removal or securing of
any such materials. He/she shall, in all cases of fire threatening
danger or destruction of property, take prompt and efficient
measures to extinguish the same, and shall at such times and on
such occasions of alarm of fire have absolute control and command
over all fire apparatus and members of the Department and over all
other fire apparatus and persons aiding or assisting the
Department at any fire. The Chief and Assistant Chief shall be in
charge of Fire Department equipment and personnel and incidents
and operations, other than fires, involving the Fire Department in
either a support or primary role.
(2) In the absence of the Chief, his/her command shall devolve upon
and his/her duties shall be performed by the Assistant Chiefs or, in
their absence, by the first arriving ex-Fire Chief who possesses the
knowledge and expertise to handle said command and is qualified
at the time of arrival, including being in possession of appropriate
training and update classes at the time, or, in his/her absence, by
the first arriving Company Captain.
A. Uniformed Fire Division. The full-time drivers of the fire apparatus of
the City of Long Branch, who are now so employed or who may
hereafter by appointed, shall be and are hereby designated as "fire
fighters, UFD." Members of the UFD shall be under the command of the
Fire Chief and his two assistants at fires or any operation involving the
Fire Department. With the approval of the Public Safety Director and/or
Fire Chiefs, the Fire Captain and/or Provisional Fire Captain shall be in
charge of all other day-to-day operations involving the fire fighters
(UFD). The chain of command shall be that the Fire Captain, if
available, shall supersede all other UFD officers. In the event that the
Fire Captain is unavailable, then the Provisional Fire Captain shall be in
charge of all other day-to-day operations involving the Uniformed Fire
§ 45-3 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-4
41:75
Department. In the event that the Provisional Fire Captain shall not
be available, the Fire Lieutenant as directed by the Director of Public
Safety and/or Fire Chief shall be in charge of the day-to-day operations
involving the fire fighters UFD.
B. Fire fighters UFD; superior officers. One of the fire fighters UFD shall
be appointed and designated as Fire Captain UFD by the appointing
authority, Director of Public Safety, pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the Department of Personnel. The Fire Captain shall, in
addition to his/her normal duties as fire fighter UFD, with the approval
of the Public Safety Director and/or the Fire Chief, supervise the Fire
Lieutenants and all other fire fighters UFD in the performance of their
duties except during fire calls.
C. Appointment; removal; suspension. The fire fighters UFD, including
Lieutenants and Supervisor, shall be appointed by the appointing
authority that is authorized to formulate rules for the qualifications and
government of fire fighters, and they shall be subject to such rules. For
inefficiency or any infraction of the rules or other provisions of any
ordinance of the City of Long Branch relating to the fire fighters or for
any other misconduct deemed sufficient, fire fighters may be subject to
temporary suspension or to any other penalty which may be now or
hereafter prescribed by the Business Administrator or Director of
Public Safety in conformance with Department of Personnel
regulations. No fire fighter shall be subject to permanent removal
except by having charges preferred upon him/her and a hearing before
the Director of Public Safety on notice and in conformance with
Department of Personnel regulations. Any complaint of a violation or
infraction of rules or regulations against a fire fighter UFD shall be
made to the Fire Captain for appropriate disciplinary action. Any such
allegations against the Fire Captain shall be made to the Chief, who
shall investigate the matter and file a report with the Director of Public
Safety for appropriate action. Fire fighters shall wear suitable uniforms
as may be designated by the Director of Public Safety and Fire Chief.
D. Assignment. The Director of Public Safety shall assign fire fighters to
the various fire companies of the city.
E. Appointment.
(1) All applicants for appointment to the Fire Department shall be
qualified for appointment as required by law, ordinance and Civil
Service rules and regulations. All applicants for appointment shall
be residents of the City of Long Branch and must maintain
continuous residency within the City of Long Branch from the
announced closing date of the Department of Personnel
examination up to and including the date of appointment.
(2) All applicants falling in Class 1 shall be appointed first, and then
those in each succeeding class in the order above listed, and no
person shall be appointed to fill a vacancy until all qualified
§ 45-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-4
41:76
§ 45-5. Fire police.
The Fire Department shall have a fire police organization which shall be
made up of 39 members, four from each company of less than 100 members
and five from each one-hundred-member company. They shall be elected
at the company's regular election and their names submitted to the Fire
Chief for approval by the Director of Public Safety. The fire police shall have
the power to provide for the election of officers. They shall manager their
own affairs under rules and regulations adopted by them and subject to the
approval or disapproval of the Fire Chief. The fire police shall assist the
Chief or Assistant Chiefs by doing general police duty as directed by the
Chief or his assistants.
§ 45-6. Membership. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 6-15]
applicants in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or
have declined an offer of appointment.
(3) Pursuant to the provisions of Title III of the Revised Statutes, the
classes of qualified applicants defined in Subsection E(1) shall be
considered as separate and successive lists of eligibles, and the
Civil Service Commission shall, when requested to certify eligibles
for positions specified in this section, make such certifications from
any such class until all persons in the preceding class or classes
have been appointed or have declined offers of appointment.
(4) This section shall apply only to initial appointments and not to
promotional appointments of persons already members of the Fire
Department.
(5) In making temporary appointments, the Fire Department may
utilize the classifications set forth in Subsection E(1) and shall
certify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the positions to
be temporarily filled.
A. Qualifications. Effective January 1, 1988, no person shall become an
active member of the Fire Department of the City or any company
thereof unless he/she is 18 years of age and not over age set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-56 and is a citizen of the United States. He/she shall be
physically fit to perform the duties of a firefighter, such fitness to be
evidence by a certificate of a practicing physician of the State of New
Jersey, after physical examination made for that purpose. He/she shall
be a resident of or work in the City of Long Branch or one of the
bordering towns listed in § 45-3C(2). A candidate for membership
residing or working in any other town may be approved for membership
by a company. The membership of such a person in the Fire Department
shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
B. Procedure.
§ 45-4 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-6
41:77
(1) Every person seeking to join the Fire Department shall make
application to the company he/she wishes to join in the manner
provided by this section. Upon his/her election to membership and
completion of Subsections D, E, F and G of this section is to be
scheduled for confirmation by the Council, he/she shall become a
member in good standing of the Fire Department, and his/her name
shall be entered on a roll of firefighters of the City of Long Branch.
He/she may be given a badge of membership in his/her unit by his/
her company and which shall be delivered to the company
secretary at any time upon demand of the Chief, or whenever the
member is under charges involving moral turpitude or neglect of
duty, or any act which may post a health or safety risk to another
member or for any cause, or ceases to be an active firefighter.
(2) Any person seeking to join the Fire Department as an honorary
member shall make an application to the company which he/she
desires to join. Upon election to honorary membership, according
to the rules of the company and a confirmation by the Council, he/
she shall become a member in good standing of the Fire
Department, and his/her name shall be entered on a roll of
honorary firefighters of the City of Long Branch. The honorary
status may be revoked, with or without cause, upon demand of the
Public Safety Director, the Chief, or by action of the company to
which the individual belongs.
(3) Any person obtaining membership to the Department and
participating in fire fighting activities must meet and comply with
the state-mandated training requirements within the time allowed
by the state. Specialized units with the department must comply
with their own mandated training.
C. This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq. in order to
implement N.J.S.A. 15A:2-1 and 15A:2-7. The Home Rule Act directs
municipalities to act for the health, welfare and safety of its citizens.
D. Any person desiring membership in a volunteer fire department/rescue
squad shall complete an application, provided by the Director of Public
Safety, which shall contain the following information about the
applicant:
(1) Name.
(2) Home address.
(3) Birth date.
(4) Social Security number.
(5) Driver's license number.
(6) Any conviction of a crime or disorderly persons violation.
§ 45-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-6
41:78
§ 45-7. Duties of fire fighters.
(7) Such other information as the volunteer fire department/rescue
squad deems relevant to the application, provided that said
information is not prohibited by law.
E. Upon approval of the application by the Fire Company, the applicant
shall take the application to the Long Branch Police Records Bureau
who shall initiate an investigation to ascertain the truth of the
statements made by the applicant upon his/her application and any
such other investigation of the applicant's background deemed
necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such
investigation, the applicant is found to have been convicted of a crime
or disorderly persons violation, or there is any other information that
would indicate the applicant may be a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the community, the Public Safety Director shall report such
information and the particulars thereof to the volunteer fire
department/rescue squad.
F. In connection with said investigation, the applicant shall submit to
fingerprinting, and the Public Safety director or his/her authorized
designee is authorized to submit the applicant's fingerprints and
receive state criminal history record information from the Division of
State Police/State Bureau of Identification for use in considering the
suitability of all applicants covered under this chapter.
G. Any conviction of a crime under N.J.S.A. title 2C:1-4 after June 1, 2015,
by any member, either active or honorary, shall result in a review by the
Director of Public Safety. This review may result in termination of
membership of the department.
H. This section is intended to make the volunteer rescue squad an
authorized agency as defined by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1.
I. The above investigation by the Public Safety Director shall be
completed within 30 days of receipt of the application and the
fingerprinting of the applicant. The applicant has six months to
complete the process.
A. It shall be the duty of each volunteer fire fighter to report immediately
to wherever any fire or incident/operation involving the Fire
Department shall occur in the city, unless otherwise directed by the
Chief or any Assistant Chief.
B. It shall be the duty of each volunteer fire fighter to familiarize himself/
herself with the Department's standard operating guidelines and the
chain of command. [Amended 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1-03]
C. It shall be the duty of each volunteer fire fighter to attend Department
training classes and stay current with all mandated state and local
training.
§ 45-6 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-8
41:79
§ 45-8. Exemption certificate; benefits. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 13-17]
Every active member of company's § 45-1A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I within
the Fire Department shall in each year perform at least 50% of duty to be
composed of actual attendance and duty at fires and drills, and a record
shall be kept of such attendance and duty by the company Captains and
the Chief of the Fire Department and annually reported to City officials
and the secretary of the local Fireman's Relief Association to qualify for
exempt certificates and state benefits. The UFD Commander must report all
qualified members of § 45-1J annually to City officials and the secretary of
the local Fireman's Relief Association.
§ 45-9. Disciplinary actions.
§ 45-10. General regulations.
A. The Chief is empowered to suspend from duty any company or any
member of any company for disobedience of his/her orders or the
orders of the officer in command when on duty. Any person so
suspended may appeal, in writing, to the Director of Public Safety, who
shall investigate the charge and the suspension and report thereon to
the Council. After due hearing, the Council shall by a majority vote of all
its members affirm, modify or reverse the suspension.
B. Any member of the Fire Department may be suspended or expelled by
the Director of Public Safety for any willful disrespect, insubordination
or disobedience of the rules of the Fire Department, ordinances of the
city, or for counseling, aiding or abetting any person in the doing of any
act which may hamper or interfere with the efficient service of the
Department. Any person so charged shall be served with a written or
printed copy of the complaint made against him/her, shall be entitled to
a hearing at least five days subsequent to service upon him/her, and his/
her suspension shall require a majority vote of all members of the City
Council.
C. All disciplinary actions shall be subject, where applicable, to the
provision of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes21 and rules and regulations
made thereunder, and to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-19
through 40A:14-22.
A. Apparatus. No fire apparatus shall leave the City except by permission
of the Chief, Assistant Chief or appointed Acting Chief, provided that, in
case of necessity by reason of fire, the Mayor or Director of Public
Safety may permit any apparatus to leave. No fire apparatus shall be
used for any mere trial of skill or power except with the consent of the
Director of Public Safety. When an alarm is received and the answering
company sees that the fire is in a neighboring community, the ranking
21.Editor's Note: L. 1986, c. 112 enacted new Title 11A, Civil Service, and repealed former
Title 11, Civil Service. (See § 11A:12-3.)
§ 45-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-10
41:80
§ 45-11. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Safety shall have the power to promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the Department not inconsistent with law,
with this chapter or with any rules or regulations adopted by the Council.
The Advisory Council (see § 45-12 below) shall have the right to advise the
Director about the promulgation of such rules; accordingly, the Council shall
provide a copy of said proposed rules to the Advisory Council. These rules
shall not be effective unless and until a copy thereof has been delivered to
each member of the Department.
§ 45-12. Ex-Chief's Advisory Council.
officer shall use best judgment in deciding whether to leave the city. No
City building used for the keeping of any fire apparatus or any portion
of any building rented or owned by the City shall be used for any other
purpose without the consent of the Council.
B. Interference with Department orders. While on duty, a fire fighter shall
conform with the directions given by the Chief, Assistant Chiefs or, in
their absence, by the next officer in line under the chain of command, to
manage the fire apparatus with all his/her skill and power, and when the
fire is extinguished, he/she shall not leave except by direction of the
Chief or Assistants, and, on such direction being given, shall return the
fire apparatus to the fire house.
C. Alarms. Response to alarms is dictated by Department SOG's.
[Amended 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1-03]
D. Miscellaneous.
(1) No person who has been suspended or expelled from the Fire
Department shall concern himself/herself in any manner with any
apparatus belonging to the Fire Department.
(2) No person shall at any time willfully drive or cause to be driven any
vehicles over any hose or other fire equipment.
(3) No person shall raise or cause to be raised any false alarm.
(4) No person shall refuse or neglect to remove any gunpowder or
other explosives or inflammable material from any premises when
ordered to do so by the Chief or an Assistant Chief.
E. Table of Organization. The structure of the Long Branch Fire
Department consisting of the Volunteer Fire Division and the
Uniformed Fire Division, shall be as designated on the Table of
Organization, which is on file with the Director of Public Safety of the
City of Long Branch.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established in the Long Branch Fire
Department an Advisory Council of ex-Chiefs made up of no more than
§ 45-10 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-12
41:81
§ 45-13. (Reserved)22
§ 45-14. Ladies Auxiliary.
There is hereby established in the Long Branch Fire Department a Ladies
Auxiliary. Prospective members shall make application for membership in
such fashion as prescribed in § 45-66. If accepted, membership shall be
classified as honorary membership. The Ladies Auxiliary shall have the
authority to provide for the election of officers. It shall manage its own
affairs under rules and regulations adopted by it and approved by the Long
Branch Fire Chief. The Ladies Auxiliary shall assist the Chief or Assistant
Chiefs by providing support services as directed by the Fire Chiefs.
§ 45-15. Exemption from fees.
nine members, one from each company, with the exception of § 45-1J.
They shall be elected for a term of three years at the company's regular
election, and their names submitted to the Public Safety Director and
the Fire Chief. Any vacancy may be filled by appointment of an ex-Chief
from the same company for the unexpired term. Any company which
does not have an ex-chief as member shall not be eligible to make an
appointment to the Council. The Advisory Council shall have the power
to provide for the election of a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson and
adopt bylaws. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
B. Duties of Council. It shall be the duty of the Advisory Council to assist
and advise the Public Safety Director and the Fire Chief on matters of
policy and procedure affecting the Long Branch Fire Department.
C. The Council shall meet at regularly scheduled meetings as per the
bylaws of the Council. Special meetings may be called at any time by
the Chairperson or, in his/her absence, by the Vice-Chairperson. A
meeting of the Council may also be called upon request of a least three
members of the Council.
D. Any proposed change or changes to the City ordinance governing the
Long Branch Fire Department shall be submitted in writing to the
Advisory Council prior to introduction its advice.
E. There shall be, at a minimum, a quarterly meeting of the Advisory
Council (or designated representatives thereof), the Director of Public
Safety, the Captain of the UFD (or designated representative), the
current volunteer Chiefs, and the Mayor (or designated representative
thereof) to discuss all relevant Fire Department issues.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this
section:
22.Editor's Note: Former § 45-13, Emergency Services Unit, was repealed 2-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 1-15.
§ 45-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 45-15
41:82
ACTIVE MEMBER — Individuals in any volunteer organization who
meet the definition of either "active member" or "active life member"
as established by the bylaws of the voluntary organization as are in
effect on the effective date of this section. Probationary members are
specifically excluded from this definition. This is not to include
members of § 45-1J.[Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
FAMILY — An active member, his/her spouse and all natural or adopted
children under 21 years of age who are unmarried and permanently
occupying the same residence.
FEES — Those charges established by the governing body of the City of
Long Branch which are retained by the City of Long Branch as revenue.
Specifically excluded is any portion of the fee that is collected by the
City on behalf of another entity, including but not limited to the State of
New Jersey, the County of Monmouth or any outside vendor.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — The Fire Department and First Aid
Squad of the City of Long Branch.
B. Incentives. All active members of a volunteer organization and families
shall be entitled to the following benefits:
(1) Exemption from fees for recreational programs conducted within
the City of Long Branch.
(2) Exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform Construction
Code fees for the issuance of a building permit required in
connection with either the construction of an addition or
completion of repairs to an existing single-family dwelling owned
and occupied by an active member of a volunteer organization.
(3) Partial exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform
Construction Code fees, not to exceed a maximum of $500, for the
issuance of a building permit required in connection with the
construction of a new single-family dwelling to be occupied by an
active member of a volunteer organization.
(4) Exemption from rental fees for any indoor recreational facilities,
such as rental of municipally owned public facilities, if required,
provided that such rental is for the actual use of the active member
or the member's family.
(5) Exemption from miscellaneous fees, licenses and permits,
including but not limited to cat licenses, marriage licenses,
certificate of continued occupancy for any dwelling personally
occupied by the active member and Board of Adjustment fees
required in connection with applications for either use or bulk
variances.
(6) Beach badges for any active member of any volunteer organization.
C. Administration.
§ 45-15 FAIR HOUSING TASK FORCE § 45-15
41:83
Chapter 53
HISTORIAN
§ 53-1. Position established; compensation; term of office;
functions.
There is hereby established the position of City Historian, such position to
be nonsalaried and to be filled by appointment by the Mayor for a period
of three years. The City Historian shall render such assistance to persons
seeking historical information about the City of Long Branch as he shall
be able to provide and shall advise city officials on projects and programs
which in his judgment foster interest in the historical background of the City
of Long Branch.
Chapter 56
(1) On or about January 1 of each calendar year, a volunteer
organization shall submit to the City of Long Branch a list of all
individuals who meet the definition for active member status. Such
list shall be updated on a periodic basis by the volunteer
organization, to add those individuals who have completed their
probationary status or to delete individuals who have been dropped
from their membership or who no longer meet the criteria for
active member status.
(2) On a form provided by the City Clerk, each active member shall
provide information related to his family status to assist the various
municipal officials in the administration of this section in order to
be eligible for the benefits provided in this section.
(3) All active members and their families must comply with all
registration procedures and complete all application forms
established by the City of Long Branch.
D. Exclusions. No exemption shall be allowed for the following fees:
(1) Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
(2) Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after
maximum registration has been reached.
(3) Fees and escrows required by either the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment in connection with any site plan or subdivision
application.
(4) Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
(5) Dog license fees.
(6) Posting of performance guaranties where required or permitted by
law.
§ 45-15 LONG BRANCH CODE § 53-1
53:84
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 56-1. Establishment.
There is established the Housing Authority of the City of Long Branch, an
agency and instrumentality of the city.
§ 56-2. Members; appointment; terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 6-11-1991 by Ord. No. 13-91]
The Authority shall consist of seven members, five of whom shall be
appointed by the City Council, one of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor
and one of whom shall be appointed by state authority. Locally appointed
members shall hold office for five years, and vacancies among them shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The state-appointed member shall serve at the
pleasure of the authority appointing him.
§ 56-3. Powers and duties.
The Housing Authority shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed
for it by law.
Chapter 59
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 59-1. Establishment; members; term of office.
There shall be a Human Relations Commission consisting of nine members,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of four years.
§ 59-2. Replacement of Civil Rights Commission; powers and duties.
The Human Relations Commission shall replace the Civil Rights
Commission and shall succeed to all of the duties previously carried out by
the Civil Rights Commission, which shall include the promotion of the best
methods of ensuring excellent human relations among the various groups in
the community and such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Mayor.
Chapter 62
INDUSTRIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
§ 62-1. Establishment; appointment of members.
There is hereby established a special committee to be known and
designated as the "Industrial and Economic Development Committee of the
City of Long Branch," the members of which shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
§ 53-1 HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION § 62-2
59:85
§ 62-2. Members; qualifications; terms of office; compensation;
officers.
§ 62-3. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Committee shall be as follows:
A. The Committee shall consist of not more than 11 members, including
the two ex officio members referred to herein. The members shall
preferably be residents of the City of Long Branch; however, this shall
not preclude the appointment of a nonresident member of exceptional
qualifications and interest in the City of Long Branch. All members shall
be selected on the basis of qualifications and fitness on the Committee.
B. Three members of the Committee shall be appointed for a term of one
year and until the appointment and qualification of their successors;
three members of the Committee shall be appointed to serve for a term
of two years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors; and one member of the Committee shall be appointed for a
term of three years and until the appointment and qualification of his/
her successor. All subsequent terms thereafter shall be for a period of
three years.
C. The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
D. The Mayor and a member of the City Council shall be ex officio
members of the Committee.
E. The members of the Committee shall choose from among its members a
Chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
A. To promote and recommend to the Mayor and Council the development
of industry in the city and to explore and make recommendations to the
various public bodies of the City of Long Branch for the expansion of
industrial growth.
B. To conduct studies and surveys of the opportunities for industrial
expansion and development in the city.
C. To analyze the several and various industries throughout the country,
with a view to ascertaining the type of industry best suited to the
economic and social improvement of the city.
D. To recommend to the Planning Board, Environmental Commission and
City Council desirable and suitable areas within the city for the location
of industry and light manufacturing.
E. To recommend to the Planning Board and Mayor and Council of the city
reasonable and desirable restrictions concerning industrial sites, in
order to safeguard property values of established residential and
business areas in the city.
F. To promote the advantages of the city for industrial settlement.
§ 62-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 62-3
62:86
§ 62-4. Receipt of assistance and access to information.
The Committee shall receive from all officials and all authorized boards,
departments and offices of the City of Long Branch such assistance as may
be required by the Committee in performing its duties, and the Committee
shall also be given access to all municipal records and information which
may assist the Committee in the performance of its duties.
§ 62-5. Annual appropriations.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the City of Long
Branch such sum as may be determined by the City Council to be necessary
for the purpose of advertising the advantages of this municipality, and the
Committee herein established is authorized to use and expend said funds
for such purposes upon the adoption of the annual budget.
Chapter 66
LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD
§ 66-1. Establishment; members; officers; compensation. [Amended
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1271]
There is hereby established in the City of Long Branch a voluntary Landlord-
Tenant Dispute Review Board, hereinafter referred to as the "Board." The
membership of the Board shall consist of five members, two of whom shall
be tenants, two of whom shall be landlords and a fifth member from the
community who shall be neither a landlord nor tenant. Each member shall
be a resident of the city. The Chairman shall be chosen from among the
members. The Board may have available to it the services of a Secretary,
who shall be a person presently employed by the City of Long Branch
in a secretarial position. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
§ 66-2. Terms of office.
Members of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council of the City of
Long Branch for a one-year term.
G. To encourage expansion of existing industry and business to the best
interest of the city.
H. To prepare, develop and distribute any and all types of material and
data advertising the advantages of the city to new business and
industry.
I. To make quarterly annual reports to the Mayor and Council of the city,
setting forth therein and detailing the activities and operations of the
Committee during the preceding three months.
§ 62-3 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 66-3
66:87
§ 66-3. Powers and duties; procedure for complaints.
It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Long Branch that the
Board be a totally voluntary mechanism which may be used by landlords
and/or tenants as an aid to resolve disputes. As such, the Board shall have
no legal authority to issue subpoenas, require oaths or make any legally
binding determinations with regard to the landlord-tenant relationship of
the parties that appear before it. The Board shall be acting solely in an
advisory capacity to the parties in the hopes of amicably resolving any
existing disputes without the necessity of time consuming and expensive
legal proceedings. In furthering its purposes, the Board shall conduct itself
as follows:
§ 66-4. Applicability.
The Board shall have the authority to hear complaints concerning any and
all rental units except for housing units of two units or less.
A. The Board may consider complaints, in writing, from either a landlord
or a tenant with regard to the issues of rental increases, repairs to the
premises or maintenance items.
B. Upon receipt of the written complaint, the Chairman or his designee
shall contact the parties involved in order to determine whether they
wish to appear before the Board. Upon confirmation of an agreement to
appear before the Board, the Chairman shall schedule an informal
hearing at which the landlord and tenant may appear to present their
respective positions.
C. A copy of the written complaint shall be made available to the
responding party by the Board, prior to the informal hearing.
D. At the informal hearing, testimony shall not be required to be under
oath. The Board members may make inquiries of those persons
appearing before them. The individuals appearing before the Board
shall be allowed to make a statement as to their respective positions
prior to any questioning by Board members. The proceedings shall not
be considered an adversary proceeding requiring testimony under oath,
cross examination or appearances of corporate or partnership entities
through attorneys.
E. Upon completion of the informal hearing, the Board may either
immediately render a recommendation or, in its discretion, advise the
parties of its recommendations, in writing, within seven days after the
informal appearance before the Board. All recommendations shall be
nonbinding on the parties. There shall be no method of appeal from the
recommendations of the Board.
§ 66-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 66-4
66:88
Chapter 69
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 35.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 66-4 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 66-4
66:89

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 69-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the City of Long Branch."
§ 69-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to set forth the land use procedures
as designated by statute and the defining of the function and duties of the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 69-3. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in Chapter 291,
P.L. 1975,23 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 69-1 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-3
66:91

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 69-4. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, a Planning Board
consisting of nine members is hereby established and created.
§ 69-5. Membership classes.
For convenience in designating the manner of their appointment, the
members constituting the Planning Board shall consist of and be divided
into the following four classes:
A. Class I: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor. [Amended 10-27-2001 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Class II: An official of the City other than a member of the City Council
to be appointed by the Mayor; the member of the Environmental
Commission, who is also a member of the Planning Board as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there be among the Class IV or alternate members both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education. [Amended 10-27-2001 by Ord. No. 36-98]
C. Class III: A member of the City Council to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: Six citizens to be appointed by the Mayor.
E. Alternate class.
(1) Alternate members of the Planning Board, who shall attend all
Planning Board meetings and be utilized by the Chairman of the
Planning Board when the full regular membership of the Board is
not in attendance, shall not exceed two in the Class IV category, to
be appointed by the Mayor. They shall serve for terms of two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any
one year. Such alternate member shall be designated by the Mayor
at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2" and shall serve during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member or members of Class IV.
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
§ 69-4 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-5
66:93
§ 69-6. Compensation; terms of office.
§ 69-7. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment in the manner herein specified.
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. (See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.)
A. All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation,
and the members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office except
that one member may be a member of the Board of Adjustment and one
may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
shall be a Class IV member except as specified in § 69-5.
B. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence
of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or termination at
the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
D. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the City
Council; provided however, that no term of any member shall exceed
four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect the
term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the term for which they were
appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
E. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malfeasance in office by the officer or body
appointing them.
§ 69-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-8
66:94
§ 69-8. Officers; additional staff and services.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it. The Planning
Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts and other
staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not, however,
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
§ 69-9. Planning Board Attorney. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
There is hereby created the Office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney and licensed to practice in New Jersey.
§ 69-10. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking
of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the
following powers and duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To reexamine its Master Plan and development regulations at least
every six years as provided by the City Council and prepare a report on
the findings of such a reexamination in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-89.
C. To administer the provisions of the land subdivision ordinance of the
City,24 including the granting of final approval of subdivision plats, in
accordance with said ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. A
Subdivision Committee may be appointed by the Chairman, with the
approval of the Board, and the Board is empowered to waive full notice
and hearing and favorable referral by a majority of the Board on a
subdivision where no new street is shown and where the Committee
finds no cause for review by the entire Board or for unfavorable action
upon the subdivision.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 69-8 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-10
66:95
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend the same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make a report(s) to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment.
(1) The Planning Board when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses shall have the
power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public area reserved pursuant to Section 23 of this act;25
and
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
the hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
(3) Whenever possible and beneficial to the community, the Planning
Board shall require consolidation of adjoining nonconforming lots,
owned by one person, when development or a variance is
requested. Within 30 days of any approval of consolidation, the
Planning Board shall notify the Tax Assessor's office of such
consolidation. The Tax Assessor is to implement the consolidation
on the tax records within 30 days and send a notice thereof to the
Planning Board.
I. Matters for review and recommendation.
(1) To pass on matters referred to it for review and make
recommendation with respect to the location, character and extent
of any project of the City Council or other public body, and the City
Council or other public body shall not act thereon without such
recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed without it, except
that such reference shall not extend the time for action by the
referring body.
25.Editor's Note: "Section 23 of this act" refers to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 69-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-10
66:96
§ 69-11. Time for decision.
§ 69-12. Citizens' Advisory Committee on Planning.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee on Planning to assist the Planning Board, but the Committee
shall have no power to vote or take other action required of the Board. The
Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 69-13. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission shall prepare and submit to the
Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality, the
Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
(2) The Planning Board shall pass upon other matters specifically
referred to it from time to time by the City Council, and final action
on such matters shall not be taken until the Planning Board has
submitted its report or 60 days have elapsed without such report
from the date the matter was referred from the City Council.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(3) Any recommendation of the Planning Board to the City Council or
any other body may be overridden by a majority of the full
membership. A majority vote of the City Council shall be necessary
to sustain any vote of any other body which has overridden a
Planning Board recommendation.
J. To pass on any amendments or changes of any nature to Chapter 345,
Zoning. In addition, the Planning Board at all times shall have the
power to suggest amendments to the zoning ordinance or any other
ordinance having to do with the physical development of the City.
K. To review and consider applications for scattered site housings
pursuant to Ordinance No. 22-98, Code § 345-56. [Added 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 8-99]
A. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to exercise its ancillary
powers before the granting of a variance as set forth in § 69-10H, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within
120 days after submission by the developer of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the Zoning
Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Preliminary and final subdivision approval shall be made in accordance
with Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, § 300-5, Application procedure.
§ 69-10 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-13
66:97
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 69-14. Period of limitation.
A. Any exception or variance from this section granted by the Planning
Board to the applicant permitting the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises
shall expire by limitation unless construction, alteration or conversion
shall have actually commenced on each and every structure permitted
by such variance or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced within one year from the date of publication of the notice of
the judgment or determination of the Planning Board; except, however,
that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be
tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Planning
Board to the Council, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the
termination in any manner of such appeal of proceeding.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section,
whenever such exception or variance shall be granted in conjunction
with a final approval of a site plan or major subdivision, the validity of
such exception or variance shall be extended for the initial two-year
time period and any subsequent one-year extensions that the applicant
may obtain under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 69-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-14
66:98
ARTICLE III
Board of Adjustment
§ 69-15. Establishment; members; term of office; compensation.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 46-95]
A. The City Council shall appoint the members to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, which shall consist of seven regular members and which
may not have more than two alternate members. All members shall be
residents of the City; all terms shall begin on January 1 of the year of
their appointment. The alternate members shall be designated at the
time of their appointment by the authority appointing them as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Board of Adjustment members
shall serve without compensation. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
B. The terms of the members first appointed under this chapter shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of
such term shall be distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly
over the first four years after their appointment and, in the case of
alternate members, evenly over the first two years after their
appointment, provided that the initial term of no alternate member
shall exceed two years.
C. Therefore, for the three regular members of the Board of Adjustment
whose terms expire December 31, 1995, appointments shall be made
for their positions as follows: one appointment for a term of one year
and two appointments for a term of three years. Further, for the two
alternate members of the Board of Adjustment whose terms expire
December 31, 1995, appointments shall be made for their positions as
follows: "Alternate No. 1" shall be appointed for a term of one year and
"Alternate No. 2" shall be appointed for a term of two years. For the
four members of the Board of Adjustment whose terms expire
December 31, 1997, appointments shall be made for the positions as
follows: two appointments for a term of two years and two
appointments for a term of four years. Thereafter, the term of each
regular member shall be for a period of four years, and the term of each
alternate member shall be for a period of two years. No member may
hold any elective office or position under the City. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by the expiration of the term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
D. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
§ 69-15 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-16
66:99
§ 69-16. Removal of members.
All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be subject to removal
for cause upon written charges after public hearing by the City Council.
§ 69-17. Officers; additional staff and services.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members and shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a Board
member or another municipal employee. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall
not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 69-18. Board of Adjustment Attorney. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
There is hereby created the Office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney and licensed to practice in New Jersey.
§ 69-19. Rules and regulations for operation and conduct.
The Board may adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing its
internal operation and the conduct of its members, appellants, attorneys
and citizens, not inconsistent with this chapter. In the issuance of
subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions
of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1
et seq.) shall apply.
§ 69-20. Powers and duties.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as follows:
(1) Hear and decide appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b.
(3) Grant, upon application or appeal, relief for variances pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(4) Grant variances to allow departure from regulations pursuant to
N.J.S.A 40:55D-70d.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall refer any application for a subdivision or
site plan approval made pursuant to this chapter to the Planning Board
for its report and recommendation before it takes final action thereon.
Such referral shall not extend the time for action by the Board of
§ 69-16 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-20
66:100
§ 69-21. Appeals and applications.
Adjustment, whether or not the Planning Board has submitted its
recommendation or report. Whenever the Planning Board shall have
made a recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this chapter
to be decided by the Board of Adjustment, such recommendation may
be rejected by the Board of Adjustment only when approved by a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board of Adjustment.
C. Whenever possible and beneficial to the community, the Board of
Adjustment shall require consolidation of adjoining nonconforming lots,
such lots having the same owner, when development or a variance is
requested. Within 30 days of any approval of consolidation, the Board of
Adjustment shall notify the Tax Assessor's office of such consolidation.
The Tax Assessor is to implement the consolidation on the tax records
within 30 days and send a notice thereof to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party. Each appeal shall be taken within 20 days prescribed by the
statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with three copies of such notice, with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The notice of appeal shall specify
the grounds for the appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment with prior application to an administrative officer shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Three
copies of the application shall be filed.
C. At the time of filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than
10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all
plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of
this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of
the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting
dates of the Board.
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the Construction
Code Official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him
that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior
Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the Construction Code
Official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 69-20 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-21
66:101
§ 69-22. Power to reverse or modify decision.
In exercising the power conferred upon it, the Board of Adjustment, in
conformity with the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and the amendments
thereto, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have all the power of the Construction Code Official. The
concurring vote of three members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Construction Code Official or to decide in favor of the application any
matter on which it is required to pass under this section or to effect or
recommend any exceptions to or variations from the zoning ordinance.26
§ 69-23. Time frame for decision.
E. The Zoning Board of the City of Long Branch or its duly authorized
committee or designee shall issue the required written notice of a
complete application and shall specify the deficient items in an
incomplete application.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or the submission of a complete application for
development to the Board pursuant to the provisions of § 69-21. Failure
of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day
period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
B. Where an application for development requests relief pursuant to
§ 69-25B, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after submission by a developer of a
complete application to the Construction Code Official or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application. A certificate of the Construction Code
Official as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for the purposes of
filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) in
the case of a subdivision or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6) in the case of a site plan, the Board of Adjustment shall
condition any that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approvals by the
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 69-21 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-23
66:102
§ 69-24. Period of limitation.
Any exception or variance from this section granted by the Board of
Adjustment to the applicant permitting the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall
expire by limitation unless construction, alteration or conversion shall have
actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance
or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period
of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an
appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the Council, or to
a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of
such appeal or proceeding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this section, whenever such exception or variance shall be granted
in conjunction with a final approval of a site plan or major subdivision, the
validity of such exception or variance shall be extended for the initial twoyear
time period and any subsequent one-year extensions that the applicant
may obtain under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 69-25. Additional powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in
§ 69-20, have power given by law to:
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time.
D. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
B. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street. The Board of Adjustment shall have
the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board subdivision or site plan approval
pursuant to Article 6 of Chapter 291, P.L. 197527 whenever the Board is
reviewing an application for approval of a use variance pursuant to
§ 69-20A(4).
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 69-23 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-25
66:103

ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 69-26. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 69-27. Meetings.
§ 69-28. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any made by it, and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the City Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for
in the rules of the Board.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meeting may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All action shall be taken by a majority of the members of the agency
present at the meeting except as otherwise provided in this chapter and
by state statute.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231, P.L.
1975.28
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 69-26 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-29
66:105
§ 69-29. Fees. (Last amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93)
A. Any application of any nature shall be accompanied by an
administrative fee and escrow fee pursuant to the schedule
incorporated in Subsection C.
B. Escrow deposits.
(1) The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall also require, in addition to the filing fees provided
hereafter, escrow deposits in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such escrows shall be utilized to reimburse the
municipality for:
(a) All expenses of professional personnel incurred by it necessary
to process an application for development before a municipal
agency, such as, but not by way of limitation:
[1] Charges for reviews by professional personnel of
applications and accompanying documents.
[2] Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the
municipal agency setting forth recommendations resulting
from the review of any documents submitted by the
applicant.
[3] Charges for any telephone conference or meeting
requested or initiated by the applicant, his attorney or any
of his experts.
[4] Review of additional documents submitted by the
applicant and issuance of reports relating thereto.
[5] Review or preparation of easements, developers'
agreements, deeds, resolutions or the like.
[6] Preparation for and attendance at special meetings.
(b) The cost of additional expert advice or testimony obtained by
the municipal agency regarding the application, provided that
the municipal agency gives prior notice to the applicant of its
intention to obtain such additional expert advice or testimony
and affords the applicant an opportunity to be heard as to the
necessity for such additional advice or testimony and definition
of the limitations on the nature and extent thereof.
(2) The municipality shall require the deposit of such escrows into an
escrow account for the purpose of reimbursing the municipality for
payment of such expenses. The applicant shall, as a condition
precedent to the application being deemed complete, submit the
escrow deposits hereinafter set forth to be held in escrow in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 69-29 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-29
66:106
(3) In the event that the professional and/or expert charges should
deplete the escrow account by more than 50% of the original
submission, the Director of Finance shall notify the applicant and
require payment of additional escrow sums. Such additional escrow
sums shall be sufficient to restore the escrow account to not less
than 75% of the original escrow deposit.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(1)(b) above, no
applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the municipality for
attendance by the municipality's professional personnel at any
regularly scheduled meeting of the municipal agency; provided
further, however, that the municipality shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for attendance of its professional personnel at a special
meeting(s) of a municipal agency, which special meeting(s) was
requested to be called by the applicant.
(5) The term "professional personnel" or "professional services" as
used herein shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer,
surveyor, planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or other expert who
would provide professional services to ensure an application meets
performance standards set forth in the ordinance and other experts
whose testimony is in an area in which the applicant has presented
expert testimony.
(6) No signed plat or site plan shall be released to the applicant nor
shall any zoning permits, building permits, certificates of
occupancy or any other types of permits be issued with respect to
any approved application for development until all bills for
reimbursable services have been received by the municipality from
professional personnel rendering services in connection with such
application and payment has been approved by the governing body.
The Finance Director shall, upon written notification by the
applicant that all outstanding conditions of final approval have
been met and final plans (plats) have been submitted for signature,
render a written final accounting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
If the amount of escrow deposit exceeds the actual cost as
approved for payment by the governing body, the developer shall
be entitled to a return of the excess deposit, together with such
interest as allowed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1; but if the charges
submitted and approved by the governing body exceed the amount
of the escrow deposit, the applicant shall be liable for payment of
such deficiency.
(7) No professional personnel submitting charges to the municipality
for any of the services referred to in Subsection B(1)(a) above shall
charge for any of the services contemplated by that subsection at
any higher rate or in any different manner than would normally be
charged the municipality for similar work as ascertained by the
professional's contract of employment with the municipality or by
provisions of the municipal salary ordinance. Payment of any bill
rendered by a professional to the municipality with respect to any
§ 69-29 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-29
66:107
service for which the municipality is entitled to reimbursement
under this chapter shall in no way be contingent upon receipt
of reimbursement by the developer, nor shall any payment to a
professional be delayed pending reimbursement from a developer.
(8) Escrow deposits received from any developer pursuant to
Subsection B shall be deposited in a banking institution pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
C. Development application fee and escrow schedule. [Amended
6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93; 8-25-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98;
2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 3-01; 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 13-01;
5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01; 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 23-01;
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 29-11; 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 26-12]
Type of
Application
Administrative
Fee
Initial
Escrow
Planning
Board
Initial
Escrow
Zoning
Board
Appeals and
interpretations
$200 $850 $850
Conceptual/ informal
reviews
$150
Bulk variance
Single-and twofamily
$150 $850 plus (a) $850 plus (a)
(a) $100 per each variance
requested when connected
with a major subdivision
Multifamily $200 $1,000 plus
(b)
$1,000 plus
(b)
(b) $100 per each variance
requested
Non-residential $200 $1,000 plus
(c)
$1,000 plus
(c)
(c) $100 per variance
requested)
"D" variances $200 $1,000 $1,000
Use variance
Single-and twofamily
$250 $1,000 $1,250
Multifamily $450 $1,500 plus
$50 per unit
$2,000 plus
$50 per unit
§ 69-29 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-29
66:108
Type of
Application
Administrative
Fee
Initial
Escrow
Planning
Board
Initial
Escrow
Zoning
Board
Non-residential $450 $2,000 plus
(d)
$2,500 plus
(d)
(d) $100 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction thereof over
2,000 square feet of gross
impervious surface to be
developed
Conditional use $450 $1,000 plus
(e)
$1,500 plus
(e)
(e) $100 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction thereof over
2,000 square feet of gross
impervious surface to be
developed
Subdivision
Minor/sketch plat $100 plus $50
per lot
$1,500 $2,000
Major
classification
$100 $2,000 plus
$200 per lot
$2,500 plus
$200 per lot
Preliminary $150 plus $50
per lot
Final $100 plus $25
per lot
$1,000 plus
$100 per lot
$1,500 plus
$100 per lot
Site plan
Minor site plan $200 $1,000 $1,250
Major site plan
Residential
Preliminary $200 plus $50
per unit
$3,000 plus
(f)
$3,500 plus (f)
(f) $50 per 1,000 square feet
or fraction thereof over 2,000
square feet of gross
impervious surface to be
developed, plus $200 per
dwelling unit
Final $100 plus $25
per unit
$1,500 plus
(g)
$2,000 plus
(g)
§ 69-29 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-29
66:109
Type of
Application
Administrative
Fee
Initial
Escrow
Planning
Board
Initial
Escrow
Zoning
Board
(g) $50 per 1,000 square feet
or fraction thereof over 2,000
square feet of gross
impervious surface to be
developed, plus $200 per
dwelling unit
Non- residential
Preliminary $250 plus (h) $3,000 plus
(i)
$3,500 plus (i)
(h) $50 per 1,000 square feet or fraction
thereof over 2,000 square feet of gross
impervious surface
(i) $100 per 1,000 square feet or fraction
thereof over 2,000 square feet of gross
impervious surface to be developed, plus $200
per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of
gross floor area
Final $125 plus (j) $1,500 plus
(k)
$2,000 plus
(k)
(j) $25 per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof
over 2,000 square feet of gross impervious
surface to be developed
(k) $50 per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof
over 2,000 square feet of gross impervious
surface to be developed, plus $100 per 1,000
square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor
area
Special meeting $2,500 $2,500 $2,500
Resubmission or
revision fee
Minimum $50
Maximum 40% of
original fee
$250
Maximum
40% of
original fee
$250
Maximum
40% of
original fee
Zoning permit $30 Single-family, minor and grading
application; $50 all others such as multi-family,
subdivisions and commercial applications
Preexisting use
certificate
$50
Search required $50
§ 69-29 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-29
66:110
§ 69-30. Hearings.
Type of
Application
Administrative
Fee
Initial
Escrow
Planning
Board
Initial
Escrow
Zoning
Board
Extension of
approvals
$200 Extension
escrow $500
Extension
escrow $500
Grading plan $30 for zoning
permit
processing
$500
(minimum
escrow)
$600
(minimum
escrow)
D. Amendment to final plat or plan (subdivision or site plan). An applicant
seeking to amend the final plat shall pay a fee of 1/2 of the final plat or
plan fee. If the approving authority determines that the proposed
amendment will result in a substantial change in the final plat or plan,
the application shall be treated as a new application and be processed
accordingly subject to the payment of a full fee pursuant to whatever
the original schedule was.
E. Resubmission fee. In the event that any applicant shall determine to
revise or is required by the approving authority to revise a submission
for any application which will result in additional review by the
approving authority's experts, employees, consultants, the planning
division or the City engineer, a resubmission fee shall be paid in an
amount not to exceed 40% of the fee for the original filing with a
minimum fee of $250. The actual amount due shall be determined by
the approving authority based upon the anticipated cost for additional
reviews. [Amended 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 29-11]
F. Special meeting fee. In the event that any applicant requests to be
placed on the agenda for a special meeting, he shall be responsible for a
pro rata share of the Board's costs in holding said meeting, including
but not limited to fees for the Board Stenographers, Board Engineer,
Board Attorney, Planner, Secretary to the Board and any other Board
experts who are required to attend. [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
3-93; 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, c.
38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 69-29 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-30
66:111
§ 69-31. Notice requirements for hearing.
All public hearing dates shall be set by the approving authority. The
approving authority shall hold a public hearing on each application for
development, except that the approving authority may waive the required
notices and hearing for minor subdivisions and minor site plans unless a
variance or conditional use is part of the application. No public hearing
shall be required for final site plan of subdivision approval. All public
hearings conducted on subdivisions, site plans or variances before either
the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board shall follow the requirements
of the Municipal Land Use Law (see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12) as
summarized below.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the City at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the City in which the applicant's land
is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of
the property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its President, a Vice President, Secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to the condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners association, because
of its ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of
the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the
same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners,
co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or
area.
§ 69-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-31
66:112
§ 69-32. List of property owners furnished.
The administrative office of the City or its designate shall, within seven days
of the receipt of a request thereof and upon receipt of payment of $10 or
$0.25 cents per name, whichever is greater, make and certify a list from
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within the 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a City boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the City Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of c.
291, P.L. 1975.29
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the City
Tax Assessor's office and the location and times as to which any maps
and documents for which approval is sought are available as required
by law.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 69-31 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-32
66:113
the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to § 69-31B.
§ 69-33. Decisions.
§ 69-34. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every decision shall be published in the official newspaper
of the City, the costs of which are to be charged to the applicant. Where
the application sought is approved, such publication shall be arranged
by the applicant. Where the application is denied, such publication shall
be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be. Such notice shall be sent to the official
newspaper for publication within 10 days of any such decision.
§ 69-35. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the City will be adequately
protected.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the City Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the City.
§ 69-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-35
66:114
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 69-36. Appeals.
§ 69-37. Ordinances continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, Section 81, the
substantive provisions of the existing Land Subdivision Ordinance and the
Zoning Ordinance31 of the City of Long Branch and the development
regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and effect and shall
be read in para materia with this chapter.
§ 69-38. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of § 69-35.
§ 69-39. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board. [Amended
6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 20-93]
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter the City Clerk shall file a copy
of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Clerk shall also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the City relating to land use, such as the subdivision and
zoning ordinances.32
§ 69-40. Internal documents. [Added 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 23-01]
All internal reports, memos, reviews, etc., as provided by either the City's
paid professionals or City agencies which are prepared for the sole purpose
A. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. An appeal to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any
decision of the Construction Code Official or any other administrative
officer or agency of the City based on or made in the enforcement of
Chapter 345, Zoning, or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within
20 days by filing a notice of appeal in the manner set forth in § 69-21A
and in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land
Use Law of 1975,30 as amended and supplemented.
B. Appeals to governing body. Any interested party may appeal to the
governing body any final decision of the Board of Adjustment approving
an application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 345, Zoning.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 345, Zoning. Former Section
23-11, Application Fee Schedule, which immediately followed this section, containing a
portion of Ord. No. 3-91, was repealed 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93 and further repealed
8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 23-93. See § 69-29 for fees
§ 69-36 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-40
66:115
of aiding the Planning/Zoning Board in its decision-making process shall
become a part of an applicant's public document file at such time as said
internal reports, memos, reviews, etc., have been compiled by the Planning
Division and distributed to the appropriate Board members for their review.
Said reports, memos, reviews, etc., may be made available to the public at
an earlier time at the discretion of the Chairman of the appropriate Board.
§ 69-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-40
66:116
ARTICLE VI
Contribution Disclosure in Development Applications
[Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 19-04]
§ 69-41. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enhance the City's commitment to openness
in government and to provide further guarantees for a fair and impartial
variance, waiver and exception application process by requiring the
disclosure of political contributions made by property owners, developers
and professionals as part of the application process for certain approvals
under the Municipal Land Use Law. Such disclosure will effectuate the
purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law to promote the morals and general
welfare of the community through ensuring additional guarantees of
openness in government and a fully informed public.
§ 69-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — The list of submission requirements adopted
by ordinance and provided by municipal agencies to a developer pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
DEVELOPER — A developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e., the legal
or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included
in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required to be
licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies legal representation, expert
testimony or written reports in support of an application. Professionals shall
include both any individuals supplying the representation, testimonies or
reports and the firms or entities in which said individuals practice.
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, gift, subscription, advance or transfer of
money or other thing of value, including any item of real property or
personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including services
provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a part or all
of their time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization), made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or political
party committee and any pledge, promise or other commitment or
assumption of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports
required under the provisions of this article, any such commitment or
assumption shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date and the recipient of any and all contributions made to or on
§ 69-41 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-42
66:117
behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee,
political committee, continuing political committee or political party
committee of or pertaining to the City of Long Branch, made prior to
filing the application with or seeking approval from the City and required
to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. The disclosure shall
include all such contributions made during the time period measuring from
one year prior to filing the application seeking approval from the City
through to the time of filing said application. Additionally, there shall be a
continuing disclosure responsibility to require continuing disclosure of any
such contributions made following the filing of the contribution disclosure
statement and during the pendency of the application and/or approval
process.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Municipal Planning Board or the Municipal
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable.
§ 69-43. General provisions.
A. Disclosure requirements.
(1) Any applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d or a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in conjunction with any
application for a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision
pursuant to local ordinance or a site plan not considered a minor
site plan pursuant to local ordinance, as well as any application for
a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision pursuant to local
ordinance or site plan not considered a minor site plan pursuant to
local ordinance requiring waivers or exceptions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, shall include in its application with and/or
submit to the relevant municipal agency a contribution disclosure
statement for all developers involved in the said application; all
associates of said developers who would be subject to disclosure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2 shall also be
subject to this requirement; and all professionals who apply for or
provide testimony, plans or reports in support of said application or
who have an enforceable proprietary interest in the property or
development which is the subject of the application or whose fee in
whole or part is contingent upon the outcome of the application
shall also be subject to this requirement. Regardless of whether the
owner of the property which is the subject of the application falls in
any of the categories established in the preceding sentence, the
applicant shall include in its application to the relevant municipal
agency a contribution disclosure statement for said owner.
(2) During the pendency of the application process until the final
approval associated with the application is granted, any applicant
required to comply with this article shall amend its contribution
disclosure statement to include continuing disclosure of all
contributions within the scope of disclosure requirement of the
above subsection.
§ 69-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 69-43
66:118
B. Inclusion of contribution disclosure statements as an element of the
application checklist.
(1) An application checklist Ordinance is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require that the contribution disclosure
statements specified in Subsection A of this section be submitted by
the applicant for all applications for variance relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c, or for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in
applications for site plan and subdivision approval not considered
to be minor site plans or minor subdivisions pursuant to local
ordinance.
(2) The City's Municipal Agencies shall amend application checklists to
include contribution disclosure statements specified in Subsection
A of this section.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency until
the required contribution disclosure statements are submitted.
C. Availability of contribution disclosure statements. All contribution
disclosure statements shall be available in the office of the
administrative officer for review by any member of the public.
D. Intent of contribution disclosure statements. It is the intent of this
article that contribution disclosure statements shall serve solely as a
means to inform the public and shall not serve in any manner as
evidence relevant to the decision-making criteria for granting or
denying requested variances or other approvals. Such decisions shall
continue to be governed strictly under the relevant criteria set forth in
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or other relevant
law.
§ 69-43 LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD § 69-43
66:119
Chapter 70
MUTUAL AID
§ 70-1. Title.
Be it enacted by the City of Long Branch, in the County of Monmouth,
an ordinance establishing the participation of said municipality in a
countywide compact which shall be know as "The Monmouth County Mutual
Aid Agreement."
§ 70-2. Statutory authority; rendering of assistance.
This article is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6) and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-156.1 and is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all
municipalities participating in the county wide mutual aid compact.
Pursuant to this agreement, the City of Long Branch shall render assistance
to any participating municipality by providing members of the Long Branch
Police Department, upon request, to help preserve the public peace and
order.
§ 70-3. Compensation.
The municipality requesting assistance shall compensate the officers at an
agreed upon rate by forwarding payment to the municipality, which will
then compensate those officers who rendered assistance.
§ 70-4. Reimbursement for expenses.
In the event that a member of the Long Branch Police Department is injured
while rendering assistance to a participating municipality, the municipality
receiving the assistance shall reimburse the municipality rendering
assistance for any and all expenses incurred as a result of a worker's
compensation claim filed by the injured officer.
§ 70-5. Separation and distinction; term of effect.
This article is separate and distinct from any mutual aid agreements
previously entered into between the City of Long Branch and the other
municipalities and shall remain in full force and effect until specifically
repealed by an affirmative act of the governing body of the City of Long
Branch.
Chapter 72
PARKING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 69-43 LONG BRANCH CODE § 70-5
70:120
§ 72-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Parking Authority Law of the State of
New Jersey (P.L. 1948, c. 198, as amended, N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1 et seq.),
there is hereby created a public body corporate and politic and a political
subdivision of the state under the name and to be known as the "Parking
Authority of the City of Long Branch."
§ 72-2. Powers and duties.
The Parking Authority of the City of Long Branch hereby created is a
parking authority as contemplated and provided for by said Parking
Authority Law and shall have and exercise all of the powers and perform all
of the duties provided by said Parking Authority Law and any other statutes
heretofore or hereafter enacted or applicable thereto.
§ 72-3. Acquisition of real property.
It is hereby expressly provided that no real property shall be acquired by
the Parking Authority of the City of Long Branch by the power of eminent
domain without the consent of the governing body of the city.
§ 72-4. Compliance with Redevelopment Plan.
The Parking Authority of the City of Long Branch shall not undertake any
activity which is inconsistent with any adopted Redevelopment Plan of the
city or ordinance or design standard incorporating or implementing such
Plan.
§ 72-5. Copy to be filed.
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City of Long
Branch, shall forthwith be filed by said City Clerk with the Clerk of the
County of Monmouth.
Chapter 75
PERSONNEL
§ 70-5 PARKING AUTHORITY § 72-5
72:121

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Ch. V of the 1971 Code]
§ 75-1. Applicability.
A. Civil service.33 The New Jersey State Civil Service Law and Civil Service
Rules of the State of New Jersey applicable to municipalities provide
the basic framework for employment in the City. [Amended 2-24-1981
by Ord. No. 1007]
(1) This article and all its provisions shall at all times be subject to the
Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey, which prescribe
basic minimum standards. To the more stringent than those
embodied in the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey, the
latter rules shall be deemed applicable; however, to the extent that
the provisions of this article contain benefits or provisions which
are more liberal than the minimum requirements of the Civil
Service Rules of the State of New Jersey, the provisions of this
article shall be deemed to be controlling.
(2) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and
the provisions in any collective bargaining agreement negotiated
by the City and a majority representative of City employees in a
unit appropriate for such purpose within the meaning of the New
Jersey Employees Relations Act, the provisions of such collective
bargaining agreement shall apply to all employees covered by such
agreement.
B. General policies. The following principles shall constitute the personnel
policies of the City of Long Branch:
(1) Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political considerations.
(2) Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established
and maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the City government.
(3) Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified
and compensated on a uniform basis.
(4) Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring
the application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic
tests and evaluations of knowledge and performance; and, where
appropriate, these shall be carried out through the City's
participation in the New Jersey State Civil Service System.
33.Editor's Note: In addition to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq., Civil Service Act,
personnel regulations are authorized by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 75-1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-1
72:123
§ 75-2. Power of appointment.
Except as otherwise required by law, the directors of the various
departments shall appoint, promote and remove officers and employees
within their departments.
§ 75-3. Classified and unclassified service.
§ 75-4. Appointment.
(5) Every effort shall be made to stimulate a high level of morale by fair
administration of this article and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interest of the
public and the City.
(6) Continuation of employment shall be subject to good behavior and
satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of
work and availability of funds.
A. Unclassified service. The unclassified service shall include the
following:
(1) All elected officials and members of citizen boards and committees.
(2) Business Administrator, City Clerk, department directors, City
Attorney and legal assistants.
(3) Secretaries to the Mayor, Business Administrator and department
directors.
(4) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
compensation.
(5) Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional
services.
(6) All other offices or positions that are so designated by N.J.S.A.
11A:3-5. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Classified service. The classified service shall include all positions in the
City government not specifically placed in the unclassified service by
the provisions of this article or excluded from the classified service by
N.J.S.A. 11A:3-5. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. Basis for original appointments. Original appointments to vacancies
shall be based on merit, fitness and ability, which shall be determined
by competitive examinations, insofar as practicable, and in accordance
with the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey.
B. Temporary appointments. In the absence of an appropriate list or for
the filling of temporary or seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case
of emergencies, vacancies may be filled by temporary appointment by
§ 75-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-4
72:124
the appointing authority. Such temporary appointments shall have a
maximum duration of four months.
C. Provisional appointments. Pending the establishment of an appropriate
eligible list, vacancies in permanent positions may be filled by
provisional appointments. Such appointments shall continue only until
an appropriate eligible list is established. Provisional employees shall
possess minimum qualifications established for the vacant position.
D. Physical examination. The department director shall require any job
applicant to submit to a physical examination by the City Physician or a
designated alternate. At his discretion, the director may require
psychological or psychiatric examinations by a psychologist or
psychiatrist designated by him.
E. Probationary period.
(1) All employees shall serve a probationary period of 90 days. At the
expiration of the probationary period, the appointing authority may
discontinue the service of any such employee if in the appointing
authority's opinion the employee is unwilling or unable to perform
the duties of his position in a satisfactory manner or if the employee
is of such reputation and habits so as not to merit continuance in
the service of the City. In every case, the department head shall
notify the employee, in writing, of his discontinuance and of the
reasons therefor and shall forward a copy of the notice to the
Department of Civil Service of the State of New Jersey.
(2) A ninety-day probationary period shall also apply to an employee
promoted to a higher classification. Such probationary status will in
no way affect the employee's rights and status in the original or
lower classification. The ninety-day probationary period shall not
commence for a police officer until he has completed the required
police training program.
F. Permanent status. Classified employees who satisfactorily complete
their probationary period shall have permanent employment status,
conditioned upon good behavior and satisfactory job performance. They
shall be subject to removal by the appointing authority only for cause or
for reason of economy, after proper notice and an opportunity to be
heard, in accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the State of New
Jersey.
G. Part-time employee. Any position where the regular hours of service are
less than the regular and normal workweek for that class or
department. A part-time employee shall be entitled to all employee
benefits on a pro rata basis. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
H. Seasonal employee. Any position where the duration of service is of a
seasonal or emergency basis, not to exceed five months. A seasonal
employee shall not be entitled to employee benefits. [Amended
2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
§ 75-4 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-5
72:125
§ 75-5. Promotions.
§ 75-6. Separation from service.
A. Definition. As used in this article, "promotion" shall mean an
advancement in classification having:
(1) New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility.
(2) A salary range having a greater maximum.
B. Effect of reclassification. When there is a major change in the duties or
responsibilities of a position resulting in its reallocation to a higher
classification, the position shall be considered vacant and subject to
filling under promotional procedures. The incumbent in the reclassified
position may be permitted to serve pending promotional procedures.
C. Permanent promotions.
(1) Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing competitive promotional
examinations in accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the
State of New Jersey.
(2) Where the appointing authority, after consultation with the New
Jersey Civil Service Department, finds that no employee is qualified
for promotion to the vacancy, he may order an open competitive
examination, open to candidates outside the City's employ. In postexamination
selection, the appointing authority shall give
appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record
of past performance and the length and quality of his service.
(3) Selection shall be made from the top three interested candidates,
as determined by the examination process of the Civil Service
Department of the State of New Jersey.
D. Provisional promotions. Pending the availability of a suitable eligibility
list, the appointing authority may fill vacancies by a provisional
promotion. Such provisional promotion shall have a maximum duration
of six months.
A. Types of separation. Classified employees who have acquired
permanent employment status may be temporarily suspended from the
City's employ by layoff or suspension, or permanently separated by
resignation or dismissal, subject at all times to the rules and regulations
of the Civil Service Department of the State of New Jersey.
B. Layoff. Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a
reduction in the number of employees in a department, the required
reductions shall be made in such job classification as the director may
designate. As determined by the appointing authority, employees shall
be laid off in the inverse order of their length of service within each
affected job class in a particular department or division. All provisional
employees shall be laid off before probationary employees, and all
§ 75-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-6
72:126
§ 75-7. Compensation. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
probationary employees shall be laid off before any permanent
employee. Permanent (including probationary) employees so affected
shall be given a minimum of 45 days' notice. Provisional employees so
affected shall be given a minimum of two weeks' notice or two weeks'
pay in lieu thereof.
C. Retirement. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
(1) Employees shall be subject to the requirements and provisions of
the Public Employees Retirement System of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Retirement shall be mandatory for all employees at the age of 70,
unless the City requests a one-year extension. Such extension may
be made on a year-to-year basis and must be approved by the Chief
Administrator and by the Public Employees Retirement System.
D. Resignation. An employee may resign from his position by tendering a
written resignation to his department head, who shall in turn forward it
to the department director. Unless there are disciplinary charges
pending against the employee, the director or his agent shall notify the
employee, in writing, of acceptance of his resignation in good standing.
An employee shall give a minimum of two weeks' notice before the
effective date of his resignation. Failure to do so may result in loss of
vacation and sick credits. Oral resignation will be deemed binding but
shall not constitute a resignation in good standing.
E. Involuntary separation of full-time unclassified employees. In the event
of the involuntary separation of a full-time unclassified employee, the
employee shall receive 60 days' notice (including accumulated vacation
leave) or be compensated at the rate of one day's wages for each day
less than 60 for which notice is required to be given, except in cases of
disciplinary dismissal for cause.
A. Computation of daily and hourly rates. Each payroll period normally
shall consist of 10 working days, so that the daily rate of pay of each
employee shall be 1/260th of his annual salary. The hourly rate shall be
computed by dividing the weekly rate by the number of hours in the
employee's prescribed workweek.
B. Deductions for leave without pay. Deductions in salary for leave without
pay shall be computed on the basis of hourly rate.
C. Compensation for overtime.
(1) Work in excess of the established regular workweek or workday
shall be compensated by either compensatory leave or payment in
cash. The convenience of the City and the requirements of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, 29 USC Sec. 201 shall be the sole criteria in
determination of such compensation. All overtime shall be
§ 75-6 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-7
72:127
§ 75-8. Hours of work. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
computed on the basis of 1 1/2 times the employee's normal rate of
pay for all hours in excess of 40 hours per workweek. [Amended
5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1338]
(2) Compensatory leave when granted must be scheduled and used
within six months of the time earned unless otherwise approved by
the Chief Administrative Officer, but in no case shall such extension
exceed one year.
(3) Payment in cash, when authorized, shall be made within one month
of the time earned. All such overtime work, except in emergencies,
must be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer in advance of
its actual performance to qualify for payment.
(4) Time spent by employees in the discharge of duties which are a
regular function of the employees' position or classification, such
as time spent at the tax or service desk in the evening, attendance
at Council meetings, meetings of public boards or agencies or as a
witness for the City in judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative
proceedings, shall not be considered overtime unless in excess of
the normal workweek. Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees
in the City Clerk's office, other than its City Clerk, shall receive
compensation at 1 1/2 times their normal rate of pay for all hours
worked on a municipal, state or federal election day and for all
hours worked up to six voter registration nights per year.
[Amended 8-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1182]
(5) All noncovered employees and exempt employees as defined in the
Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., shall not be
entitled to the compensation for overtime established in this
subsection. [Amended 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1338]
(6) Salary increases. When the City Council enacts a salary increase
for specific titles, classes and compensation ranges, it is
understood that such increases shall not apply to employees with
less than six months employment with the City unless individually
approved by the Mayor and City Council.
A. Work schedule.
(1) A regular workday shall consist of any weekday, Monday through
Friday, for eight hours, commencing at 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.,
with one hour off for lunch. A regular workweek shall consist of five
regular workdays totaling 40 hours. Employees whose duties are
clerical in nature shall work as herein set forth, except that the
regular workday shall consist of seven hours, and the regular
workweek shall consist of 35 hours.
(2) In specialized working assignments, such as shift workload, etc.,
employees may be required to work in other than the typical work
§ 75-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-8
72:128
§ 75-9. Holidays.
§ 75-10. Vacations.
schedule; provided, however, that the effect shall substantially
result in the equivalent amount of hours per day and days per
week.
B. Emergency. A department head may require any officer or employee to
be in attendance for work on any day or days whenever he determines
that a public exigency or emergency so requires.
A. Paid holidays. The following official holidays with full pay shall be
observed by the City, though no work is performed on such days:
[Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
New Year's Day Columbus Day
Martin Luther King's
Birthday
General Election Day
Lincoln's Birthday Veterans Day
Washington's Birthday, Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday Day after Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day 1/2 Day Christmas Eve (If a regular
working day)
Independence Day
Labor Day Christmas Day
B. Compensation for working on holidays. Employees called into work on a
holiday which is not their regular workday schedule or who are called
on an emergency basis shall be compensated for such at 1 1/2 times the
employees' regular rate plus the holiday pay. [Amended 2-24-1981 by
Ord. No. 1007]
C. Observance of weekend holidays. If a holiday falls on a Saturday or
Sunday, it may be celebrated and compensated accordingly on the day
preceding or the day following such holiday at the discretion of the
Chief Administrative Officer. Employees who are compelled to work on
shifts or on individual assignments shall observe the actual date of the
holiday under this section. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
D. Not charged against vacation or sick leave. If a holiday falls within the
vacation or sick leave of an employee, the employee shall receive an
additional day of vacation. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
E. Requirement for holiday pay. To be eligible to receive holiday pay, an
employee must work the regularly scheduled workday before the
holiday and the regularly scheduled workday after the holiday, unless
he has been excused by his supervisor or unless his supervisor is
satisfied that his absence was justified.
§ 75-8 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-10
72:129
A. Amount of annual leave. All employees of the City, whether in the
classified or unclassified service, shall be granted annual vacation leave
if earned each calendar year of employment without loss of pay in
accordance with the following schedule:
Number of Years Employed
Number of Working Days
Vacation
1 to 3 12
4 to 12 15
13 to 18 20
19 or more 25
B. Part-time, temporary or probationary employees. Permanent part-time
employees are eligible for vacation leave on a prorated basis.
Temporary or seasonal employees shall not be eligible for vacation
leave. New probationary and provisional employees shall be entitled to
one working day of vacation leave for each month of service completed
as of July 1.
C. General provisions. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
(1) Requests for vacation leave must be submitted in writing to the
department head by May 1 of each year. An employee desiring an
earlier vacation must submit such request at least one month in
advance. All vacation leave shall be scheduled in such manner as to
ensure adequate operation within respective departments on a
seniority basis.
(2) Vacation leave must be taken during the current calendar year
unless extended by the Chief Administrative Officer. Any unused
vacation leave may be carried forward into the next succeeding
calendar year only. This provision shall apply, unless altered by
written contract entered into between the City and an employee or
employees, in the sole discretion of the Council of the City of Long
Branch. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 42-00]
(3) In specific incidences where an employee cannot take accrued
vacation leave within two calendar years due to emergent or
critical work situations as determined by the Administrator and
approved by the Mayor, eligibility may be extended for six
additional months.
(4) When requested, vacation pay may be granted the last working day
before the employee's first vacation day.
(5) At a time of separation from employment with the City, an employee
shall be entitled in pay to any full day's vacation leave accumulated
but not taken. In the event of a death of an employee, such
settlement shall be made to the employee's estate.
§ 75-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-11
72:130
§ 75-11. Leaves of absence.
A. Sick leave.
(1) Each employee shall receive one working day sick leave with pay
for each month of service from the date of the employee's date of
appointment up to and including the first anniversary date of such
appointment and 15 days of sick leave per year thereafter. After 10
years of continuous service, each employee shall receive 20 days of
sick leave for each year thereafter. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord.
No. 1007]
(2) When an employee retires for reasons of physical disability, age or
length of service, such employee shall be entitled to be reimbursed
for 50% of his/her accumulative sick days' pay not exceeding
$15,000 in total. The $15,000 cap is consistent with state statute,
and this provision shall be interpreted so as to be in compliance
with said statute. However, this provision may be altered by written
contract entered into between the City and an employee or
employees in the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council. The
retiring employee shall, if possible, advise the Chief Administrative
Officer of the intention to retire by November 1 of the year prior to
the year of retirement so that budget requirements may be met and
so provided. In the event of an employee's death, such payment
shall be made to the beneficiary as indicated on the employee's
P.E.R.S. retirement form. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No.
1007; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 43-00; 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
11-10]
(3) Employees are eligible for a family leave of absence in accordance
with the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Such leave shall be
taken at a time determined by the employee and confirmed, in
writing, by a physician for a period not to exceed 12 weeks in a
twelve-month period if the employee has worked at least 12 months
for the City and at least 1,250 hours prior to the leave being taken.
An employee may be eligible for another twelve-week leave, but not
until the employee has worked 1,250 hours in a twelve-month
period. The employee may use paid sick and/or vacation leave
during the leave period to convert the leave from unpaid to paid
leave. During this leave, the employee shall not accrue additional
paid sick or vacation leave, but shall be entitled to health benefits.
An employee applying for family leave shall endeavor to submit an
application, in writing, for such leave at least 60 calendar days
prior to the leave, except under exigent circumstances, and shall
include the probable date of return to work. No employee who has
exercised family leave shall be permitted to return to work until the
City receives a letter from the attending physician attesting to the
employee's fitness to resume normal duties. Where applicable, the
provisions of the Family Medical Leave Act not set forth herein will
apply. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007; 3-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 19-99]
§ 75-11 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-11
72:131
§ 75-12. Residency requirement. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No.
1007]
(4) An employee who has been absent on sick leave for periods totaling
10 days in any calendar year, consisting of periods of less than five
days, shall submit acceptable medical evidence for any additional
sick leave in that year unless the illness is of a chronic or recurring
nature requiring absences of one day or less, in which case only
one certificate shall be necessary for each period of six months.
(5) The appointing authority may require proof of illness whenever
such requirement appears reasonable. Abuse of sick leave
privileges shall be cause for disciplinary action.
B. Disability leave. Any employee disabled because of occupational injury
or disease may, on recommendation of the appointing authority and
approval of the Civil Service Department, be granted a leave of absence
with full pay, reduced pay or with full pay for a certain period and
reduced pay thereafter, contingent upon availability of departmental
funds legally usable for this purpose. Salary or wages paid for disability
shall be reduced by the amount of workmen's compensation awarded.
Such leave shall not be granted beyond one year from the date of injury.
The appointing authority shall furnish the Department of Civil Service
with proof of the injury or illness and the continued disability of the
employee. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
C. Military leave. Any permanent employee, part-time or full-time, who is a
member of the National Guard, Naval Militia, Air National Guard or a
reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of the United States and
is required to engage in field training shall be granted a military leave
of absence for the period of such training as is authorized by law.
During such leave he shall receive the difference between his military
pay and his pay from regular municipal employment. The paid leave of
absence shall be in addition to his vacation. Permanent part-time
employees shall receive pay for such leave on a prorated basis.
D. Bereavement leave. Bereavement leave shall be granted to each
employee up to three days with pay per year in the event of a death in
the employee's immediate family, provided that prior notice is tendered
to the Chief Administrative Officer. Immediate family shall include:
mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, husband, wife, son,
daughter, brother and sister. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No.
1007]
E. Jury duty. Jury duty leave shall be granted to any employee summoned
to jury duty or as a witness in behalf of the City. Eligible employees shall
receive full pay at the regular rate less any court compensation
received during such period while absent from the City's employ. Prior
notice and evidence must be presented to the Chief Administrative
Officer before any payment shall be made. [Amended 2-24-1981 by
Ord. No. 1007]
§ 75-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-12
72:132
A. Establishment of residency requirement. All full-time employees of the
City must be bona fide residents of the City and retain such residency as
a condition of continued employment. All nonresidents employed by the
City shall become residents of the City within one year of initial
employment. This subsection shall not apply to employees in the City's
employ prior to September 25, 1979.
B. Action to ensure compliance.
(1) The Chief Administrative Officer shall ensure that employees
comply with the residency requirement hereby established. Failure
of any employee to maintain required residency in the City shall be
cause for termination of employment.
(2) The Chief Administrative Officer is authorized to investigate into
the residency of any employee to determine whether he is in
compliance with the residency requirement. If, after preliminary
investigation, the Chief Administrative Officer determines that
cause for taking action exists, the Chief Administrative Officer shall
cause a ten-day notice to be served personally or by certified mail
upon the employee, setting forth the charge that the employee is
not a bona fide resident of the City. The notice shall also set forth
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Chief
Administrative Officer, and the City hearing. Such hearing shall be
closed to the public unless the officer or employee requests an open
hearing.
(3) If, after hearing, the Chief Administrative Officer determines that
the employee is not in compliance with the residency requirement,
the Chief Administrative Officer shall notify the employee by
certified mail that failure to take up bona fide residence within the
City in compliance with said notice and to provide proof thereof
satisfactory to the Chief Administrative Officer such termination
shall take effect on the date specified.
C. Recruitment of nonresident. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
(1) When it is determined that there cannot be recruited a sufficient
number of prospective employees who are bona fide City residents
to specific positions, the Chief Administrative Officer shall recruit
nonCity residents.
(2) The Chief Administrative Officer shall classify all qualified nonCity
applicants for such specific positions so determined as follows:
(a) Residents of Monmouth County.
(b) Residents of Ocean, Mercer and Middlesex Counties.
(c) Residents of the State of New Jersey.
(d) All other applicants.
§ 75-12 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-12
72:133
§ 75-13. Political activity.
(3) The Chief Administrative Officer shall first appoint those in Class 1
and then those in each succeeding class in the order above-listed
and shall appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a
position or positions of employment or employments remaining
after all qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes shall
have been appointed or have declined an offer of appointment.
(4) Employees hired under the provisions of this subsection shall be
notified by the Chief Administrative Officer whether they must
become bona fide residents of the City of Long Branch within 18
months of such appointment and, if so, that they must maintain
residency in the City thereafter as a condition of continued
employment.
(5) Upon making a determination that such preference schedule shall
be applicable to any specific position, the hiring authority shall
promptly notify the Civil Service Commission of such
determination.
D. Exemptions for special skills or talents.
(1) The Chief Administrative Officer shall determine if there are
certain specific positions requiring special talents or skills which
are necessary to the operations of the City and which are not likely
to be found among the residents of the City. Such positions so
determined shall be filled without reference to residency.
(2) The formal criteria pursuant to which such positions shall be so
determined are as follows:
(a) Such positions require the exercise of professional expertise;
or
(b) Such positions require rare and highly specialized skills.
E. Officers and employees exemptions. The following officers and
employees are exempt from the provision of this section: Chief
Administrative Officer, City Clerk, City Attorney, City Prosecutor, City
Magistrate, Tax Assessor, City Engineer and all sworn police and fire
personnel. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
A. Policy. It shall be the policy of the City to appoint all employees, either
classified or unclassified, without regard to political considerations. For
the purposes of this section, "City employees" are defined to include
full-time, temporary, probationary, seasonal or part-time personnel
appointed by the City receiving an annual or hourly reimbursement for
their services from the City.
B. Certain political activities prohibited.
§ 75-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-13
72:134
§ 75-14. Conflicts of interest.
(1) City employees shall not engage in any political activities during
working hours or on City property.
(2) No person shall demand payment or contribution from City
employees for campaign purposes.
(3) City employees whose principal employment is in connection with
any activity financed in whole or in part by loans or grants made by
the United States or by any federal agency may also be subject to
the restrictions of the Federal Hatch Act applying to political
activity which is partisan.
C. Rights reserved. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
City employees from becoming or continuing to be members of any
political party, club or organization or attending political meetings;
expressing their views on political matters outside of working hours
and off City property; circulating petitions on public questions or voting
with complete freedom in any election; nor to prevent an elective officer
from campaigning.
A. Conflicts of interest prohibited.
(1) No officer or employee elected or appointed in the City shall be
interested, as defined in § 38-3A(1), directly or indirectly, in any
contract with the City or in the compensation for work done or for
materials or supplies furnished to the City or to any contractor or
other person furnishing the same to the City, nor shall he
participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or
receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward for his
services except the fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to
law. [Amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 69-02]
(2) No officer or employee elected or appointed in the City shall accept
or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in connection
with the discharge of his official duties other than the fee or
compensation prescribed pursuant to law.
B. Disclosure.
(1) No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in
any business or transaction or accept any private employment or
commitment or shall have any financial or other personal interest,
direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge
of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair
his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his
official duties.
(2) No official or employee shall accept any gift or gratuity, whether in
the form of service, loan or promise, or in any other form, from any
person which to his knowledge is directly or indirectly interested in
§ 75-13 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-14
72:135
§ 75-15. Disciplinary actions.
any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the City; nor
shall any official or employee accept from any person any gift or
gratuity which may tend to influence him in the discharge of his
duties.
(3) No official or employee shall represent private interests before the
City Council or before any board, commission or agency of the City.
He shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding
against the interest of the City in any litigation to which the City is
a party.
(4) No municipal official or employee shall, without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the
property, government or affairs of the City; nor shall he use such
information to advance the financial or other private interest of
himself or others. The Council may, from time to time, determine by
resolution what information shall be deemed confidential for the
purposes of this section.
C. Violations. Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this
section or of any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest
shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal
from office. Any officer or employee who shall knowingly permit any
provision of this section to be violated by any of his subordinates shall
also be guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal.
A. Dismissal or demotion. A permanent employee may be dismissed from
the service or demoted for cause. The causes sufficient for removal
from the service shall include the following:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked;
provided, however, that any regular member or officer of the Police
Department or Fire Department who shall be absent from duty
without a just cause for a term of five days continuously and
without leave of absence shall, at the expiration of such five days,
cease to be a member of the Police Department or Fire
Department. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(3) Incompetence, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
(4) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Commission of a criminal act.
(7) Participating in any political activity prohibited by this article.
§ 75-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-15
72:136
§ 75-16. Statement of policy.
It is the policy of the City of Long Branch that every employee at all times
be treated fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each employee
is expected to accord the same treatment to his associates, supervisors and
to the public.
§ 75-17. Personnel records.
The City Personnel Officer shall provide that adequate personnel records
are maintained for each employee of the City. Such records shall include
dates of appointments and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings
and any appropriate additional information.
§ 75-18. Medical examinations.
The City Personnel Officer may schedule medical examinations for all City
employees annually or more frequently if required.
§ 75-19. Training programs.
(8) Disobedience of the departmental rules and regulations established
pursuant to this revision.
(9) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
B. Suspension.
(1) When in the opinion of the appointing authority an employee's
performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of
dismissal, the department director or department head may
suspend or furlough the employee without pay or with reduced pay.
(2) An employee who shall be suspended, fined or demoted more than
three times in any one year or more than five days at one time or for
a period of more than 15 days in the aggregate of any calendar year
shall have the right of appeal to the Civil Service Department, and
the Civil Service Department shall have the power to revoke or
modify the action of the appointing authority. In unusual
circumstances, wherein the safety or welfare of the employee or
others is threatened, the department director or department head
may temporarily suspend the employee pending formal action by
the Mayor.
A. Development of programs. Department directors shall have
responsibility for the development of training programs, including
lectures, demonstrations, assignment of reading matter or other
methods deemed desirable.
B. Approved courses. The City may assume tuition costs of training
courses taken by employees of the City which the City Council shall
§ 75-15 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-19
72:137
§ 75-20. Surety bonds.
§ 75-21. Delivery of funds and records.
Upon the termination of the office or the employment of any officer or
employee, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor or, if there is no
successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by the
Council to receive the same all money, papers, books, memoranda, accounts
and data of any nature whatsoever pertaining to his office.
§ 75-22. (Reserved)34
§ 75-23. (Reserved)35
deem to be of benefit to employees and the City. Such training
programs shall be taken on the employees' own time unless otherwise
specifically provided.
C. Record. Successful completion of special training courses shall be filed
with the employee's personnel record and may be considered toward
his advancement or promotions in the future.
A. Every officer or employee of the City who by virtue of his office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds and any other officer or employee who may be
required so to do by the Council shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such
amount as may be fixed by resolution of the Council, binding him to the
City in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful
performance of his duty. Each officer or employee required by law to
give bond shall execute it with sufficient surety and deliver it to the
Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his bond to the Comptroller
before he enters upon the discharge of the duties of his office or
employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond
as herein required within 30 days after due notification of election or
appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the Council.
C. In every case in which any person is required by laws of the state or by
any ordinance to give a bond for the faithful performance of his duties,
such bond shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized to do
business in this state, and the premium therefor shall be paid by the
City. Each such bond shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form
and sufficiency, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
34.Editor's Note: Former § 75-22, Insurance and pension coverage, was repealed 3-23-2004
by Ord. No. 5-04.
35.Editor's Note: Former § 75-23, Longevity pay, was repealed 3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 5-04.
§ 75-19 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-24
72:138
§ 75-24. Use of vehicles. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1007]
A. City vehicles. All City-owned or City-leased cars assigned to employees
shall be kept clean and in good operating order. Assigned employees
shall be responsible for proper servicing and maintenance. No such
vehicle shall be used for any purpose other than City business, nor shall
any vehicle be taken home at any time without specific permission from
the Chief Administrative Officer.
B. Personal vehicles. Employees shall be reimbursed $0.18 for use of their
personal vehicle on City business per mile. The City assumes no
obligation for necessary liability insurance, and it is understood that the
reimbursement covers all operating expenses including insurance
coverage. Eligibility for reimbursement shall be based on the following:
(1) Use of a personal vehicle is considered necessary and is authorized
in advance by the department head.
(2) A City-owned vehicle was not reasonably available.
§ 75-24 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-24
72:139

ARTICLE II
Equal Employment Opportunity Policy
[Adopted 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 28-96]
§ 75-25. Policy.
It is the policy of the City to provide equal opportunity in employment to all
employees and applicants for employment. No person is to be discriminated
against in employment because of race, religion, color, sex, age, marital
status, national origin or disability, except where a particular qualification
is specifically permitted and is essential to successful job performance.
§ 75-26. Applicability; Business Administrator's powers and duties.
A. This policy applies to all terms, conditions and privileges of
employment, including but not limited to recruitment, selection, hiring,
introductory period, transfer, compensation and fringe benefits,
educational assistance, layoff, return from layoff, employee facilities,
termination, retirement and work environment.
B. The City Business Administrator, who reports directly to the Mayor and
Council on matters relating to this policy, is responsible for formulating,
implementing, coordinating and monitoring all efforts in the area of
equal employment opportunity. The Business Administrator's duties
may include, but are not necessarily limited to:
(1) Assisting the Mayor, Administration and, where applicable, the City
Council in collecting and analyzing employment data; and ensuring
equality of opportunity for all of the City's employees and
applicants seeking employment.
(2) Serving as the City's Affirmative Action Officer and coordinating
with the Personnel Officer in such capacity as to equal employment
opportunity.
(3) Developing policy statements and recruitment techniques designed
to comply with the equal employment policies of the City.
(4) Complying with various state and federal recordkeeping and notice
requirements in order to ensure full compliance with all
employment-related statutes and regulations.
(5) Assisting supervisory personnel in arriving at solutions to specific
personnel problems.
(6) Serving as liaison between the City and government agencies,
minority and women' s organizations and other community groups
to foster equal opportunity.
(7) Keeping the Mayor and Council informed of the latest
developments in the entire equal opportunity area.
§ 75-25 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-26
72:141
C. Any communication from an applicant for employment, an employee, a
government agency or an attorney concerning any equal employment
opportunity matter is to be referred to the Business Administrator. The
Business Administrator shall also coordinate the review of any
complaint registered with the City as to violations of equal employment
opportunities.
§ 75-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-26
72:142
ARTICLE III
Alcohol- and Drug-Free Workplace Policy for All City Employees
Other Than Public Works Department
[Adopted 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 29-96]
§ 75-27. Purpose.
The City of Long Branch (hereinafter referred to as the "City") subscribes
to the belief that the abuse of alcohol and/or drugs by City employees
incompatible with the City's obligation to seek to provide a safe and
productive work environment for its employees and for its citizens to ensure
their safety and trust in the City. The City further believes that healthy,
drug-free employees are a greater asset to the City, to society and to
themselves. The goal of the City Alcohol and Drug-Free Workplace Policy
is to maintain a work force free from prohibited drugs and alcohol abuse.
The possession, use or distribution of a prohibited drug or alcohol in the
workplace poses an unacceptable risk to employees, the public and the
City of Long Branch. Accordingly, the City hereby establishes the following
policies and procedures for all City employees other than the Public Works
Department, who are covered by their own separate policy.
§ 75-28. Authority.
This policy is intended to comply with all applicable federal and state
statutes and regulations and court cases governing workplace and antidrug
testing.
§ 75-29. City policy.
A. It is the responsibility of employees to maintain personal health so they
are physically and mentally capable of performing in the workplace.
The abuse of drugs and/or alcohol is an unsafe and counterproductive
practice which will not be tolerated for any City employees by the City.
NOTE: In this policy, the terms "abuse" and "substance abuse" will be
used to mean the use or abuse of or dependency on illegal drugs,
alcohol or drugs that can be prescribed but are used in a manner
inconsistent with the prescription.
B. Any City public works employee reporting for work and found to be
under the influence of alcohol or drugs or using drugs or alcohol while
at work or in possession of, manufacture of, selling, offering for sale,
trading or providing illegal drugs or alcohol will be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination. This policy is in
effect for all employees while on City engaged in City business. The
sale, possession, manufacture, distribution, dispensation, use or
purchase of prohibited drugs and/or alcohol on City property or while
conducting City business is prohibited. City property includes all areas
in which the City operates its equipment, City-owned or City-leased
property, as well as all City/employee-owned vehicles in use on City
property, lockers, desks, equipment, work space and storage facilities.
§ 75-27 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-29
72:143
(City-sponsored activities which may include the responsible service of
alcoholic beverages are not included in this provision, provided that
abuse does not occur.)
C. In an effort to ensure that the City is an alcohol- and drug-free
workplace, a drug and alcohol testing program will be in effect for all
employees. This program will provide for pre-employment, postaccident
testing, reasonable suspicion, return-to-duty and follow-up
testing. The City has retained a Medical Review Agency (hereinafter
referred to as the "MRO/Agent") to manage and administer the testing
program.
D. Any employee reporting for work impaired and unable to properly
perform required duties will not be allowed to work. If possible, the
supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion of the employee's
status. Also, where applicable, the supervisor will subsequently consult
privately with the employee about the observation. If, in the opinion of
the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, the employee will
be required to be tested for alcohol and illicit substances, depending on
the supervisory determination of the observed impairment. (Under no
circumstances should an impaired employee be allowed to drive.)
E. Prescription drugs prescribed by the employee's physician may be
taken during working hours. The employee is required to notify the
supervisor if the use of properly prescribed prescription drugs may
adversely affect the employee's work performance. The abuse of
prescription drugs will not be tolerated.
F. The City will provide an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) for its
employees and supervisory personnel, which will include a program of
education and training on the effects of drug/alcohol abuse. The EAP/
MRO/Agent/City will make available to all employees informational
material related to the cause and effects of substance abuse and
additionally will provide a community service hot-line telephone
number, which can be used by employees whenever assistance is
required. Supervisory personnel who will be in a position to determine
whether an employee must be drug/alcohol tested, pursuant to the
policies herein, will receive a minimum of one hour of training on the
specific physical, behavioral and performance indicators of probable
drug/alcohol abuse. It is the responsibility of the employees to seek
assistance from the EAP before drug/alcohol problems lead to violations
of policy and/or disciplinary action.
G. The City further has determined to take action against employees who
unlawfully use, distribute or possess alcohol, drugs and/or controlled
substances during or outside assigned working hours in order to
prevent illegal activities and to protect employees, the public and the
City and its property from any danger which may result from the illegal
use of alcohol, drugs and/or controlled substances.
§ 75-29 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-29
72:144
§ 75-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — A person employed by the City in any salaried capacity or
any volunteer whose job responsibility involves public safety (volunteer fire
fighters for example).
FAIL A DRUG/ALCOHOL TEST — The confirmation test result shows a
positive evidence of the presence of a prohibited or legal drug/alcohol in an
employee's system.
LEGAL DRUGS — Includes prescribed drugs and over-the-counter drugs
which have been legally obtained and are being used as directed and for the
purpose for which they were prescribed or manufactured.
PROHIBITED DRUGS — Any of the following substances specified in
Schedules I and II of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801.812
(1981 and 1987 CUM.P.P) as amended and revised, as well as marijuana,
cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, narcotic, phencyclidine (PCP) or any other
habit-forming drug, except where prescribed by a licensed medical
practitioner. This exception applies only when the substance is used by the
individual to whom the drug was prescribed or authorized. The schedule
of drugs includes, but is not limited to, opiates, opium derivatives,
hallucinogenic substances, depressants and stimulants.
§ 75-31. Pre-employment testing.
§ 75-32. Reasonable suspicion testing/employee physical.
H. The City has further determined that it will not employ or use the
services of any employee who refuses to be tested for drugs/alcohol and
will discipline any employee who fails a drug/alcohol test, which may
include termination of services.
I. All employees are required to acknowledge, in writing, the policy as a
condition to initial/continued employment.
A. All prospective employees selected for a position or authorized as a
volunteer employee by an agency of the City will be required to undergo
a post-offer, pre-employment test for the presence of alcohol and illicit
drugs. Receipt by the City of a negative test result shall be required
prior to engaging in any employment. A positive test result will
disqualify an individual from further consideration of employment with
the City.
B. Failure to keep an appointment with the Agent, which was previously
agreed to by both the prospective employee and the Agent, will be
viewed as an attempt to elude the testing or alter its results. No further
consideration for employment will be given the prospective employee at
that time or in the future. The drug test will be in accordance with
Appendix D, which is attached hereto.
§ 75-29 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-32
72:145
A. All employees are subject to a fitness-for-duty evaluation, to include
urine and breath testing, when there is reasonable suspicion to believe
that the employee is in violation of this policy. A reasonable cause
referral for testing will be made on the basis of documented, objective
facts and circumstances which are consistent with the long- and shortterm
effects of substance abuse.
B. Examples of reasonable suspicion include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Physical signs and symptoms consistent with substance or alcohol
abuse.
(2) Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession
or use of controlled substances, alcohol or drugs.
(3) See also Appendix C, which is attached hereto.
C. Reasonable cause testing determinations will be made by a supervisor
or any other City official who is trained to detect the signs and
symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who can reasonably conclude
that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his/her work
performance due to substance abuse. If another supervisor or any other
City official is immediately available, he/she will verify that there is
reasonable cause before the employee is transported to the Agent's
facility. At no time will this determination be made on the basis of thirdparty
reports without verification.
D. NOTE: Employees are cautioned that various over-the-counter and
prescribed medication can adversely affect the ability to operate
vehicles and other equipment. It is the employee's responsibility to
report to work each day fit for his or her duties.
E. Employees who are deemed to require a fitness-for-duty evaluation
based on reasonable cause will be sent to a health facility of the City's
choice. The attending physician will make every attempt to determine
the cause of the observed behavior, including authorizing, when his/her
medical opinion dictates, an additional alcohol or drug test. Employees
will be placed on unpaid medical leave of absence until the results of
the examination are received by the City. Receipt of a negative drug test
result and/or doctor's statement that the employee was and is fit for
duty is required prior to continued employment. Employees who are
returned to duty by this means will be reinstated without prejudice and
without loss of pay.
F. Employees who are medically determined to be temporarily unfit to
perform their duties, but who test negatively for alcohol or drugs, will
be returned to duty when they obtain the original examining doctor's
written statement that they are fit for duty.
G. Employees may be required by the City to undergo a physical
examination, which can include urine and/or blood testing for drugs/
§ 75-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-32
72:146
§ 75-33. Post-accident testing.
§ 75-34. Return-to-duty testing.
alcohol. Such testing shall be done by a designated Agent of the City,
who shall follow the procedures set forth in this policy.
H. Employees may be required by the City, at any time, to undergo a
physical examination, which can include urine and/or blood testing for
drugs/alcohol. Such testing shall be done by a designated Agent of the
City, who shall follow the procedures set forth in this policy.
A. Any employee involved in an accident will be required to submit to a
post-accident alcohol and drug test if:
(1) The driver involved in an accident received a citation for a moving
violation;
(2) There is a fatality as a result of an accident;
(3) The accident meets the Department of Transportation criteria for
an accident that requires such testing; and/or
(4) Any accident involving a City vehicle.
B. When a post-accident test is indicated, the City will make every effort to
have said test performed within two hours of notification of the
accident. At no time will a period of more than eight hours transpire
between notification and testing. Documentation of the entire postaccident
procedure should be made by all personnel involved in the
notification and testing process.
C. Receipt by the City of a negative alcohol and drug test result is required
prior to return to duty. A positive test result may disqualify an employee
from further employment or reinstatement at that time or any time in
the future and subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination.
A. Any employee who tests positive for alcohol or illicit substances will not
be permitted to return to work, where applicable, until he/she has met
the following:
(1) The employee must be evaluated by a substance abuse
professional. This professional must meet the criteria outlined in
the Department of Transportation's Alcohol and Drug Rules for
Substance Abuse Professionals.
(2) The employee must comply and complete all recommendations
made by the substance abuse professional and be able to document
the same.
(3) The employee must submit to a return-to-duty test, and a proof of a
negative test result must be received by the City.
§ 75-32 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-34
72:147
§ 75-35. Follow-up testing.
Any employee returning to work with the City after being disqualified for a
positive alcohol or drug test or returning to work after a leave of absence
for voluntary substance abuse treatment will be subject to random follow-up
testing. The employee will be tested at least six times in the first 12 months
after returning to duty and may be subject to follow-up testing without prior
notice for up to 60 months. However, the employee is not given a fresh start
after this period; the verified positive result remains on his/her files. If any
employee tests verified positive on a subsequent post-rehabilitation testing,
B. When the employee is cleared to return to work, he/she will be required
to pass an alcohol and drug test. Upon receipt of a negative finding, if
an employee is allowed to return to work, he/she will be subject to
follow-up testing as required by law and this policy. The cost of the
follow-up testing will be equally split between the City and the
employee.
C. All employees are entitled to voluntarily participate in the Employee
Assistance Program. However, if there is a positive test result,
participation in the Employee Assistance Program or an alternate
program approved by the City shall be a prerequisite to continued
employment. Refusal to enroll in a program or to complete a full course
of rehabilitation shall be cause for immediate termination of services. A
positive alcohol test is one with a level of .040 or greater. Employees
with a pattern of readings between .020 and .039 will also be subject to
enrolling in a mandatory counseling program.
D. In addition to completing a required course of rehabilitation, employees
shall be subject to the following discipline(s):
(1) Following the confirmation of a positive test, there shall be a
minimum five-day suspension without pay. In the case of an alcohol
test result between .020 and .039, the penalty would be a
suspension for the remainder of that day's work shift unless a
pattern of this type of abuse has developed. In either case, the
suspension(s) shall also remain in full force and effect until there is
a negative retest provided to the City through a certified laboratory
(all costs of testing to be borne by the employee), but failure on the
part of the employee to present a negative test result within six
weeks from the original incident date shall automatically result in
termination of services. After two weeks, the City reserves the
right, for reasons of operational efficiency, to fill the suspended
employee's position and, in such case, the suspended employee
would be entitled to the next available opening, provided that all
other conditions (rehabilitation and positive test result) are met.
(2) Employees found to be in violation of this policy (confirmation of a
positive drug/alcohol test) on a second occasion will be
immediately dismissed.
§ 75-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-35
72:148
or on any other test during employment with the City, that employee shall
be terminated from employment immediately.
§ 75-36. Testing procedures.
Collection of the urine specimen shall be done in accordance with law.
Instructions for employees are attached as Appendix B. Collection will be
done at a collection site designated by the MRO/Agent. A proper chain of
custody shall be maintained. Should this chain be broken, the test shall be
invalidated and a new collection made.
§ 75-37. Drug testing.
A. All drug testing required by the City for its employees will be performed
as follows:
(1) Drug testing is by urinalysis using split samples. Split-sample
testing requires the specimen be divided into two separate bottles
during the collection process. These two bottles are designated as:
the primary specimen, which shall contain no less than 30
milliliters of urine; and the split specimen, which shall contain no
less than 15 milliliters of urine. Upon arrival at the laboratory, the
primary specimen will be opened and tested. In the first screening
test, immunoassay techniques are used to screen urine specimens
for classes of drugs. In the second or confirmation test, any positive
results found in the first screening will be confirmed using the
tandem technique of gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/
MS), which positively identifies and quantifies the presence of
specific drugs. No test result will be reported by the laboratory to
the Medical Review Officer (MRO) as a positive drug test result
unless both the initial screening test and the confirmation test are
positive.
(2) The laboratory shall report the test results to the Medical Review
Officer (MRO), who shall evaluate the chain of custody, urine
custody form and test results.
B. The MRO will perform the following duties for the City:
(1) The MRO will review the results of each drug test before it is
reported to the City.
(2) The MRO will review and interpret each confirmed positive test
result in the following manner to determine whether or not there is
an acceptable medical explanation for the confirmed positive
result:
(a) The MRO will conduct a medical interview with the employee,
either in person or by phone.
(b) The MRO will review the employee's medical history and
relevant biomedical factors.
§ 75-35 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-37
72:149
(c) The MRO will review medical records made available by the
employee to determine if a confirmed positive result could be
attributed to the use of legally prescribed medication.
(d) The MRO will require, if it is deemed necessary, that the
original specimen be reanalyzed.
(e) The MRO will verify that the laboratory report and assessment
are accurate.
(f) If the MRO determines that there is a legitimate medical
explanation for the confirmed positive result, he will take no
further action other than informing the City of his
determinations that the test result is negative.
(3) If the MRO verifies that a confirmed positive test result is
scientifically sufficient and that there is no legitimate medical
explanation for the confirmed positive result, the MRO shall
immediately contact the City's designated representative (who will
instruct the employee's supervisor to immediately suspend the
employee pending management review and determination of
appropriate action) and the employee.
(4) The MRO will determine whether and when a rehabilitated
employee may return to work.
(5) The MRO will determine a schedule of post-rehabilitation testing,
after consulting with the City's designated representative, for an
employee returning to work after rehabilitation.
(6) The MRO will ensure that an employee is tested in strict
compliance with the applicable procedures before an employee
may return to work after rehabilitation.
(7) If the MRO so determines, based upon a review of laboratory
inspection reports, quality assurance and quality control data and
other drug test results, that a particular drug test result is
scientifically insufficient, the MRO will conclude that the test is
negative, and no further action shall be taken. The MRO may
request a reanalysis of the original specimen prior to making this
determination. The MRO may request the reanalysis be performed
by the same laboratory or that an aliquot of the original specimen
be sent for reanalysis to an alternate laboratory certified by the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
The laboratory shall assist the MRO in making his/her
determination by having its personnel available to the MRO for
consultation upon request by the MRO.
(8) Reporting and review of results.
(a) Review by MRO. The MRO will review all test results prior to
the transmission of results to the City to consider possible
§ 75-37 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-37
72:150
alternate medical explanations for confirmed test results. The
MRO shall have the qualifications and responsibilities,
including those pertaining to the investigation, confirmation
and communication of verified positive and negative test
results and the disposition of scientifically insufficient test
results, as set forth in the Medical Review Officer section of
this plan.
(b) Positive test results.
[1] If, after making all reasonable efforts and documenting
them, the MRO is unable to reach the individual directly,
the MRO shall contact the City's designated
representative, who shall direct the individual to contact
the MRO as soon as possible. The City's designated
representative shall employ procedures that ensure, to the
maximum extent practicable, the requirement that the
employee contact with the MRO is held in confidence.
[2] If, after making all reasonable efforts, the City's
designated representative is unable to contact the
employee, the MRO may place the employee on temporary,
unpaid leave.
[3] The MRO may verify a test as positive without having
communicated directly with the employee about the test in
three circumstances:
[a] The employee expressly declines the opportunity to
discuss the test;
[b] The City's designated representative has successfully
made and documented a contact with the employee
and instructed the employee to contact the MRO, and
more than five calendar days have passed since the
date the employee was successfully contacted by the
designated employer representative; or
[c] Other circumstances provided for in applicable testing
regulations.
[4] Under the split-test method, and if the employee so
chooses the split-test method, such test may be conducted;
and if there is a positive result, the provisions/procedures
of this section shall apply.
[5] If a test is verified positive under the circumstances
specified in this section, the employee may present to the
MRO information documenting that serious illness, injury
or other circumstances unavoidably prevented the
employee from timely contacting the MRO. The MRO, on
the basis of such information, may reopen the verification,
§ 75-37 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-37
72:151
allowing the employee to present information concerning a
legitimate explanation for a confirmed positive test. If the
MRO then concludes that there is a legitimate explanation,
the MRO may declare the test to be negative.
[6] Following verification of a positive test result, the MRO
shall refer the case to the City's designated representative
for other rehabilitation or administrative action.
(c) Verification for opiates. Before verifying a confirmed positive
test result for opiates, the MRO shall determine that there is
clinical evidence, other than or in addition to the urine test, of
unauthorized use of any opium, opiate or opium derivative,
unless confirmation testing for opiates confirms the presence
of monoacetyimorphine.
(d) Authorized reanalysis. Only the MRO may order a reanalysis of
the original primary specimen. The employee may submit a
written request for a retest of the original specimen to the
MRO for a reanalysis of the specimen within 60 days following
the day the employee was informed by the MRO that he or she
tested verified positive for drug use. The MRO shall then
authorize the reanalysis at the City's expense.
(e) Disclosure of results. Except as provided in this section, the
MRO shall not disclose to any third party medical information
provided by the individual to the MRO as a part of the testing
verification process.
[1] The MRO may disclose such information to the City, law
enforcement officials or a physician responsible for
determining the medical qualification of the employee,
only if:
[a] In the MRO's reasonable medical judgment the
information could result in the employee being
determined to be medically unqualified; or
[b] In the MRO's reasonable medical judgment the
information indicates that continued performance by
the employee of his or her function could pose a
significant safety risk.
[2] Before obtaining medical information from the employee
as part of the verification process, the MRO shall inform
the employee that information may be disclosed to third
parties as provided in this subsection and the identity of
any parties to whom information may be disclosed.
C. The City will not knowingly use as an employee any person who has
failed a drug test (i.e., tested verified positive for use of prohibited
drugs) and whose use of the prohibited drugs has been determined by
§ 75-37 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-37
72:152
§ 75-38. Alcohol testing.
the MRO to have no legitimate medical explanation. The City will not
knowingly use as an employee any person who refuses to take a drug
test as required pursuant to this policy and law.
D. The City will immediately remove the employee from his/her job as a
result of a verified positive test and will suspend the employee pending
management review and determination of appropriate action.
A. The City requires breath testing for alcohol. This testing must be done
using an evidential breath-testing device (EBT) approved by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). This testing
can only be performed by a Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) that is
certified in the equipment being used.
B. Two breath tests are required to determine if a person has a prohibited
alcohol concentration. A screening test is conducted first. Any result, if
less than 0.02 alcohol concentration, is considered a negative test, and
no further testing is required. If the initial screening shows an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second or confirmation test is
required. The confirmation test must be taken 15 minutes after the
initial screening. During that fifteen-minute period, the employee being
tested is to remain with the Breath Alcohol Technician and must refrain
from eating, drinking, smoking or belching. After the fifteen-minute
waiting period, a second breath test will be performed. The results of
the second test stand and become the official test result.
C. If the confirmation test result shows an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
less, the official test result is negative, and no action is required. If the
result of the confirmation test is 0.02 or greater, action by the employer
is required pursuant to earlier policies set forth herein.
D. As well as potential disciplinary actions, other initial employer response
to breath-testing results that show an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater are as follows:
(1) If the tested employee's alcohol concentration is between 0.02 and
0.039, the regulations call for the removal of the employee for at
least 24 hours and until a negative screen is revealed.
(2) If the tested employee's alcohol concentration is 0.04 or higher, he/
she must immediately be removed from any duties until he/she has
been evaluated by a substance abuse professional, has complied
with any recommended treatment and has taken and passed a
return-to-duty alcohol test (result must be less than 0.02). The
employee is then subject to unannounced follow-up testing. (See
§ 75-35, Follow-up testing.)
(3) All other actions as set forth earlier in this policy.
§ 75-37 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-38
72:153
§ 75-39. Confidentiality of test results.
The results of any drug test will be reported and recorded in a confidential
manner. Allowable communication of medical or test results will follow
guidelines as established by law. The results will not be reported to any
additional parties without the employee's written authorization, except
pursuant to law. A copy of the individual's test results will be available upon
request.
§ 75-40. Quality assurance of testing program.
§ 75-41. Grounds for disciplinary action; inspection; applicability.
E. Applicants and employees are expected to report for alcohol and drug
testing as required by this policy and in accordance with City testing
procedures. Employees are to report to work with no alcohol or illegal
drugs in their bodies. Any refusal to submit to alcohol breath testing or
urinalysis drug testing as directed by supervisory personnel will be
considered a refusal-to-test and may subject the employee to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
A. The City, through its agent, will take steps in its arrangements for
testing to ensure that the laboratory is certified by the NIDA or other
appropriate federal/state agency.
B. The chain of custody for any urine sample shall be maintained at all
times. If the chain of custody is broken, after the tamperproof seal is
applied, the employees shall be retested at the City's expense.
C. Any employee who receives a positive test result will have the right to
ask the City's Medical Review Officer (MRO) to retest the sample at a
NIDA-certified laboratory of the employee's choice at the employee' s
expense. Employees whose sample is retested and the laboratory finds
a negative finding will be reimbursed the cost of the test and returned
to work.
D. The City, through its agent, will make every effort to ensure that the
equipment being used for alcohol breath testing meets all the
requirements of law, and all testing will be performed by a qualified
Breath Alcohol Technician.
A. Any employee engaging in the manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession or use of prohibited substances on City premises, in City
vehicles or while on City business shall face disciplinary action, up to
and including termination. Any manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession or use of prohibited substances by any employee in any
manner which affects the employee's job performance or which may
cause the public or a governments or corporate body to lose confidence
in the City's ability to perform its responsibilities shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Law enforcement
officials could be notified, as appropriate, where criminal activity is
§ 75-38 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-41
72:154
§ 75-42. Employees voluntarily seeking help.
suspected. Any employee convicted of violating a criminal drug statute
or drunk driving law/statute must notify the designated City
representative and the employee's supervisor within three calendar
days of any such conviction.
B. Any employee who refuses to comply with a request for drug testing
shall be considered as having produced a positive test result and shall
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Any
employee who provides false information, in connection with a test, or
who attempts to falsify test results through tampering, contamination,
adulteration or substitution shall face disciplinary action, up to and
including termination, for insubordination. In the event that the
laboratory detects any substance which has been added to the sample
to interfere with the normal testing process, this will be considered a
refusal-to-test, and the same sanctions will apply.
C. The City reserves the right to inspect, investigate and search for
controlled substances at any time, without prior notice, on or in any and
all City premises and vehicles or other areas as set forth in this policy.
All coolers are subject to inspection. Refusal to cooperate with any
inspection, investigation or search that is authorized by a City
representative or by a court of competent jurisdiction shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
D. This policy applies to all City of Long Branch employees, other than
Public Works employees who are covered by their own agreement.
Visitors, vendors and contractors are also governed by this policy while
on City property or providing services to or for the City. Failure on the
part of vendors or contractors to adhere to this policy will cause the
City to cease to do business with that concern.
A. The City strongly encourages an employee with a drug/alcohol abuse
problem to voluntarily step forward to tell the City.
B. The City will assist in referring the employee to community assistance
programs. An unpaid leave of absence will be granted for a reasonable
period for treatment. Use of accumulated sick or vacation leave, where
applicable and if approved by the employee's supervisor and the City's
Business Administrator, may be granted on a case-by-case basis for
treatment purposes.
C. It is crucial to note that the accommodations in this section apply only
when an employee voluntarily comes forward. If a substance abuse
problem is disclosed to the City only after there has been a positive
drug test, a violation of a City rule or standard, a violation of law or a
violation of this policy, the same conditions outlined in § 75-34A of this
policy apply. If an employee fails to remain drug-free after the first
voluntary rehabilitation, he/she shall be discharged.
§ 75-41 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-43
72:155
§ 75-43. Training.
§ 75-44. Employee acknowledgment.
Each employee or prospective employee shall be given a copy of this policy.
He/she must acknowledge receipt and understanding of the policy as a
condition of employment. A sample of this acknowledgment is attached as
Appendix A.
§ 75-45. Administration.
A. In an effort to educate employees in the dangers of drug use and the
City's commitment to keeping drugs out of the workplace, each
employee will receive information covering the dangers of substance
abuse, the City's commitment to an alcohol- and drug-free workplace
and the penalties for violation of this policy.
B. Supervisory employees will receive at least five hours of training on
identifying those individuals who might be impaired by the use of drugs.
A. The City has designated _________________________ to administer this
company's antidrug/alcohol program. It has contracted with
________________________________ or the collection and testing to be done
under ___________________'s standard procedures, and for the employee
awareness and supervisory training program as designed and
administered by (_); all as more particularly required by the City
antidrug/alcohol program.
B. The Medical Review Officer and Drug/Alcohol Testing Laboratory shall
be those entities utilized by _________________ in its contract with the
City.
APPENDIX A
Acknowledgment
This will certify that I, ____________________, have been given a copy of
the City of Long Branch's policy addressing alcohol and drugs in the
workplace and that I fully understand said policy and agree to comply
with all terms and requirements set forth herein.
EMPLOYEE ___________________________________
DATE ___________________________________
WITNESS ___________________________________
DATE ___________________________________
APPENDIX B
Donor's Checklist for Drug Testing
§ 75-43 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-45
72:156
The collection of your urine will be conducted under the procedures
set forth herein. These procedures provide for your individual privacy,
unless there is reason to believe that you may have altered or
substituted the urine specimen.
Please take a few minutes to read the following information, which
describes your role in the collection process.
Present required photo identification to the collector. If you do not
have a photo ID, an employer representative will be asked to identify
you.
You may ask the collector to show his/her identification.
Remove any unnecessary outer garments, e.g., coat, jacket. All
personal belongings (e.g., purse, briefcase) must remain with outer
garments. You may ask for a receipt.
When instructed by collector, wash and dry your hands.
You will be provided a sealed specimen bottle or collection container,
or the collector may unwrap it in your presence. You will be allowed to
select your specimen kit from a box full of like, sealed specimen kits.
You may provide the specimen in the privacy of a stall or otherwise
partitioned area that allows for individual privacy.
After providing the specimen to the collector, he/she will divide the
sample into two separate bottles.
You should initial the security tape on the specimen bottles to certify
that it is your specimen. These sealed bottles will then be placed in a
security bag or security box. These will be sealed with security tape in
your presence.
You should observe the entire collection procedure.
You should complete the information on copies 3 through 6 of the
custody and control form. You will be given a copy of the completed
form after the collector has completed his/her certification.
You should NOT list medications/prescriptions on any other copy of
the form except the copy which you are given for your records.
The results of the laboratory analysis will be forwarded to our
Medical Review Officer. If the laboratory results are negative, the MRO
will notify your employer. If the laboratory results are positive, the
MRO will contact you at the phone number you provided to give you
the opportunity to discuss the test results.
APPENDIX C
Prohibited Conduct
The following conduct is specifically prohibited by law:
A. Alcohol concentration.
§ 75-45 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-45
72:157
(1) No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty
while having an alcohol concentration of 0.04% or
greater, and no employer having actual knowledge that
an employee has a concentration of 0.04% or greater
shall permit an employee to perform or continue his/her
duties.
(2) An 0.02 or greater means no functions can be performed
for 24 hours and another negative screen is revealed to
the employee's supervisor.
B. Alcohol possession. No employee shall be on duty or operate
a motor vehicle while on duty with the City while possessing
alcohol, unless the alcohol is manifested and transported as
part of the shipment. No employer having actual knowledge
that the employee possesses alcohol may permit the employee
to drive or continue to drive a motor vehicle.
C. On-duty alcohol use. No employee shall use alcohol while
performing his/her duties, and no employer having actual
knowledge that an employee is using alcohol shall permit the
employee to perform or continue to perform his/her duties.
D. Pre-duty alcohol use. No employee shall perform his/her duties
within four hours after using alcohol if such use impairs the
employee's duties, and no employer, having actual knowledge
that an employee has used alcohol within the preceding four
hours, shall permit an employee to perform or continue to
perform his/her duties if such use impairs the employee's
duties.
E. Alcohol use following an accident. No employee, who is subject
to a post-accident alcohol test, shall use alcohol for eight hours
following the accident or until he or she undergoes a postaccident
alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
F. Refusal to submit to a required alcohol or controlled substance
test. No employee shall refuse to submit to an alcohol or
controlled substance test under any circumstances in which
the City rules require such a test. No employer shall permit
an employee who refuses to submit to such test to perform or
continue to perform.
G. Controlled substances use. No employee shall report for duty
or remain on duty when the employee uses any controlled
substances, except when the use is pursuant to the instructions
of a physician who has advised the employee that the
substance does not adversely affect the employee's ability. No
employer having actual knowledge that the employee has used
controlled substances shall permit the employee to perform or
continue to perform his/her duties. An employer may require
an employee to inform the employer of any therapeutic drug
use.
§ 75-45 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-45
72:158
H. Positive test for controlled substances. No employee shall
report for duty or remain on duty if the employee tests positive
for controlled substances. No employer having actual
knowledge that an employee has tested positive for controlled
substances shall permit the employee to perform or continue
to perform his/her duties.
APPENDIX D
City of Long Branch
Pre-Employment Drug Testing Policy and Procedure
The City of Long Branch is dedicated to providing a safe workplace
for its employees and residents. In continuation of this commitment, it
is the policy of Long Branch to conduct pre-employment and for-cause
drug screening programs. Job applicants in Long Branch will undergo
testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment.
Procedure:
1. Once a candidate is selected for a position and an offer of
employment is accepted, the candidate will be required to
undergo a pre-employment drug screen within 48 hours of the
job offer. All offers of employment will be conducted by the
Personnel Department and are conditional upon completion of
a drug screening test.
2. Candidates will be instructed by the Personnel Department
where the nearest testing centers are located.
3. Test results will be received by the City's Medical Review
Officer within three business days. Results will be reported to
the Personnel Department at the end of each business day.
4. In the result of a positive test, a confirmation test will then
be conducted by the medical laboratory. If the results of the
confirmation test are positive, the offer of employment will be
rescinded.
5. Supervisors will be notified by the Personnel Department of
the candidate's employment status.
6. A minimum of one week will be required for the above actions
to take place.
§ 75-45 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-45
72:159

ARTICLE IV
Public Works Department Alcohol- and Drug-Free Workplace Policy
[Adopted 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
§ 75-46. Purpose.
The City of Long Branch Public Works Department (hereinafter referred
to as the "City") subscribes to the belief that the abuse of alcohol and/or
drugs by City employees is incompatible with the City's obligation to seek
to provide a safe and productive work environment for its employees and
for its citizens to ensure their safety and trust in the City. The City further
believes that healthy, drug-free employees are a greater asset to the City,
to society and to themselves. The goal of the City Alcohol- and Drug-Free
Workplace Policy is to maintain a work force free from prohibited drugs
and alcohol abuse. The possession, use or distribution of drugs/alcohol in
the workplace poses an unacceptable risk to employees, the public and the
City of Long Branch. Accordingly, the City hereby establishes the following
policies and procedures for all Public Works Department employees.
§ 75-47. Authority.
This policy is intended to comply with all applicable federal and state
statutes and regulations governing workplace and antidrug testing,
including but not limited to the following:
§ 75-48. City policy.
A. Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug Testing Programs: 49
CFR, Part 40.
B. Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act: 49 CFR, Part 382.
C. Controlled Substances Testing, Covering Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) and controlled drivers: 49 CFR, Part 39,
Subpart H.
D. Notification and Reporting of Accidents: 49 CFR, Part 394.
A. It is the responsibility of employees to maintain personal health so they
are physically and mentally capable of performing in the workplace.
The abuse of drugs or alcohol is an unsafe and counterproductive
practice which will not be tolerated at the City of Long Branch Public
Works Department. NOTE: In this policy, the terms "abuse" and
"substance abuse" will be used to mean the use or abuse of or
dependency on illegal drugs, alcohol or drugs that can be prescribed
but are used in a manner inconsistent with the prescription.
B. Any City public works employee reporting for work and found to be
under the influence of alcohol or drugs or using drugs or alcohol while
at work or in possession of, manufacture of, selling, offering for sale,
trading or providing illegal drugs or alcohol will be subject to
§ 75-46 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-48
72:161
disciplinary action, up to and including termination. This policy is in
effect for all employees while on City property, which includes the
parking lots, or while engaged in City business. The sale, possession,
manufacture, distribution, dispensation, use or purchase of prohibited
drugs and/or alcohol on City property or while conducting City business
is prohibited. City property includes all areas in which the City operates
its equipment, City-owned or City-leased property, as well as all City/
employee-owned vehicles in use on City property, lockers, desks,
equipment, work space and storage facilities. (City-sponsored activities
which may include the responsible service of alcoholic beverages are
not included in this provision, provided that abuse does not occur.)
C. In an effort to ensure that the City of Long Branch Public Works
Department is an alcohol- and drug-free workplace and to comply with
Department of Transportation Regulations, a drug testing program will
be in effect for all commercial drivers license holders. This program will
provide for pre-employment, random, post-accident testing, reasonable
suspicion, return-to-duty and follow-up testing. The City has retained a
Medical Review Agency (hereinafter referred to as the MRO/Agent) to
manage and administer the testing program.
D. Any employee reporting for work impaired and unable to properly
perform required duties will not be allowed to work. If possible, the
supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion of the employee's
status. Also, where applicable, the supervisor will subsequently consult
privately with the employee about the observation. If, in the opinion of
the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, the employee will
be required to be tested for alcohol and illicit substances, depending on
the supervisory determination of the observed impairment. (Under no
circumstances should an impaired employee be allowed to drive.)
E. Prescription drugs prescribed by the employee's physician may be
taken during working hours. The employee is required to notify the
supervisor if the use of properly prescribed prescription drugs may
adversely affect the employee's work performance. The abuse of
prescription drugs will not be tolerated.
F. The City will provide an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) for its
employees and supervisory personnel, which will include a program of
education and training on the effects of drug/alcohol abuse. The EAP/
MRO/Agent/City will make available to all employees informational
material related to the cause and effects of substance abuse and
additionally will provide a community service hot-line telephone
number, which can be used by employees whenever assistance is
required. Supervisory personnel who will be in a position to determine
whether an employee must be drug/alcohol tested, pursuant to the
policies herein, will receive a minimum of one hour of training on the
specific physical, behavioral and performance indicators of probable
drug/alcohol abuse. It is the responsibility of the employees to seek
assistance from the EAP before drug/alcohol problems lead to violations
of policy and/or disciplinary action.
§ 75-48 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-48
72:162
§ 75-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — A person employed by the City in a capacity which requires a
commercial drivers license to be maintained, which in this case includes all
Public Works Department employees, foremen and supervisors, all of whom
shall be included in the test pool.
FAIL A DRUG/ALCOHOL TEST — The confirmation test result shows a
positive evidence of the presence of a prohibited or legal drug/alcohol in an
employee's system.
LEGAL DRUGS — Prescribed drugs and over-the-counter drugs which have
been legally obtained and are being used as directed and for the purpose
for which they were prescribed or manufactured.
PROHIBITED DRUGS — Any of the following substances specified in
Schedules I and II of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801.812
(1981 and 1987 CUM.P.P) as amended and revised, as well as marijuana,
cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, narcotic, phencyclidine (PCP) or any other
habit-forming drug, except where prescribed by a licensed medical
practitioner. This exception applies only when the substance is used by the
individual to whom the drug was prescribed or authorized. The schedule
of drugs includes, but is not limited to, opiates, opium derivatives,
hallucinogenic substances, depressants and stimulants.
§ 75-50. Pre-employment testing.
G. The City further has determined to take action against employees who
unlawfully use, distribute or possess alcohol, drugs and/or controlled
substances during or outside assigned working hours in order to
prevent illegal activities and to protect employees, the public and the
City and its property from any danger which may result from the illegal
use of alcohol, drugs and/or controlled substances.
H. The City has further determined that it will not employ or use the
services of any employee who refuses to be tested for drugs/alcohol and
will discipline any employee who fails a drug/alcohol test, which may
include termination of services.
I. All employees are required to acknowledge, in writing, the policy as a
condition to initial/continued employment.
A. All prospective employees selected for a position will be required to
undergo a post-offer, pre-employment test for the presence of alcohol
and illicit drugs. Receipt by the City of a negative test result shall be
required prior to engaging in any safety-sensitive function employment.
A positive test result will disqualify an individual from further
consideration of employment with the City.
§ 75-48 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-50
72:163
§ 75-51. Random testing.
§ 75-52. Reasonable suspicion testing/employee physical.
B. Failure to keep an appointment with the Agent, which was previously
agreed to by both the prospective employee and the Agent, will be
viewed as an attempt to elude the testing or alter its results. No further
consideration for employment will be given the prospective employee at
that time or in the future. The drug test will be in accordance with
Appendix D, which is attached hereto.
A. All employees who have commercial drivers licenses will be subject to
random, unannounced annual alcohol and drug testing. Testing will be
done during working hours, except under exigent circumstances. The
City shall be responsible for the costs of the tests. Split-sample testing
will be as provided by this policy. Selection criteria, numbers of tests
and test frequency will be determined by the language of FHWA
regulations and will be communicated to employees by City
management or the Agent. However, annually at least 50% of the
employees will undergo drug testing and 25% of the employees will
undergo alcohol testing. Monthly, but no later than quarterly, a
prorated number of employees will be tested. The portion will ensure
that the ratios above are conducted over the calendar year.
B. Upon notification of selection, the employee will report to the
designated collection site immediately. Failure to report will be viewed
as an attempt to elude the test or alter its results and will result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
A. All employees are subject to a fitness-for-duty evaluation, to include
urine and breath testing, when there is reasonable suspicion to believe
that the employee is in violation of this policy. A reasonable cause
referral for testing will be made on the basis of documented, objective
facts and circumstances which are consistent with the long- and shortterm
effects of substance abuse.
B. Examples of reasonable suspicion include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Physical signs and symptoms consistent with substance or alcohol
abuse.
(2) Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession
or use of controlled substances, alcohol, or drugs.
(3) See also Appendix C, which is attached hereto.
C. Reasonable cause testing determinations will be made by a supervisor
or other City official who is trained to detect the signs and symptoms of
drug and alcohol use and who can reasonably conclude that an
employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his/her work
performance due to substance abuse. If another supervisor or other
§ 75-50 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-52
72:164
§ 75-53. Post-accident testing.
City official is immediately available, he/she will verify that there is
reasonable cause before the employee is transported to the agent's
facility. At no time will this determination be made on the basis of thirdparty
reports without verification.
D. NOTE: Employees are cautioned that various over-the-counter and
prescribed medication can adversely affect ability to operate vehicles
and other equipment. It is the employee's responsibility to report to
work each day fit for his or her duties.
E. Employees who are deemed to require a fitness-for-duty evaluation
based on reasonable cause will be sent to a health facility of the City's
choice. The attending physician will make every attempt to determine
the cause of the observed behavior, including authorizing, when his/her
medical opinion dictates, an additional alcohol or drug test. Employees
will be placed on unpaid medical leave of absence until the results of
the examination are received by the City. Receipt of a negative drug test
result and/or doctor's statement that the employee was and is fit for
duty is required prior to continued employment. Employees who are
returned to duty by this means will be reinstated without prejudice and
without loss of pay.
F. Employees who are medically determined to be temporarily unfit to
perform their duties, but who test negatively for alcohol or drugs, will
be returned to duty when they obtain the original examining doctor's
written statement that they are fit for duty.
G. Employees may be required by the City to undergo a physical
examination, which can include urine and/or blood testing for drugs/
alcohol. Such testing shall be done by a designated agent of the City,
who shall follow the procedures set forth in this policy.
A. Any employee involved in an accident will be required to submit to a
post-accident alcohol and drug test if:
(1) The driver involved in an accident received a citation for a moving
violation;
(2) There is a fatality as a result of an accident;
(3) The accident meets the Department of Transportation criteria for
an accident that requires such testing; and/or
(4) Any accident involving a City vehicle.
B. When a post-accident test is indicated, the City will make every effort to
have said test performed within two hours of notification of the
accident. At no time will a period of more than eight hours transpire
between notification and testing. Documentation of the entire post-
§ 75-52 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-53
72:165
§ 75-54. Return-to-duty testing.
accident procedure should be made by all personnel involved in the
notification and testing process.
C. Receipt by the City of a negative alcohol and drug test result is required
prior to return to duty. A positive test result may disqualify an employee
from further employment or reinstatement at that time or any time in
the future and subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination.
A. Any employee who tests positive for alcohol or illicit substances will not
be permitted to return to work, where applicable, until he/she has met
the following:
(1) The employee must be evaluated by a substance abuse
professional. This professional must meet the criteria outlined in
the Department of Transportation's Alcohol and Drug Rules for
Substance Abuse Professionals.
(2) The employee must comply and complete all recommendations
made by the substance abuse professional and be able to document
the same.
(3) The employee must submit to a return-to-duty test, and a proof of a
negative test result must be received by the City.
B. When the employee is cleared to return to work, he/she will be required
to pass an alcohol and drug test. Upon receipt of a negative finding, if
an employee is allowed to return to work, he/she will be subject to
follow-up testing as required by law and this policy. The cost of the
follow-up testing will be equally split between the City and the
employee.
C. All employees are entitled to voluntarily participate in the Employee
Assistance Program. However, if there is a positive test result,
participation in the Employee Assistance Program or an alternate
program approved by the City shall be a prerequisite to continued
employment. Refusal to enroll in a program or to complete a full course
of rehabilitation shall be cause for immediate termination of services. A
positive alcohol test is one with a level of .040 or greater. Employees
with a pattern of readings between .020 and .039 will also be subject to
enrolling in a mandatory counseling program.
D. In addition to completing a required course of rehabilitation, employees
shall be subject to the following discipline(s):
(1) Following the confirmation of a positive test, there shall be a
minimum five-day suspension without pay. In the case of an alcohol
test result between .020 and .039, the penalty would be a
suspension for the remainder of that day's work shift unless a
pattern of this type of abuse has developed. In either case, the
§ 75-53 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-54
72:166
§ 75-55. Follow-up testing.
Any employee returning to work with the City after being disqualified for a
positive alcohol or drug test or returning to work after a leave of absence
for voluntary substance abuse treatment will be subject to random follow-up
testing. The employee will be tested at least six times in the first 12 months
after returning to duty and may be subject to follow-up testing without prior
notice for up to 60 months. However, the employee is not given a fresh start
after this period; the verified positive result remains on his/her files. If any
employee tests verified positive on a subsequent post-rehabilitation testing,
or on any other test during employment with the City, that employee shall
be terminated from employment immediately.
§ 75-56. Testing procedures.
Collection of the urine specimen shall be done in accordance with federal
regulations, as described in 49 CFR, Part 40. Instructions for employees
are attached as Appendix B. Collection will be done at a collection site
designated by the MRO/Agent. A proper chain of custody shall be
maintained. Should this chain be broken, the test shall be invalidated and a
new collection made.
§ 75-57. Drug testing.
suspension(s) shall also remain in full force and effect until there is
a negative retest provided to the City through a certified laboratory
(all costs of testing to be borne by the employee), but failure on
the part of the employee to present a negative test result within
six weeks from the original incident date shall automatically result
in termination of services. After two weeks, the City reserves the
right, for reasons of operational efficiency, to fill the suspended
employee's position and, in such case, the suspended employee
would be entitled to the next available opening, provided that all
other conditions (rehabilitation and positive test result) are met.
(2) Employees found to be in violation of this policy (confirmation of a
positive drug/alcohol test) on a second occasion will be
immediately dismissed.
A. All drug testing required by the City Public Works Department will be
performed in accordance with Department of Transportation
guidelines. Drug testing is by urinalysis using split samples. Splitsample
testing requires the specimen be divided into two separate
bottles during the collection process. These two bottles are designated
as: the primary specimen, which shall contain no less than 30 milliliters
of urine; and the split specimen, which shall contain no less than 15
milliliters of urine. Upon arrival at the laboratory, the primary specimen
will be opened and tested. In the first screening test, immunoassay
techniques are used to screen urine specimens for classes of drugs. In
the second or confirmation test, any positive results found in the first
§ 75-54 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-57
72:167
screening will be confirmed using the tandem technique of gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), which positively
identifies and quantifies the presence of specific drugs. No test result
will be reported by the laboratory to the Medical Review Officer (MRO)
as a positive drug test result unless both the initial screening test and
the confirmation test are positive. The laboratory shall report the test
results to the Medical Review Officer (MRO), who shall evaluate the
chain of custody, urine custody form and test results.
B. The MRO will perform the following duties for the City:
(1) The MRO will review the results of each drug test before it is
reported to the City.
(2) The MRO will review and interpret each confirmed positive test
result in the following manner to determine whether or not there is
an acceptable medical explanation for the confirmed positive
result:
(a) The MRO will conduct a medical interview with the employee,
either in person or by phone.
(b) The MRO will review the employee's medical history and
relevant biomedical factors.
(c) The MRO will review medical records made available by the
employee to determine if a confirmed positive result could be
attributed to the use of legally prescribed medication.
(d) The MRO will require, if it is deemed necessary, that the
original specimen be reanalyzed.
(e) The MRO will verify that the laboratory report and assessment
are accurate.
(f) If the MRO determines that there is a legitimate medical
explanation for the confirmed positive result; he will take no
further action other than informing the City of his
determinations that the test result is negative.
(3) If the MRO verifies that a confirmed positive test result is
scientifically sufficient and that there is no legitimate medical
explanation for the confirmed positive result, the MRO shall
immediately contact the City's designated representative (who will
instruct the employee's supervisor to immediately suspend the
employee pending management review and determination of
appropriate action) and the employee.
(4) The MRO will determine whether and when a rehabilitated
employee may return to work.
§ 75-57 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-57
72:168
(5) The MRO will determine a schedule of post-rehabilitation testing,
after consulting with the City's designated representative, for an
employee returning to work after rehabilitation.
(6) The MRO will ensure that an employee is tested in strict
compliance with DOT procedures before an employee may return
to work after rehabilitation.
(7) If the MRO so determines, based upon a review of laboratory
inspection reports, quality assurance and quality control data and
other drug test results, that a particular drug test result is
scientifically insufficient, the MRO will conclude that the test is
negative, and no further action shall be taken. The MRO may
request a reanalysis of the original specimen prior to making this
determination. The MRO may request the reanalysis be performed
by the same laboratory or that an aliquot of the original specimen
be sent for reanalysis to an alternate laboratory certified by the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
The laboratory shall assist the MRO in making his/her
determination by having its personnel available to the MRO for
consultation upon request by the MRO.
(8) Reporting and review of results.
(a) Review by MRO. The MRO will review all test results prior to
the transmission of results to the City to consider possible
alternate medical explanations for confirmed test results. The
MRO shall have the qualifications and responsibilities,
including those pertaining to the investigation, confirmation
and communication of verified positive and negative test
results and the disposition of scientifically insufficient test
results, as set forth in the Medical Review Officer section of
this plan.
(b) Positive test results.
[1] If, after making all reasonable efforts and documenting
them, the MRO is unable to reach the individual directly,
the MRO shall contact the City's designated
representative, who shall direct the individual to contact
the MRO as soon as possible. The City's designated
representative shall employ procedures that ensure, to the
maximum extent practicable, the requirement that the
employee contact with the MRO is held in confidence.
[2] If, after making all reasonable efforts, the City's
designated representative is unable to contact the
employee, the MRO may place the employee on temporary,
unpaid leave.
§ 75-57 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-57
72:169
[3] The MRO may verify a test as positive without having
communicated directly with the employee about the test in
three circumstances:
[a] The employee expressly declines the opportunity to
discuss the test.
[b] The City's designated representative has successfully
made and documented a contact with the employee
and instructed the employee to contact the MRO, and
more than five calendar days have passed since the
date the employee was successfully contacted by the
designated employer representative; or
[c] Other circumstances provided for in DOT agency drug
testing regulations.
[4] Under the split-test method, and if the employee so
chooses the split-test method, such test may be conducted,
and if there is a positive result, the provisions/procedures
of this section shall apply.
[5] If a test is verified positive under the circumstances
specified in this section, the employee may present to the
MRO information documenting that serious illness, injury
or other circumstances unavoidably prevented the
employee from timely contacting the MRO. The MRO, on
the basis of such information, may reopen the verification,
allowing the employee to present information concerning a
legitimate explanation for a confirmed positive test. If the
MRO then concludes that there is a legitimate explanation,
the MRO may declare the test to be negative.
[6] Following verification of a positive test result, the MRO
shall refer the case to the City's designated representative
for other rehabilitation or administrative action.
(c) Verification for opiates. Before verifying a confirmed positive
test result for opiates, the MRO shall determine that there is
clinical evidence other than, or in addition to, the urine test of
unauthorized use of any opium, opiate or opium derivative,
unless confirmation testing for opiates confirms the presence
of monoacetyimorphine.
(d) Authorized reanalysis. Only the MRO may order a reanalysis of
the original primary specimen. The employee may submit a
written request for a retest of the original specimen to the
MRO for a reanalysis of the specimen within 60 days following
the day the employee was informed by the MRO that he or she
tested verified positive for drug use. The MRO shall then
authorize the reanalysis at the City's expense.
§ 75-57 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-57
72:170
§ 75-58. Alcohol testing.
(e) Disclosure of results. Except as provided in this section, the
MRO shall not disclose to any third party medical information
provided by the individual to the MRO as a part of the testing
verification process.
[1] The MRO may disclose such information to the City, DOT
or other federal safety agency, law enforcement officials or
a physician responsible for determining the medical
qualification of the employee under an applicable DOT
agency regulation, as applicable, only if:
[a] An applicable DOT regulation permits or requires
such disclosure;
[b] In the MRO's reasonable medical judgment, the
information could result in the employee being
determined to be medically unqualified under an
applicable DOT agency rule; or
[c] In the MRO's reasonable medical judgment, in a
situation in which there is no DOT agency rule
establishing physical qualification standards
applicable to the employee, the information indicates
that continued performance by the employee of his or
her safety-sensitive function could pose a significant
safety risk.
[2] Before obtaining medical information from the employee
as part of the verification process, the MRO shall inform
the employee that information may be disclosed to third
parties as provided in this subsection and the identity of
any parties to whom information may be disclosed.
C. The City will not knowingly use as an employee any person who has
failed a drug test (i.e., tested verified positive for use of prohibited
drugs) and whose use of the prohibited drugs has been determined by
the MRO to have no legitimate medical explanation. The City will not
knowingly use as an employee any person who refuses to take a drug
test as required pursuant to this policy and 49 C.F.R. Parts 199 and 391.
D. The City will immediately remove the employee from his/her job as a
result of a verified positive test and will suspend the employee pending
management review and determination of appropriate action.
A. The Department of Transportation rules require breath testing for
alcohol. This testing must be done using an evidential breath-testing
device (EBT) approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA). This testing can only be performed by a
Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) that is certified in the equipment being
used.
§ 75-57 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-58
72:171
§ 75-59. Confidentiality of test results.
The results of any drug test will be reported and recorded in a confidential
manner. Allowable communication of medical or test results will follow
guidelines established in 49 C.F.R., Part 40. The results will not be reported
to any additional parties without the employee's written authorization,
B. Two breath tests are required to determine if a person has a prohibited
alcohol concentration. A screening test is conducted first. Any result, if
less than 0.02 alcohol concentration, is considered a negative test, and
no further testing is required. If the initial screening shows an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second or confirmation test is
required. The confirmation test must be taken 15 minutes after the
initial screening. During that fifteen-minute period the employee being
tested is to remain with the Breath Alcohol Technician and must refrain
from eating, drinking, smoking or belching. After the fifteen-minute
waiting period, a second breath test will be performed. The results of
the second test stand and become the official test result.
C. If the confirmation test result shows an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
less, the official test result is negative, and no action is required. If the
result of the confirmation test is 0.02 or greater, action by the employer
is required pursuant to policies set forth herein.
D. As well as potential disciplinary actions, other initial employer response
to breath-testing results that show an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater are as follows:
(1) If the tested employee's alcohol concentration is between 0.02 and
0.039, the regulations call for the removal of the driver for at least
24 hours and until a negative screen is revealed.
(2) If the tested employee's alcohol concentration is 0.04 or higher, he/
she must immediately be removed from any safety-sensitive duties
until he/she has been evaluated by a substance abuse professional
(DOT regulations have specific guidelines for who qualifies as a
substance abuse professional), has complied with any
recommended treatment and has taken and passed a return-to-duty
alcohol test (result must be less than 0.02). The employee is then
subject to unannounced follow-up testing. (See § 75-55, Follow-up
testing.)
(3) All other actions as set forth earlier in this policy.
E. Applicants and employees are expected to report for alcohol and drug
testing as required by this policy and in accordance with township
testing procedures. Employees are to report to work with no alcohol or
illegal drugs in their bodies. Any refusal to submit to alcohol breath
testing or urinalysis drug testing as directed by supervisory personnel
will be considered a refusal-to-test and may subject the employee to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
§ 75-58 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-59
72:172
except as outlined in 49 C.F.R., Part 40. A copy of the individual's test results
will be available upon request.
§ 75-60. Quality assurance of testing program.
§ 75-61. Grounds for disciplinary action; inspection; applicability.
A. The City, through its agent, will take steps in its arrangements for
testing to ensure that the laboratory is certified by SAMHSA and meets
the requirements of the United States Department of Transportation
(DOT).
B. The chain of custody for any urine sample shall be maintained at all
times. If the chain of custody is broken, after the tamperproof seal is
applied, the employees shall be retested at the City's expense.
C. Any employee who receives a positive test result will have the right to
ask the City's Medical Review Officer (MRO) to retest the sample at a
NIDA-certified laboratory of the employee's choice at the employee's
expense. Employees whose sample is retested and the laboratory finds
a negative finding will be reimbursed the cost of the test and returned
to work.
D. The City, through its Agent, will make every effort to ensure that the
equipment being used for alcohol breath testing meets all the
requirements of the Department of Transportation, and all testing will
be performed by a qualified Breath Alcohol Technician.
A. Any employee engaging in the manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession or use of prohibited substances on City premises, in City
vehicles or while on City business may face disciplinary action, up to
and including termination. Any manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession or use of prohibited substances by any employee in any
manner which affects the employee's job performance or which may
cause the public or a government or corporate body to lose confidence
in the City's ability to perform its responsibilities may result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Law enforcement
officials could be notified, as appropriate, where criminal activity is
suspected. Any employee convicted of violating a criminal drug statute
or drunk driving law/statute will notify the designated City
representative within three calendar days of any such conviction.
B. Any employee who refuses to comply with a request for drug testing
shall be considered as having produced a positive test result and may
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Any
employee who provides false information, in connection with a test, or
who attempts to falsify test results through tampering, contamination,
adulteration or substitution shall face disciplinary action up to and
including termination. In the event that the laboratory detects any
substance which has been added to the sample to interfere with the
§ 75-59 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-61
72:173
§ 75-62. Employees voluntarily seeking help.
§ 75-63. Training.
§ 75-64. Employee acknowledgment.
Each employee or prospective employee shall be given a copy of this policy.
He/she must acknowledge receipt and understanding of the policy as a
normal testing process, this will be considered a refusal to test, and the
same sanctions will apply.
C. The City reserves the right to inspect, investigate and search for
controlled substances at any time, without prior notice, on or in any and
all City premises and vehicles. All coolers are subject to inspection.
Refusal to cooperate with any inspection, investigation or search that is
authorized by a City representative or by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall result in disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
D. This policy applies to all Public Works Department employees. Visitors,
vendors and contractors are also governed by this policy while on City
property or providing services to or for the City. Failure on the part of
vendors or contractors to adhere to this policy will cause the City to
cease to do business with that concern.
A. The City strongly encourages an employee with a drug/alcohol abuse
problem to voluntarily step forward to tell the City.
B. The City will assist in referring the employee to community assistance
programs. An unpaid leave of absence will be granted for a reasonable
period for treatment. Use of accumulated sick or vacation leave, where
applicable and approved by the Superintendent, may be granted on a
case-by-case basis.
C. It is crucial to note that the accommodations in this section apply only
when an employee voluntarily comes forward. If a substance abuse
problem is disclosed to the City only after there has been a positive
drug test, a violation of a City rule or standards, a violation of law or a
violation of this policy, the same conditions outlined in § 75-54A of this
policy apply. If an employee fails to remain drug-free after the first
voluntary rehabilitation, he/she will be discharged.
A. In an effort to educate employees in the dangers of drug use and the
City's commitment to keeping drugs out of the workplace, each
employee will receive information covering the dangers of substance
abuse, the City's commitment to an alcohol- and drug-free workplace
and the penalties for violation of this policy.
B. Supervisory employees will receive at least five hours of training on
identifying those individuals who might be impaired by the use of drugs.
§ 75-61 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-64
72:174
condition of employment. A sample of this acknowledgment is attached as
Appendix A.
§ 75-65. Administration.
A. The City has designated __________________________ to administer this
company's antidrug/alcohol program. It has contracted with
___________________________ for the collection and testing to be done
under ____________________________'s standard procedures, and for the
employee awareness and supervisory training program as designed and
administered by ____________________________; all as more particularly
required by the City antidrug/alcohol program.
B. The Medical Review Officer and Drug/Alcohol Testing Laboratory shall
be those entities utilized by __________________ in its contract with the
City.
APPENDIX A
Acknowledgment
This will certify that I, ____________________, have been given a copy of
the City of Long Branch's Public Works Department Policy addressing
alcohol and drugs in the workplace, and that I fully understand said
policy and agree to comply with all terms and requirements set forth
herein.
EMPLOYEE ___________________________________
DATE ___________________________________
WITNESS ___________________________________
DATE ___________________________________
APPENDIX B
Donor's Checklist for Drug Testing
The collection of your urine will be conducted under procedures
mandated by the Department of Transportation. The DOT regulations
provide for your individual privacy unless there is reason to believe
that you may have altered or substituted the urine specimen.
Please take a few minutes to read the following information, which
describes your role in the collection process.
Present required photo identification to the collector. If you do not
have a photo ID, an employer representative will be asked to identify
you.
You may ask the collector to show his/her identification.
Remove any unnecessary outer garments, e.g., coat, jacket. All
personal belongings (e. g., purse, briefcase) must remain with outer
garments. You may ask for a receipt.
When instructed by collector, wash and dry your hands.
§ 75-64 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-65
72:175
You will be provided a sealed specimen bottle or collection container,
or the collector may unwrap it in your presence. You will be allowed to
select your specimen kit from a box full of like, sealed specimen kits.
You may provide the specimen in the privacy of a stall or otherwise
partitioned area that allows for individual privacy.
After providing the specimen to the collector, he/she will divide the
sample into two separate bottles.
You should initial the security tape on the specimen bottles to certify
that it is your specimen. These sealed bottles will then be placed in a
security bag or security box. These will be sealed with security tape in
your presence.
You should observe the entire collection procedure.
You should complete the information on copies 3 through 6 of the
custody and control form. You will be given a copy of the completed
form after the collector has completed his/her certification.
You should NOT list medications/prescriptions on any other copy of
the form except the copy which you are given for your records.
The results of the laboratory analysis will be forwarded to our
Medical Review Officer. If the laboratory results are negative, the MRO
will notify your employer. If the laboratory results are positive, the
MRO will contact you at the phone number you provided to give you
the opportunity to discuss the test results.
APPENDIX C
Prohibited Conduct
The following conduct is specifically prohibited by law:
A. Alcohol concentration.
(1) No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty
while having an alcohol concentration of 0.04% or
greater, and no employer having actual knowledge that
an employee has a concentration of 0.04% or greater
shall permit an employee to perform or continue his/her
duties.
(2) An 0.02 or greater means no functions can be performed
for 24 hours and another negative screen is revealed to
the employee's supervisor.
B. Alcohol possession. No employee shall be on duty or operate
a motor vehicle while on duty with the City while possessing
alcohol, unless the alcohol is manifested and transported as
part of the shipment. No employer having actual knowledge
that the employee possesses alcohol may permit the employee
to drive or continue to drive a motor vehicle.
§ 75-65 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-65
72:176
C. On-duty alcohol use. No employee shall use alcohol while
performing his/her duties, and no employer having actual
knowledge that an employee is using alcohol shall permit the
employee to perform or continue to perform his/her duties.
D. Pre-duty alcohol use. No employee shall perform his/her duties
within four hours after using alcohol if such use impairs the
employee's duties, and no employer, having actual knowledge
that an employee has used alcohol within the preceding four
hours, shall permit an employee to perform or continue to
perform his/her duties if such use impairs the employee's
duties.
E. Alcohol use following an accident. No employee, who is subject
to a post-accident alcohol test, shall use alcohol for eight hours
following the accident or until he or she undergoes a postaccident
alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
F. Refusal to submit to a required alcohol or controlled substance
test. No employee shall refuse to submit to an alcohol or
controlled substance test under any circumstances in which
the City rules require such a test. No employer shall permit
an employee who refuses to submit to such test to perform or
continue to perform.
G. Controlled substances use. No employee shall report for duty
or remain on duty when the employee uses any controlled
substances, except when the use is pursuant to the instructions
of a physician who has advised the employee that the
substance does not adversely affect the employee's ability. No
employer having actual knowledge that the employee has used
controlled substances shall permit the employee to perform or
continue to perform his/her duties. An employer may require
an employee to inform the employer of any therapeutic drug
use.
H. Positive test for controlled substances. No employee shall
report for duty or remain on duty if the employee tests positive
for controlled substances. No employer having actual
knowledge that an employee has tested positive for controlled
substances shall permit the employee to perform or continue
to perform his/her duties.
APPENDIX D
City of Long Branch
Pre-Employment Drug Testing Policy and Procedure
The City of Long Branch is dedicated to providing a safe workplace
for its employees and residents. In continuation of this commitment, it
is the policy of Long Branch to conduct pre-employment and for-cause
drug screening programs. Job applicants in Long Branch will undergo
testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment.
§ 75-65 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-65
72:177
Procedure:
1. Once a candidate is selected for a position and an offer of
employment is accepted, the candidate will be required to
undergo a pre-employment drug screen within 48 hours of the
job offer. All offers of employment will be conducted by the
Personnel Department and are conditional upon completion of
a drug screening test.
2. Candidates will be instructed by the Personnel Department
where the nearest testing centers are located.
3. Test results will be received by the City's Medical Review
Officer within three business days. Results will be reported to
the Personnel Department at the end of each business day.
4. In the result of a positive test, a confirmation test will then
be conducted by the medical laboratory. If the results of the
confirmation test are positive, the offer of employment will be
rescinded.
5. Supervisors will be notified by the Personnel Department of
the candidate's employment status.
6. A minimum of one week will be required for the above actions
to take place.
§ 75-65 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-65
72:178
ARTICLE V
Benefits for Military Personnel
[Adopted 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
§ 75-66. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide every municipal officer or
employee who is a member of the National Guard or is a reservist in any
branch of the military or naval service of the national government or of
the state, to the extent permitted by N.J.S.A. 38:23-3, with continued salary
during the entire duration of time that such municipal officer or employee is
on any call to active duty, in an amount representing the difference between
the municipal officer's or employee's military pay and his or her municipal
salary. It is also the intention of this article to provide every such officer or
employee with continued health and other applicable benefits, including the
accrual of sick leave, during the entire duration of time that such municipal
officer or employee is on any call to active duty and to require every such
officer or employee to exhaust vacation and personal days which might
otherwise accrue to the officer or employee during the leave period.
§ 75-67. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Duty in the active military service.
ARMED FORCES — The air, land and sea forces established by state or
federal laws as applicable.
MILITARY — Any part of or all of the armed forces.
NATIONAL GUARD — The Army National Guard or the Air National Guard
of the State of New Jersey.
RESERVIST — A member of the reserve component of any branch of the
armed forces of the federal government or the national guard of any other
state.
§ 75-68. General provisions.
The provisions of this article shall apply to:
A. City officers or employees who are members of the national guard.
(1) Any officer or employee of the City of Long Branch who is a
member of the national guard shall be entitled to all of the benefits
afforded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 38A:4-4 pertaining to leaves of
absence, payment of compensation and time earned while said
officer or employee is engaged in any period of state or federal
active duty.
§ 75-66 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-68
72:179
(2) For any period of federal active duty that is in excess of 90 work
days in one calendar year, such municipal officer or employee shall
be entitled to be paid, to the extent permitted by N.J.S.A. 38:23-3,
the difference between the officer's or employee's military pay and
his or her municipal salary on all days for the entire duration of any
call to such active duty.
(3) Any officer or employee of the City of Long Branch who is a
member of the national guard shall also be entitled, to the extent
permitted by N.J.S.A. 38:23-3, to continued health and other
applicable benefits, including the accrual of sick leave, during the
entire duration of time that such municipal officer or employee is
on any call to state or federal active duty and shall be required to
exhaust vacation and personal days which might otherwise accrue
to the officer or employee during the leave period.
B. City officers or employees who are reservists.
(1) Any officer or employee of the City of Long Branch who is a
reservist shall be entitled to all of the benefits afforded pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 38:23-1 pertaining to leaves of absence, payment of
compensation and time earned while said officer or employee is
engaged in any period of federal active duty.
(2) For any period of Federal active duty that is in excess of 30 work
days in one calendar year, such municipal officer or employee shall
be entitled to be paid, to the extent permitted by N.J.S.A. 38:23-3,
the difference between the officer's or employee's military pay and
his or her municipal salary on all work days for the entire duration
of any call to such federal active duty.
(3) Any officer or employee of the City of Long Branch who is a
reservist shall be entitled to be paid, to the extent permitted by
N.J.S.A. 38:23-3, the difference between the officer's or employee's
military pay and his or her municipal salary on all work days for the
entire duration of any call to federal active duty.
(4) Any officer or employee of the City of Long Branch who is a
reservist shall also be entitled, to the extent permitted by N.J.S.A.
38:23-3, to continued health and other applicable benefits,
including the accrual of sick leave, during the entire duration of
time that such municipal officer or employee is on any call to
federal active duty and shall be required to exhaust vacation and
personal days which might otherwise accrue to the officer or
employee during the leave period.
§ 75-68 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-68
72:180
ARTICLE VI
Eligibility for Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 17-08]
§ 75-69. Eligible positions; exemptions.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
(1) The Business Administrator.
(2) All department heads of the City of Long Branch.
(3) City Attorney.
(4) City Engineer.
(5) City Prosecutor.
(6) Court Judge.
B. Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
(1) Certified Health Officer.
(2) Tax Collector.
(3) Chief Financial Officer.
(4) Construction Code Official.
(5) Qualified Purchasing Agent.
(6) Tax Assessor.
(7) City Planner.
(8) Registered City Clerk.
(9) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
(10) Principal Public Works Manager.
C. If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in Subsection
A and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
Subsection B above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
(1) Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement
System on July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
§ 75-69 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-69
72:181
(2) Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
(3) Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in Subsection B herein, and
is in pursuit of the required certification; or
(4) Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
D. This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the
aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as
amended from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents
from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 75-69 LONG BRANCH CODE § 75-69
72:182
ARTICLE VII
Positions Considered Members of UFCW Local 125 Collective
Bargaining Agreement
[Adopted 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 12-11]
§ 75-70. Eligible positions.
The positions of Municipal Clerk, Deputy Municipal Clerk, Secretary to the
Mayor, Clerk Transcriber and Administrative Secretary of the City of Long
Branch be and the same are subject to the economic terms and conditions
of employment as set forth in the contract between the City of Long Branch
and UFCW Local 152 collective bargaining agreement effective April 1,
2011.
§ 75-70 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-70
72:183
Chapter 78
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Personnel — See Ch. 75.
§ 78-1. Establishment; members. [Amended 8-10-1993 by Ord. No.
23-93; 11-9-2000 by Ord. No. 45-00; 9-24-2002 by Ord. No. 42-02;
5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 13-04; 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-17;
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18; 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 8-19]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor is hereby designated as the
"appropriate authority." The Appropriate Authority, or his designee,
shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police
Department and shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for
the government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 or as subsequently revised or
amended, the Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department
and shall be directly responsible to the Appropriate Authority for its
efficiency and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established
by the Appropriate Authority, or his designee, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers;
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department;
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control; and
(5) Report at least monthly to the Appropriate Authority, or his
designee, in such form and at such times as shall be prescribed by
the Appropriate Authority regarding the operation of the Police
Department during the preceding month and make such other
reports as may be requested by the Appropriate Authority, or his
designee.
C. Police Department of the City of Long Branch may consist of the
following:
§ 75-70 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-1
72:184
§ 78-2. Applicants for appointment. [Amended 9-27-1994 by Ord.
No. 47-94; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
All applicants for appointment to the Police Department shall be qualified
for appointment as required by law, ordinance and Civil Service rules and
regulations.
§ 78-3. Divisions; organization; command. [Amended 8-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 40-94; 11-28-2000 by Ord. No. 47-00; 7-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 25-07; 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 8-19]
§ 78-4. Rules and regulations. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
12-18; 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 8-19]
The appropriate authority shall promulgate such rules and regulations as
he deems necessary for the government and efficient working of the Long
Branch Police Department to include, but not be limited to, matters relating
to discipline, training efficiency and use and care of equipment and
apparatus.
(1) One Police Chief.
(2) Four Police Captains.
(3) Seven Police Lieutenants.
(4) Fourteen Police Sergeants.
(5) Sixty-six Patrolmen.
(6) Any such other probationary officers, police matrons, traffic
officers, school traffic officers, officers and employees as the
Council will from time to time authorize.
A. Divisions. For the purpose of administration and efficiency, the Police
Department is divided into four divisions:
(1) Patrol Division.
(2) Investigations Division.
(3) Support Services Division.
(4) Professional Standards Division.
B. Organization. The organization of the Police Department shall be as
promulgated by the appropriate authority, or his designee.
C. Command. The assignment of duties and functions of each of the
divisions of the Police Department shall be as promulgated by the Chief
of Police or his duly authorized designee.
§ 78-1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-5
72:185
§ 78-5. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed a police officer unless he/she is:
§ 78-6. Classifications for appointment.
A. A citizen of the United States.
B. Not less than 18 nor more than 35 years of age. [Amended 6-12-2018
by Ord. No. 12-18]
C. Of sound body and in good health. He/she shall be certified at the City's
expense by the Police Physician that he/she is in good health and that
his/her hearing, eyesight and general physical condition are such that
he/she is physically capable of performing the duties required of him/
her. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
D. Able, to read, write and speak the English language understandably.
E. Of good moral character. No person shall be appointed who has been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude which in the judgment
of the Director of Public Safety would be prejudicial to the morale of the
Police Department.
F. Has successfully completed four years of accredited high school work
or the equivalent thereof of private, vocational or other school credits.
G. Has filed a verified application on forms furnished by the Chief of Police
with all questions answered within the time period fixed by the Chief of
Police. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
H. He/she shall be subject to a psychiatric examination. [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
I. He/she shall comply with the residence requirements adopted by
Council. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
J. If you served in the military service, you must show proof of an
honorable or general discharge. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
12-18]
A. All duly qualified applicants for the position or positions to be filled as a
member of the Police Department of the City of Long Branch shall be
appointed by the following classifications:
(1) Class I: residents of the municipality.
(2) Class II: other residents of the county in which the municipality is
situate.
(3) Class III: other residents of the state.
(4) Class IV: all other qualified applicants.
§ 78-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-6
72:186
§ 78-7. Outside employment. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
12-18]
Police officers shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without the prior approval of the Chief of Police. They
may not engage in any employment or business activity that has any direct
or indirect contract or connection with the City of Long Branch. An
application for permission to accept outside employment shall be made in
writing. The application shall set forth pertinent information concerning the
type of activity to be engaged in, the name and address of the prospective
employer and the hours of such employment. No application for permission
to accept outside employment shall be approved if there is any reasonable
probability that the outside employment will interfere with the police
officer's performance or compromise the police officer's position through a
conflict of interest or if such employment shall exceed 20 hours per week.
B. Within each such classification, duly qualified applicants who are
veterans shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are
provided by law. Persons discharged from the service within six months
prior to making application to such municipality who fulfill the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1 and who, thereby, are entitled to
appointment notwithstanding their failure to meet the New Jersey
residency requirement at the time of their initial application shall be
placed in Class III.
C. All applicants falling in Class I shall be appointed first, and then those in
each succeeding class in the order above listed, and no person shall be
appointed to fill a vacancy until all qualified applicants in the preceding
class or classes have been appointed or have declined an offer of
appointment.
D. Pursuant to the provisions of Title 11 of the Revised Statutes,36 the
classes of qualified applicants defined in Subsection A of this section
shall be considered as separate and successive lists of eligibles, and the
Civil Service Commission shall, when requested to certify eligibles for
positions specified in this section, make such certifications from said
classes separately and successively, and shall certify no person from
any such class until all persons in the preceding class or classes have
been appointed or have declined offers of appointment.
E. This section shall apply only to initial appointments and not to
promotional appointments of persons already members of the Police
Department.
F. In making temporary appointments, the Police Department may utilize
the classifications set forth in Subsection A of this section and shall
certify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the positions to be
temporarily filled.
36.Editor's Note: L. 1986, c. 112 enacted new Title 11A, Civil Service, and repealed former
Title 11, Civil Service. (See N.J.S.A. 11A:12-3.)
§ 78-6 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-8
72:187
§ 78-8. Oath of allegiance.
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his/her duties, take and subscribe an oath to bear true faith
and allegiance to the government established in this state, to support the
Constitution of the United States of America and the State of New Jersey
and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all the duties
of his office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Clerk.
§ 78-9. Day-to-day operations. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
26-90; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
§ 78-10. Police Physician. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
The City Council shall designate a local physician who shall assist in the
official capacity of Police Physician.
§ 78-11. Powers and duties of Department.
The Police Department shall:
A. The Public Safety Director shall be the administrative head of the Police
Department. In the temporary absence or disability of the Director of
Public Safety, the City Business Administrator, or his duly authorized
designee, shall act in the Director of Public Safety's place.
B. The control and discipline of the Police Department and of its members
and responsibility and control of the day-to-day operations of the
Department shall be vested in the Chief of Police.
C. The Chief of Police, with the assistance of other members of the
Department who shall be detailed for this purpose, shall keep
comprehensive records of the work of the Department in such form and
detail as required by its rules and regulations.
A. Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the city, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections,
unlawful or dangerous assemblages and preserve order at all elections
and public meetings and assemblages.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, control and
restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the use of
the streets by vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and facilitate
the convenience of motorists and pedestrians and to make and enforce
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances and
resolutions of the city for such purpose.
C. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the city; and inspect and observe all
places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
§ 78-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-11
72:188
§ 78-12. Fingerprint fees. [Amended 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 30-94;
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
The Records Bureau of the Police Department shall direct members of the
general public that request to be fingerprinted to the State of New Jersey
approved vendor, IdentoGO by Morpho Trust, for any services.
§ 78-13. Special law enforcement officers. [Amended 4-25-1995 by
Ord. No. 18-95; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 6-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 12-18]
requiring any state or municipal license or permit and report thereon
to the appropriate department.
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
E. Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the
prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of
federal, state and county governments.
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
A. Any local unit may, as it deems necessary, appoint special law
enforcement officers sufficient to perform the duties and
responsibilities permitted by local ordinances authorized by N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 or ordinance or resolution, as appropriate, authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-106 and within the conditions and limitations as may be
established pursuant to this act.
B. A person shall not be appointed as a special law enforcement officer
unless the person:
(1) Is a citizen of the United States of America;
(2) Is a resident of this state during the term of appointment;
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(4) Is sound in body and of good health;
(5) Is of good moral character;
(6) Has not been convicted of any crime or offense involving
dishonesty or which would make him unfit to perform the duties of
his office;
(7) Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers in the municipality or county
or, with regard to a special law enforcement officer hired for a
seasonal period by a resort municipality which requires
§ 78-11 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-13
72:189
psychological testing of its full-time police officers, has successfully
undergone a program of psychological testing approved by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission.
C. Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to this act shall have fingerprints taken, which
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. No person shall be appointed to serve as a special law enforcement
officer in more than one local unit at the same time, nor shall any
permanent, regularly appointed full-time police officer of any local unit
be appointed as a special law enforcement officer in any local unit. No
public official with responsibility for setting law enforcement policy or
exercising authority over the budget of the local unit or supervision of
the Police Department of a local unit shall be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer.
E. Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed pursuant to this
act, the Chief of Police, or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law
enforcement officer of the local unit shall ascertain the eligibility and
qualifications of the applicant and report these determinations, in
writing, to the appointing authority.
F. In addition to the qualifications established in Subsection B of this
section, a person shall not be appointed as a Class Three special law
enforcement officer unless the person:
(1) Is a retired law enforcement officer who is less than 65 years of
age; for the purposes of this subsection, a law enforcement officer
shall not be considered retired if the officer's return to employment
violates any federal or state law or regulation which would deem
the officer's retirement as not being bona fide;
(2) Had served as a duly qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in any
municipality or county of this state or as a member of the State
Police and was separated from that prior service in good standing,
within three years of appointment, except during the first year
following the effective date of P.L. 2016, c. 68, was separated from
that prior service within five years of appointment;
(3) Is physically capable of performing the functions of the position,
determined in accordance with Police Training Commission
guidelines;
(4) Possesses a New Jersey Police Training Commission Basic Police
Officer Certification or New Jersey State Police Academy
Certification;
(5) Has completed the training course for safe schools resource
officers developed pursuant to Subsection a of Section 2 of P.L.
2005, c. 276 (N.J.S.A. 52:17B-71.8); and
§ 78-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-13
72:190
(6) Is hired in a part-time capacity.
For the purposes of this subsection, "good standing" shall exclude
a retirement resulting from injury or incapacity.
G. A person shall not commence the duties of a special law enforcement
officer unless the person has successfully completed a training course
approved by the New Jersey Police Training Commission, and a special
law enforcement officer shall not be issued a firearm unless the officer
has successfully completed the basic firearms course approved by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission for permanent, regularly
appointed police and annual re-qualification examinations as required
by Subsection b of Section 7 of P.L. 1985, c. 439 (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14). There shall be three classifications for special police
officers. The New Jersey Police Training Commission shall prescribe by
rule or regulation the training standards to be established for each
classification. Training may be in a New Jersey Police Training
Commission approved academy or in any other training program which
the New Jersey Police Training Commission may determine
appropriate. The classifications shall be based upon the duties to be
performed by the special law enforcement officer as follows:
(1) Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform
routine traffic detail, spectator control, and similar duties. If
authorized by ordinance or resolution, as appropriate, Class One
officers shall have the power to issue summonses for disorderly
persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of
municipal ordinances, and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be
strictly prohibited, and a Class One officer shall not be assigned
any duties which may require the carrying or use of a firearm.
(2) Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer
of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission.
(3) Class Three. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise
full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer while providing security at a
public or nonpublic school or a county college on the school or
college premises during hours when the public or nonpublic school
or county college is normally in session or when it is occupied by
public or nonpublic school or county college students or their
teachers or professors. While on duty in the jurisdiction of
employment, an officer may respond to offenses or emergencies off
school or college grounds if they occur in the officer's presence
while traveling to a school facility or county college, but an officer
§ 78-13 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-13
72:191
shall not otherwise be dispatched or dedicated to any assignment
off school or college property.
H. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be authorized
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection b of Section 7 of P.L. 1985, c.
439 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14). An officer of this class shall not be
authorized to carry a firearm while off duty unless the officer complies
with the requirements set forth in Subsection 1 of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6,
authorizing a retired law enforcement officer to carry a handgun.
(1) The New Jersey Police Training Commission may, in its discretion,
except from the requirements of this section any person who
demonstrates to the New Jersey Police Training Commission's
satisfaction that the person has successfully completed a police
training course conducted by any federal, state or other public or
private agency, the requirements of which are substantially
equivalent to the requirements of this act.
(2) The New Jersey Police Training Commission shall certify officers
who have satisfactorily completed training programs and issue
appropriate certificates to those officers. The certificate shall
clearly state the category of certification for which the officer has
been certified by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
(3) All special law enforcement officers appointed and in service on the
effective date of this act may continue in service if within 24
months of the effective date of this act they will have completed all
training and certification requirements of this act.
I. Every special law enforcement officer prior to the commencement of his
duties shall be furnished with a uniform which shall identify the
officer's function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat
and appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or
name tag and the name of the local unit in which the officer is
employed. The uniform shall also include an insignia issued by the New
Jersey Police Training Commission which clearly indicates the officer's
status as a special law enforcement officer and the type of certification
issued.
(1) Special law enforcement officers may be appointed for terms not to
exceed one year, and the appointments may be revoked by the local
unit for cause after adequate hearing, unless the appointment is for
four months or less, in which event the appointment may be
revoked without cause or hearing. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require reappointment upon the expiration of the
term. The special law enforcement officers so appointed shall not
be members of the police force of the local unit, and their powers
and duties as determined pursuant to this act shall cease at the
expiration of the term for which appointed.
(2) No special law enforcement officer may carry a firearm except
while engaged in the actual performance of the officer's official
§ 78-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-13
72:192
duties and when specifically authorized by the Chief of Police, or,
in the absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement officer
of the local unit to carry a firearm and provided that the officer
has satisfactorily completed the basic firearms course required
by the New Jersey Police Training Commission for regular police
officers and annual re-qualification examinations as required for
permanent, regularly appointed full-time officers in the local unit.
(3) A special law enforcement officer shall be deemed to be on duty
only while he is performing the public safety functions on behalf of
the local unit pursuant to this act and when he is receiving
compensation, if any, from the local unit at the rates or stipends as
shall be established by ordinance. A special law enforcement
officer shall not be deemed to be on duty for purposes of this act
while performing private security duties for private employers,
which duties are not assigned by the Chief of Police, or, in the
absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement officer of the
local unit, or while receiving compensation for those duties from a
private employer. A special law enforcement officer may, however,
be assigned by the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief,
other chief law enforcement officer, to perform public safety
functions for a private entity if the Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer supervises the performance of the public safety
functions.
(4) Any firearm utilized by a special law enforcement officer shall be
returned at the end of the officer's workday to the officer in charge
of the station house, unless the firearm is owned by the special law
enforcement officer and was acquired in compliance with a
condition of employment established by the local unit. Any special
law enforcement officer first appointed after the effective date of
this act shall only use a firearm supplied by the local unit.
(5) A special law enforcement officer shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief,
other chief law enforcement officer of the local unit wherein the
officer is appointed, and shall perform his duties only in the local
unit except when in fresh pursuit of any person pursuant to
Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes or when
authorized to perform duties in another unit pursuant to a mutual
aid agreement enacted in accordance with Section 1 of P.L. 1976, c.
45 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1).
(6) The officer shall comply with the standard operating procedures
and rules and regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of
the permanent, regularly appointed police officers of the City of
Long Branch Police Department, as well as any rules and
regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of special law
enforcement officers.
§ 78-13 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-13
72:193
§ 78-14. Hours of employment.
The hours of employment of uniformed members of the Police Department
shall not exceed eight consecutive hours in any one day nor 40 hours in
any one week, provided that in case of an emergency, the officer, board or
other official having charge or control of the Police Department or the police
system shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all
such members during the period of emergency.
§ 78-15. Removal and suspension.
(7) Notwithstanding any provision of P.L. 1985, c. 439 (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq.), to the contrary, a special law enforcement
officer may travel through another local unit to reach a
noncontiguous area of the local unit in which his appointment was
issued or to transport persons to and from a correctional facility.
J. The Chief of Police, or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law
enforcement officer of the local unit wherein the officer is appointed,
may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty to
exercise the same powers and authority as permanent, regularly
appointed police officers of the local unit, including, but not limited to,
the carrying of firearms and the power of arrest, subject to rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the certification requirements of this
act, as may be established by local ordinance or resolution, as
appropriate, adopted by the appropriate authority of the local unit in
which they are employed.
K. Special law enforcement officers shall be assigned as needed by the
Chief of Police or designee.
L. Class I officers shall be empowered to direct traffic, handle crowd/
spectator control and be empowered to issue summonses for petty
disorderly persons offenses, as well as traffic and City ordinance
violations.
M. All special law enforcement officers shall receive training as prescribed
by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
N. All compensation for special law enforcement officers shall be set
annually through the City's salary ordinance.
A. Each regular police officer shall hold office and continue in employment
during good behavior, efficiency and compliance with applicable
residence requirements in the city, and no person shall be removed
from office or employment for any cause other than physical or mental
incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, nonresidence where residence
is required, conduct unbecoming a police officer, disobedience of the
rules and regulations established or hereafter established for the
Department or absence from duty without just cause for five days or
more.
§ 78-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-15
72:194
§ 78-16. Appointment and promotions. [Amended 9-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 41-94; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
All applicants for appointment to or for promotion within the Police
Department shall be qualified for appointment or promotion as required by
law, ordinance and Civil Service rules and regulations.
§ 78-17. Psychological testing. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
12-18]
Each member of the Police Department may, at the request of the Chief of
Police or his duly authorized designee, within three years from the date of
this enactment of this section and once every five years thereafter, undergo
a psychological examination; said examination shall be performed in the
same manner as that administered at the time of hiring of said officer.
In the event that, as a result of said examination, it is determined that
such member of the Long Branch Police Department is unable to fulfill the
obligations and duties of a member thereof, said individual shall be subject
to temporary or permanent suspension or removal.
§ 78-18. Chaplain of the Police Department. [Amended 6-12-2019
by Ord. No. 8-19]
B. If in the judgment of the Chief of Police a member of the regular police
force shows deviation from normal physical or mental health, the Chief
of Police may require said individual to undergo individual
psychological or physical examinations as to aid in determining the
individual's physical or emotional capacity. Before an individual is
ordered to submit to a psychological examination, he/she is entitled to a
statement of the reasons for said examination and to a hearing, if
requested. The New Jersey State Civil Service Law and the Civil Service
Rules of the State of New Jersey applicable to municipalities shall
provide the basic framework for the procedures to be utilized in
connection with such hearings. Any member of the Department may be
suspended, removed, fined or reduced from his office or employment
for just cause upon due notice and service of written charges and a
hearing. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
A. Establishment of office, The Office of Chaplain of the Police Department
of the City of Long Branch is hereby established.
B. Appointment. All Chaplains of the Police Department shall be appointed
by the appropriate authority. Upon appointment, all Chaplains shall
become members of the Police Department of the City of Long Branch,
with or without rank, as designated by the governing body.
C. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed a Chaplain of the Police
Department unless he shall be an ordained clergyman in good standing
in the religious body from which he is selected.
§ 78-15 PARKING AUTHORITY § 78-18
72:195
§ 78-19. Responsibilities of Chief. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No.
26-90; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
§ 78-20. Parking Enforcement Officers; establishment of position.
[Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 98-89; amended 6-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 12-18; 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 8-19]
There is hereby established within the City of Long Branch the position of
Parking Enforcement Officer. All Parking Enforcement Officers of the City
of Long Branch shall be appointed by the appropriate authority following
certification of the eligibility and qualifications of an applicant for such
position by the Chief of Police.
D. Salary. The salary of the Office of Chaplain, if any, shall be fixed by the
governing body and shall be payable in the same manner as in the case
of other members of the Police Department.
E. Terms of office. The term of office shall be as designated by the
governing body. However, any Chaplain may be removed or suspended
from office by the appropriate authority for any of the following
reasons: incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, nonresidence where
residence is required, conduct unbecoming a chaplain, disobedience of
the rules or regulations established or hereafter established for the
Department or absence from duty without just cause for five days or
more.
A. The Chief of Police is the chief executive officer of the Department and
the final departmental authority in all matters of policy, operations and
discipline. He exercises all lawful powers of his office and issues such
lawful orders as are necessary to assure the effective performance of
the Department.
B. Responsibility. Through the Chief of Police, the Department is
responsible for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances coming
within its legal jurisdiction. He is responsible for planning, directing,
coordinating, controlling and staffing all activities of the Department,
for its continued and efficient operation, for the enforcement of rules
and regulations within the Department, for the completion and
forwarding of such reports as may be required by competent authority,
and for the Department's relations with the citizens of the City, the City
government and other agencies.
A. Minimum qualifications. No person may be appointed as a Parking
Enforcement Officer unless, at a minimum, the person:
(1) Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during the term of
appointment and at least 18 yearsold;
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
(3) Is of sound mind and in good health;
§ 78-18 LONG BRANCH CODE § 78-20
72:196
Chapter 84
SELF INSURANCE FUND
(4) Is of good moral character; and
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make the person unfit to perform the duties of his
office.
B. Power and authority of office.
(1) Parking Enforcement Officers appointed pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this section shall enforce state, county and municipal
statutes, resolutions, ordinances and regulations relating to the
parking of vehicles within the City of Long Branch. In addition,
Parking Enforcement Officers shall possess the power and
authority to:
(a) Issue a parking ticket for a parking offense, as those two terms
are defined in the Parking Offenses Adjudication Act, (N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.2) et seq.;
(b) Serve and execute all process for any parking offenses issuing
out of the Municipal Court of the City of Long Branch; and
(c) Cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in the City of
Long Branch in violation of a state statute, county or municipal
resolution, ordinance or regulation to be towed away from the
scene of the violation and to collect from the vehicle owner or
the owner's agent, on behalf of the City, the cost of the towing
and subsequent storage of the vehicle before surrendering the
vehicle to the owner or agent.
(2) A Parking Enforcement Officer appointed pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall not be considered a special law
enforcement officer within the meaning of the Special Law
Enforcement Officers' Act (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.), and is not
a member of the Long Branch Police Department. No Parking
Enforcement Officer may carry or use a firearm while on duty. A
Parking Enforcement Officer is deemed to be on duty while the
officer is performing the public safety functions enumerated in
Subsection B(1) hereinabove.
C. Completion of training course. No person appointed after the effective
date of this chapter may commence duties as a Parking Enforcement
Officer unless the person has successfully completed a training course
conducted or approved by the City. The City Council, in its sole
discretion, may waive this training requirement for any person
otherwise eligible to be appointed as a Parking Enforcement Officer if
the person possesses substantially equivalent training and background
as determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 78-20 SELF INSURANCE FUND § 84-1
84:197
§ 84-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the City of Long Branch the Long Branch Self
Insurance Fund.
§ 84-2. Purposes.
The Fund established in § 84-1 herein shall be for the following purposes:
§ 84-3. Appropriations.
The Mayor and City Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary
to accomplish the purposes for which the Long Branch Self Insurance Fund
is established.
§ 84-4. Amount and disposition of funds. [Amended 6-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 14-91]
§ 84-5. Appointment of Commissioners; terms of office;
compensation.
Upon adoption of the Fund, the Mayor shall appoint three officials of the
city, who may be members of the governing body, to serve as Insurance
Fund Commissioners. He shall also appoint a person to serve as Secretary
to the Commission. The Commissioners shall hold office for two years or
the remainder of their term of office as officials, whichever shall be less,
A. To insure against any loss or damage however caused to any property,
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by it or owned by or
under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
B. To insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by it or owned
by or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
C. To insure against liability for its negligence and that of its officers,
employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who
are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an
independent contractor within the limitations of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.), including public officials liability.
A. Beginning in the 1991 budget year the Mayor and City Council shall
appropriate for the Self Insurance Fund the amount of moneys they
deem appropriate to accomplish the purposes for which the Long
Branch Self Insurance Fund is established.
B. The Mayor and City Council may from time to time provide for the
disposition of any excess over and above the maximum amount fixed
herein or of the interest or profits arising therefrom when the Fund
shall have reached the maximum limit.
§ 84-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 84-5
84:198
and until their successors shall have been duly appointed and qualified.
The Commissioners shall serve without compensation. The salary of the
Secretary shall be set by the salary ordinance authorized by the City
Council.
§ 84-6. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the office of Insurance Fund Commissioners caused by any
reason other than expiration of term as an official shall be filled for the
unexpired term. Vacancies in the position of Secretary shall be filled in the
manner of the original appointment.
§ 84-7. Powers and duties.
A. The Commissioners shall have the following powers and authority:
(1) Employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall be
fixed and paid by the City Council in the same manner as is that of
other employees of the local unit.
(2) Invest the Fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as they shall deem best suited for the purposes of this
section.
(3) Adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the
Fund.
(4) Keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the same
invested in such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for
the payment of losses to any buildings or property of the local unit
or liability resulting from the operation of publicly owned motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus.
(5) Fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the
Insurance Fund, and shall effect all insurance in the Insurance
Fund or with any insurance company or companies authorized to
do business in this state.
B. Premiums for insurance, whether in the Insurance Fund or placed with
insurance companies, shall be paid to the Commissioners by the board,
commission, department, committee or officer having charge or control
of the property insured.
C. All insurance upon property owned or controlled by a local unit or any
of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions shall be placed
and effected by the Commissioners.
D. If provided by the rules and regulations of the Commission, the
Secretary to the Insurance Fund Commission shall be entrusted with
the daily operation of the Insurance Fund and shall submit a report to
the Commissioners at least once a month.
§ 84-5 SELF INSURANCE FUND § 84-7
84:199
Chapter 87
SENIOR CITIZEN AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 87-1. Director to head Department.
There shall be a Department of Senior Citizen Affairs, the head of which
shall be the Director of Senior Citizen Affairs. Subject to the supervision and
direction of the Mayor, the Director shall supervise and direct the work of
the Department.
§ 87-2. Powers and duties of Department.
The functions of the Department shall relate to the planning, operation
and coordination of senior citizen programs and activities. The Department,
subject to the Charter and ordinances, shall:
§ 87-3. Powers and duties of Director.
There shall be a full-time Director of Department of Senior Citizen Affairs,
who shall:
A. Establish and develop a senior center which shall be available to all
seniors to serve as the focal point and base from which a
comprehensive range of services and programs are conducted.
B. Obtain the use of a senior citizen van or similar type vehicle for the
transportation of elderly residents of the city.
C. Provide outreach to homebound seniors in the form of liaison services
with health and social service facilities and organizations.
D. Provide information and referral services to senior citizens for state and
federal assistance programs.
E. Offer educational and recreational programs and functions which will
provide participants with creative outlets which are challenging and
enjoyable.
F. Provide transportation services to senior citizens to assist in day-to-day
living requirements, including food shopping, banking and medical
attention needs.
G. Offer such other services as the Director shall deem necessary in order
to meet the needs of the senior citizen members of the city.
A. Administer the work of the Department with the assistance of such
policy guides as may be established by ordinance.
B. Supervise the operation of the the Long Branch senior center and the
activities of all persons utilizing such facility.
§ 84-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 87-3
87:200
§ 87-4. Rules and regulations.
The Department may adopt suitable rules and regulations for the safety and
conduct of persons using recreational facilities and for the preservation of
public peace and order at public events under its jurisdiction.
Chapter 90
SEWAGE AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street excavations by Sewerage
Authority — See Ch. 297, § 297-43.
Copies of major subdivision preliminary plat
to Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 300, § 300-7.
§ 90-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established a Sewerage Authority for the
City of Long Branch, under the corporate name and title of "Long Branch
Sewerage Authority." The Long Branch Sewerage Authority shall have and
exercise all of the powers conferred by N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.
§ 90-2. Members; term of office.
There shall be five members of the authority appointed by resolution of the
Council for terms of five years commencing February 1 next following their
appointment.
§ 90-3. Powers and duties.
The Long Branch Sewerage Authority shall have all of the powers and duties
and shall discharge the functions prescribed in and by N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et
seq.
Chapter 94
C. Assist the administration in the fulfillment of goals and objectives of the
Department.
D. Recommend to the city certain programs, activities, improvements and
matters of importance which will benefit the city's senior citizens, as
well as alleviate problem areas of concern to those city residents who
are senior citizens.
E. Identify senior citizens residing in the city.
F. Maintain records as may be required to control departmental receipts,
property and personnel, to evaluate programs and to provide
information for budgeting, public reporting, planning and financing of
programs.
§ 87-3 SEWAGE AUTHORITY § 90-3
90:201
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 94-1. Authority granted.
The City of Long Branch is hereby authorized to act as an incorporator
to create a nonprofit organization to be known as the "Enterprise Zone
Development Corporation of Long Branch," and the Business Administrator
is hereby authorized to execute a Certificate of Incorporation containing
provisions authorized by and consistent with this chapter.
§ 94-2. Purpose.
The purpose to be included in the Certificate of Incorporation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. shall include the following:
A. To formulate and propose a Preliminary Zone Development Plan
pursuant to the Enterprise Zone Act and prepare, monitor, administer
and implement the Zone Development Plan.
B. To utilize the powers conferred by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zone Act for the purpose of stimulating investment in and economic
development of the proposed enterprise zone.
C. To utilize state assistance through the provisions of the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act relating to exemptions from and credits
against state taxes.
D. To secure the involvement in and commitment to zone economic
development by private entities, including zone neighborhood
associations and voluntary community organizations supported by
residents and businesses in said enterprise zone.
E. To make recommendations for the revision of municipal planning and
zoning ordinances and other land use regulations as they pertain to the
Enterprise Zone for the City of Long Branch so that the city may use the
powers conferred by law to enhance the attractions of the Enterprise
Zone to prospective developers.
F. To increase the availability and efficiency of support services, public
and private, generally used by and necessary to the efficient
functioning of commercial and industrial facilities in the area, to the
extent to which the increase of improvement is to be provided and
financed by the City of Long Branch or by other entities.
G. To take such additional action, not inconsistent with the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act, as the Board of Directors of the Enterprise
§ 90-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 94-2
90:202
§ 94-3. Members of Board. [Amended 12-13-1994 by Ord. No.
57-94]
§ 94-4. Duration of Corporation.
The duration of the Corporation shall be for a period of time as permitted
by N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
§ 94-5. Directors to develop bylaws; Enterprise Zone Administrator;
term of office; additional personnel. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord.
No. 18-06]
The Directors of the Corporation shall develop bylaws for the Corporation,
which shall be approved by the City Council of the City of Long Branch,
and shall include an executive officer to be known as the "Enterprise
Zone Administrator." The Board shall develop qualifications for the Zone
Administrator and shall thereafter appoint an Administrator who meets said
qualifications. The Zone Administrator shall serve at the discretion of the
Mayor and City Council. The Board may thereafter reappoint the same
individual as Zone Administrator for successive terms, provided that no
term shall exceed four years. The Board shall also hire such other persons,
including professional persons, as may be necessary for the efficient
operation of the Enterprise Zone Corporation.
§ 94-6. Voting.
All ordinary business conducted by the Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation shall be approved by a simple majority of the Board members
who are present at any regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors.
However, amendments to the Zone Development Corporation's bylaws,
modification of zone boundaries, proposals for projects to receive money
from the Zone Assistance Fund, the hiring of an Enterprise Zone
Zone Development Corporation deemed necessary for the development,
administration and coordination of activities in the Enterprise Zone for
the benefit of zone businesses and community organizations within said
Enterprise Zone, for the ultimate purpose of the economic betterment
of the residences and said Zone and the participating municipalities.
A. The Board of Directors of the Urban Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation shall consist of nine members as follows: All of the above
shall be appointed by the Long Branch City Council who shall serve on a
nonsalaried basis. All members must be a resident of the City of Long
Branch or have a bona fide business within the City of Long Branch.
B. Two alternates are to be selected and shall serve in the absence of a
regular member.37 [Added 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 18-06]
37.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 16-06 provided that the Board of Directors recommended a
change to the bylaws to authorize alternate members to ensure a quorum at regular or
monthly meetings.
§ 94-2 SEWAGE AUTHORITY § 94-6
90:203
Administrator and the hiring of professional, technical and consultant
personnel shall require the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the entire Board of
Directors.
§ 94-7. Certificate of Incorporation.
The Certificate of Incorporation shall also contain the name and addresses
of the first Board of Directors of the Corporation and such additional
information as may be required by the New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation
Act.
§ 94-8. Fees. [Added 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 48-98]
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 100
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Automatic fire and smoke detection systems
in boardinghouses — See Ch. 123, § 123-8.
Rapid-entry system in residences and
businesses — See Ch. 173, § 173-8.
Failure of fire alarm system — See Ch. 200,
§ 200-16.
A. Individual design kits, consisting of Facade Concepts and Regulations;
Drawing Customers to your Business; Signage; Advertising 24 Hours a
Day; and Renovation and New Construction, are available at the rate of
$4 per kit or $15 for all four kits.
B. The Revitalization Plan for Broadway is allowed to be purchased by the
public at a cost of $35 per copy.
§ 94-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 94-8
100:204
ARTICLE I
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. 14-88]
§ 100-1. Definitions.
The words and terms as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
5:10-21 et seq. are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 100-2. Single-family and two-family dwellings.
§ 100-3. Hotels, motels, rooming or boarding homes and
multifamily dwellings.
Every owner, tenant or occupant of a hotel, motel, rooming or boarding
home or multifamily dwelling shall comply with all rules, regulations,
obligations and responsibilities pertaining to the installation, maintenance
and repair of smoke detectors and smoke alarms as required in N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:10-25.1 et seq., which are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 100-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this article shall be
subject to a minimum fine per violation for a first offense of § 100-2 of this
article of $250. The minimum fine for a second offense of § 100-2 shall be
$500. The minimum fine for a third offense of § 100-2 shall be $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge.
A. Each single- or two-family dwelling in the City of Long Branch shall
have installed therein a minimum of one single station or batteryoperated
smoke detector/alarm installed and maintained on each level
of the home and within 10 feet of each sleeping area within the
dwelling. The detectors in these dwellings must meet the minimum
requirements of the appropriate National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) standard upon sale or change of use. [Amended 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 10-99]
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of an owner-occupied singlefamily
dwelling and the responsibility of the residents (tenants or
occupants) of a two-family dwelling to inspect and clean all smoke
detector/alarm units located in their residence and replace batteries
therein at least annually or as otherwise required per the
manufacturer's printed recommendations.
C. The owner, tenant or occupant of a one- or two-family dwelling unit
shall perform a monthly testing of the detector/alarm units and
maintain them as per the manufacturer's recommendations.
§ 100-1 ALARMS § 100-4
100:205

ARTICLE II
Alarm Systems
[Adopted 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 44-95]
§ 100-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions will have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM — Any alarm placed by any means or any alarm transmitted to
police headquarters via any means.
§ 100-6. Registration; fee.
A. Any person who desires to own, operate, lease or maintain an alarm
system in the city shall file a registration application, in writing, with
the Fire Official of the City of Long Branch on a form provided by the
Fire Prevention Bureau. The application shall contain at least the
location of the alarm system, the name and address of the installer of
the device, the type of device, information relating to false alarms and
the method of resetting the system and test procedures; a list of names,
addresses and telephone numbers of persons to be contacted in the
event of alarm, at least one of whom shall have an address of and phone
number different than the registrant; and such other information as
may be required by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Fire alarm systems
having key pad controls shall use the code "1325" for the reset feature.
It shall be the registrant's affirmative obligation to file a written
amendment with the Fire Official within 10 days of the change of any
information contained in the registration application.
B. The Fire Official shall issue a registration certificate for ownership,
operation or maintenance of an alarm system to any person desiring to
own, operate, lease or maintain an alarm system if the Fire Official is
satisfied that the registration information is complete and that the
alarm system is capable of being operated in conformance with this
article. The registration certificate may be granted subject to any
special conditions stated thereon, if this is deemed necessary by the
Fire Official.
C. A registration certificate shall be valid for as long as the registrant
occupies the premises for which the certificate has been issued,
provided that all required amendments thereto have been filed. A
registration certificate shall automatically terminate upon a change in
occupancy for the premises for which the certificate was issued.
D. A fee of $10 will be charged for the registration of each system. A
change in ownership or tenant will require a new registration and fee.
§ 100-5 ALARMS § 100-7
100:207
§ 100-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any person who owns, operates,
leases or maintains any alarm system situated in the city if the alarm system
has an audible signaling device or a device which requires a response by
the Fire Department or other city agency. The provisions to this article shall
in no way prohibit any person or entity authorized to do so from providing
service by private source to persons within or without the city, so long as
such activity is not in violation of this article, and provided further that
any person owning, operating, leasing or maintaining a premises protected
by an alarm system shall be responsible for the registration thereof in
accordance with this article.
§ 100-8. Maintenance.
All components of an alarm system shall be maintained in good repair and
shall operate in a proper manner. When evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with the maintenance and operation requirements of this
section, the Fire Official shall then be authorized to demand that such alarm
system be restored in good working condition, in a reasonable time.
§ 100-9. Malfunction and disconnection.
The Fire Official shall have the right to disconnect any malfunctioning
equipment from any alarm system until such time as the malfunction has
been corrected and the alarm system is operating in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 100-10. Rule-making authority.
The Fire Official shall have the authority to promulgate written rules and
regulations, subject to the approval by a resolution adopted by the Mayor
and Council of the city, which rules and regulations shall supplement this
article, and provide for recordkeeping and the efficient operation and
management of alarm systems in the city.
§ 100-11. False alarm; violations and penalties.
In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Department in a manner to be prescribed by the Fire
Official. In addition, in case of false alarms, the Fire Official shall cause an
investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said alarm on file. For
such false alarms, the following minimum penalties are prescribed:
A. For the first, second and third false alarm in any given calendar year, a
warning shall be issued.
B. For the fourth or any subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, a summons will be issued, and a fine set forth in the following
schedule shall be paid to the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(1) For the fourth false alarm: $25.
§ 100-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 100-11
100:208
(2) For the fifth false alarm: $50.
(3) For the sixth false alarm: $100.
(4) For the seventh false alarm: $150.
(5) For the eighth and subsequent false alarm: $200.
C. Where the investigation of the Fire Official discloses a continued
disregard by the owner for remedial steps for avoiding false alarm, or
for continued failure to maintain or operate an alarm system, the Fire
Official shall have the right to assess daily penalties of $200 under the
provisions of the New Jersey State Uniformed Fire Code. The owner
shall be given an opportunity to show cause before the Fire Official why
such action should not be taken. A person aggrieved by the decision of
the Fire Official shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
Director of Public Safety.
D. Any unauthorized equipment pertaining to an alarm system may be
ordered to be disconnected by the Fire Official for noncompliance with
this section. Any placing, installing or maintaining unauthorized
equipment or failing to file a required registration application or
amendment thereto shall be in violation of this section and shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $100, which shall be paid to the City of
Long Branch Bureau of Fire Safety. Each day such equipment is
installed or maintained shall be considered a separate violation. Any
person placing, installing or maintaining any alarm system shall be
deemed as having consented to inspection of the premises on which the
alarm system is installed or maintained at reasonable hours by the Fire
Official or his designated representative.
§ 100-11 ALARMS § 100-11
100:209
Chapter 103
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See § 218-7.
Parks — See § 247-3.
Alcoholic beverage licenses or permits — See
§ 306-3.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the City of Long Branch in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.38
§ 103-2. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this chapter shall be in accordance with the acts,
rules and regulations referred to in § 103-1 and all other applicable
laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by
the Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the City without having obtained a license in accordance with
the act referred to in § 103-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
D. Fingerprinting required. Each individual applicant for an alcoholic
beverage license and the officers, directors and stockholders, including
the officers, directors and stockholders of any corporation holding more
than 10% of the capital stock or outstanding indebtedness of any
corporate applicant, and any individual other than an officer, director of
members of any partnership, association or organization application,
shall be fingerprinted under the direction of the Chief of Police and pay
that amount charged by the state or federal agency for a fingerprint
inquiry where such an inquiry is permitted by law, which shall be paid
by certified check or money order payable to the agency. Upon receipt
of a report from both federal and state agencies, the Chief of Police will
38.Editor's Note: Laws concerning alcoholic beverage control are contained in Title 33 of the
Revised Statutes. All ordinances must be in conformity with these provisions and approved
by the Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40. State law prescribes the
types of licenses that may be issued, their number, permissible license fees and the
regulations of licensed premises, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
§ 100-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-2
100:210
§ 103-3. Fees; maximum number of licenses.
§ 103-4. Limitations on location.
report to the Director of Public Safety, who shall report to the City
Council any arrests or conviction record pertaining to any crime. A
"crime" is any offense that is a violation of Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes, including disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons
offenses, or an offense committed in New Jersey prior to 1979 or
outside of New Jersey that would constitute a crime under Title 2C
of the New Jersey Statutes. The report shall also advise whether the
applicant has violated the provisions of any act, rule or regulation
affecting the sale of alcoholic beverages, drugs, narcotics or otherwise
or the operation of games in which the primary element determining
the outcome is chance. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
E. Change in corporate structure. When a change in the corporation
stockholdings of a license corporation occurs, that change must be
reported to the issuing authority within 10 days after the sale of the
corporation's shares. This action does not constitute a transfer, but is
handled as a change in the corporate structure. If the change
encompasses 1/3 or more of the total number of issued shares, the
change must be reported by the filing of a complete twelve-page
application form. If the change constitutes less than 1/3 of the total
issued shares, the change is reported by amending the last application
on file by filing new pages to reflect the changes. Any new stockholder
must be fully qualified as an individual to hold an alcoholic beverage
license and must be investigated by the issuing authority.
A. Fees. The fees for licenses shall be as follows: [Amended 10-27-1998
by Ord. No. 36-98; 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 20-10; 2-26-2020 by
Ord. No. 10-20]
(1) Plenary retail consumption license: $1,030.
(2) Season retail consumption license: $720.
(3) Plenary retail distribution license: $760.
(4) Club license: $188.
B. Limitation on number of licenses.
(1) The maximum number of licenses issued and outstanding in the
City at any time, for the classes set forth, shall be as follows:
(a) Plenary retail consumption license: 50.
(b) Plenary retail distribution license: seven.
(2) The foregoing limitations shall not apply to bona fide hotels having
100 or more sleeping rooms.
§ 103-2 ALARMS § 103-4
100:211
A. Seasonal license. The seasonal license shall be issued for any premises
east of Second Avenue in the City other than for bona fide hotels having
100 rooms or more. [Amended 10-23-2019 by Ord. No. 17-19]
B. Proximity to existing license location. A license for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the licensed premises,
excepting renewal licenses for the same premises which have been
previously licensed and transferred from person to person, shall not be
granted or transferred to other premises within 1, 000 feet of any
existing licensed premises in any zone in which liquor stores, bars and
night clubs, restaurants or eating and drinking establishments are
nonpermitted uses. The distances shall be measured in the same
manner as that required by statute for the measuring of businesses
between licensed premises, schools and churches. [Amended
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 21-04; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04;
10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 22-08; 10-23-2019 by Ord. No. 17-19]
C. Exceptions. [Added 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 22-08]
(1) An exception to the one-thousand-foot distance requirement shall
apply to restaurants. "Restaurants" shall be defined in accordance
with the definition found in § 103-5G.
(2) The following requirements shall apply to restaurants for purposes
of this exception:
(a) The total number of seats at the bar shall not exceed 15% of
the total number of seats in the restaurant for the service of
meals.
(b) At a minimum, 75% of the usable floor area of the premises
must be devoted to the service of meals.
(c) No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the restaurant
premises by any patron at any time, and no package good sales
are permitted.
(d) The restaurant shall contain separate restroom facilities for
men and women.
(e) The restaurant must be a full-service restaurant furnishing
complete meals, i.e., dinners with appetizers, main entree and
dessert.
(f) The sale of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted
between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. prevailing time,
and no consumption shall be permitted within the restaurant
after 1:30 a.m. and prior to 11:00 a.m., prevailing time, and
notwithstanding the above, only during those hours when the
service of food is available.
§ 103-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-4
100:212
§ 103-5. Hours of sale.
The hours and times when sale of alcoholic beverages at retail, and the
consumption thereof, may be made are as follows:
(g) There shall be no separate and exclusive exterior entrances to
the bar. Access to the bar shall be through the restaurant
premises.
(h) All regulations of the alcoholic beverage control authority shall
remain applicable to the restaurant.
A. Weekdays. On weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
of the following day; provided, however, that on the last day of the
calendar year the hours shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
day following.
B. Sundays. On Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of
the day following; provided further that on the last day of the calendar
year, when it shall fall on a Sunday, the hours shall be between 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the day following. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 18-96]
C. No retail licensee may sell spirituous liquors in original containers
(package goods) before 9:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the
week.
D. Close of premises requirement. Before the start or after the close of any
period of time during which alcoholic beverages may legally be sold, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed for business, and all curtains
shall be thrown open so that the premises shall be open to the view of
the public. All customers and patrons shall be off the premises by 2:30
a.m. and may be permitted to consume alcoholic beverages purchased
before 2:00 a.m. No licensees shall serve or deliver or allow, permit or
suffer the service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the premises at the close of
legal selling hours. No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the
premises by anyone, including the licensee or his employees, after the
close of legal selling hours, and all alcoholic beverages remaining
unconsumed at the close of legal selling hours shall be immediately
removed from the bar and tables and disposed of by the licensee. All
licensed premises shall permit the entry of a law enforcement officer for
the purposes of enforcement of City ordinances and the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
E. Nonapplicability. The close-of-premises requirement contained in
Subsection D shall not apply to motels, hotels and restaurants, as
hereinafter defined, and meeting the requirements of Subsection F,
Hotels and restaurants, or to clubs which have a club liquor license and
other establishments where the principal business or activity is other
than the sale of alcoholic beverages. Such premises may remain open
§ 103-4 ALARMS § 103-5
100:213
before the start or after the close of legal selling hours, but no licensee
shall serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the delivery of any
alcoholic beverages or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
beverages, and no alcoholic beverages shall be consumed by anyone,
including customers, the licensee or his employees, on such premises
before the start or after the close of legal selling hours; and all alcoholic
beverages remaining unconsumed at the close of legal selling hours
shall be immediately removed from the bar and the tables and disposed
of by the licensee; provided also that in such case before the start and
after the close of legal selling hours, the bar and any other place from
which alcoholic beverages are usually dispensed shall be closed, and
a sign reading "BAR CLOSED" shall be permanently displayed on the
bar, and any separate room which is devoted solely to the service and
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be closed off.
F. Hotel and restaurants. Any licensed premises or part of any licensed
premises may be designated by the Council as a hotel or restaurant
area. Nightclubs are not restaurants or hotels.
(1) Designated hotel and restaurant areas shall be permitted to remain
open to the public beyond closing times, provided that no alcoholic
beverages are sold, served or consumed during the hours set forth
in Subsections A and B.
(2) A part or portion of any licensed premises may be designated a
hotel or restaurant area only if that part or portion in fact
constitutes a hotel or restaurant.
(3) Applications to designate any licensed premises or part of any
licensed premises as hotel or restaurant areas shall be made in
writing by the licensee and may be made simultaneously with the
application for renewal of an annual license. The licensee shall
submit with the applications all documents, sketches and other
information necessary to a determination whether the premises or
part of the premises sought to be designated in fact constitutes a
hotel or restaurant. The licensee shall be given the opportunity to
be heard on the application.
G. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building containing more than five rooms with
individual entrances, used or intended to be used, rented or hired
out, to be occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and which may
also contain only a general kitchen and dining room and/or drinking
facilities and conference or meeting rooms.
NIGHTCLUB — Any licensed premises or part of any licensed premises
primarily engaged in the retail sale of beverages, which provides
entertainment and/or dancing and where the sale or service of food is
incidental to the entertainment. A nightclub shall not be considered a
restaurant or hotel.
§ 103-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-5
100:214
§ 103-6. Minors.
RESTAURANT — An establishment regularly and principally used for
the purposes of providing meals to the public, having an adequate
kitchen and dining room or dining area, equipped for the preparing,
cooking and serving of foods for its customers and in which no other
business, except as incidental to such establishments, is conducted.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply:
MINOR — Any person under the legal age of consumption of alcoholic
beverages in the State of New Jersey.
B. Misstating age.
(1) No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of another person
for the purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee to sell,
serve or deliver any alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal
age of consumption of alcoholic beverages in the State of New
Jersey.39
C. Presumption. Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such
person under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages in
the State of New Jersey into a premises in which alcoholic beverages
are served and who permits the minor to possess or consume alcoholic
beverages shall be presumed to have misrepresented the age of the
minor.40
D. It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without
legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes any
alcoholic beverage on private property. Violation of this subsection shall
be punishable by a line of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any
subsequent offense. [Added 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 32-00]
(1) In addition to the fine imposed pursuant to this section, the Court
may suspend or postpone, for six months, the driving privilege of
the defendant. Upon conviction of any person and the suspension
or postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall
forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first
and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by
the Court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of the sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including the suspension or postponement
of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence
on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six
months after the person reaches the age of 17.
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding persons under the legal age for
consumption of alcoholic beverages, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 39-99.
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Possession, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 39-99.
§ 103-5 ALARMS § 103-6
100:215
§ 103-7. Regulations for licensed premises.
(2) If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence imposed
pursuant to this section, has a valid driver's license issued by this
state, the Court shall immediately collect the driver's license and
forward it to the Division along with the report. If for any reason
the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license
suspension period imposed by the Court.
(3) The Court shall inform the person, in writing, pursuant to P.L. 2000,
Chapter 33, amending N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, as to the potential
consequences of violating the period of suspension or
postponement.
(4) This section shall not be construed to prohibit an underage person
from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection
with a religious observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
(a) For purposes of this section "guardian" is defined as a person
who has qualified as a guardian of the underage person
pursuant to testamentary or Court appointment.
(b) Pursuant to this section "relative" shall be defined as the
underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or any
other person related by blood or affinity.
(5) This Subsection D shall not be construed to prohibit possession of
alcoholic beverages by any person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who is licensed under Title
33 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, or actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts
or hotel management program at a county vocational school or a
post-secondary educational institution.
A. Sale to certain persons. No licensee or employee of the licensee shall
sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to a
habitual drunkard or to an apparently or actually intoxicated person nor
permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed
premises by any of the above named classes of persons or permit any
such person to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
B. Display of license. Every license certificate shall be framed under glass
and displayed by the licensee in such a manner and place that it may be
seen by anyone entering the licensed premises. All employee lists in a
form prescribed by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control and a true copy of the application for the current license as well
§ 103-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-7
100:216
as the last filed long-form application (if current application is the
short form) shall be kept on the licensed premises, and said certificate
employee list and application copy shall be available for inspection.
C. Disturbance and nuisances. No licensee shall permit or allow any brawl,
violent act, unnecessary noise, lewd behavior, topless or nude dancing
and/or entertainment or disturbance to occur on the licensed premises.
Go-go dancing, just as other live entertainment, cannot involve persons
under the age of 18 years and cannot involve lewd or immoral activity.
Such lewd or immoral activity generally involves the lack of attire or
covering on genitals or private parts, as well as female breasts. Seethrough
garments and the use of pasties are not considered sufficient
covering. Simulation of sexual activity, even if clothed, is also
prohibited. Dancers are not permitted to touch or be touched by
patrons, and this includes the placing of tips in the costume of the
dancer. A dancer also cannot solicit drinks from patrons. No licensee
shall permit or allow the licensed premises to be used or operated in
such a manner as to become a nuisance.
D. Suitable attire required. No person while in any licensed premises shall
exhibit lewd behavior and/or exhibit personal body parts.
E. Dancing limitations. Dancing shall not be permitted on any licensed
premises during hours when the sale, service and consumption of
alcoholic beverages are prohibited.
F. Teen night. The use of any licensed premises for the exclusive use of
minors, whether or not alcoholic beverages are in the licensed
premises, is prohibited.
G. Possessing open containers. No retail distribution licensee shall allow,
permit or suffer any alcoholic beverage to be consumed in or upon the
licensed premises, nor shall such licensee possess or allow, permit or
suffer any open containers of alcoholic beverages in or upon the
licensed premises; provided, however, that opened bottles of alcoholic
beverages returned by a customer as allegedly defective may be so
possessed pending return to the manufacturer or wholesaler; and
further provided that the container is immediately resealed and labeled
with the name and address of the customer and the date of the return
by the customer.
H. Intoxicated worker. No licensee shall work in any capacity in or upon
the licensed premises while actually or apparently intoxicated or allow,
permit or suffer any actually or apparently intoxicated person to work
in any capacity in or upon the licensed premises.
I. Closing premises during public emergency or crime investigation. No
licensee shall serve, sell or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or
allow, permit or suffer the retail licensed premises to be open during
any period for which any duly constituted state, county or municipal law
enforcement authority, because of a public emergency or investigation
§ 103-7 ALARMS § 103-7
100:217
§ 103-8. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
or crime or offense, has ordered the licensed premises to be closed,
unless excepted by such authority to permit continuing conduct of
business other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
J. Occupancy. All licensed premises are required to display in a prominent
location the total occupancy of said licensed premises as determined by
the City of Long Branch Division of Fire Prevention. The licensee shall
at all times be required to maintain an accurate occupancy count and is
also responsible to ensure compliance with the occupancy. The Police
and/or Fire Departments shall have the right to close said licensed
premises for the enforcement of this provision.
K. Minor's activities on licensed premises. No licensee shall allow, permit
or suffer any person under the age of 18 years to sell, serve or solicit
the sale of any alcoholic beverage or to participate in the manufacture,
rectification, blending, treating, fortification, mixing, processing,
preparing or bottling of any alcoholic beverage.
L. Search of licensed premises. By the acceptance of the license, the
licensee consents to the detention as and for evidence of any physical
matter, including alcoholic beverages found on the licensed premises or
in the possession or custody of the licensee or his employee during the
course of any investigation, inspection or search of the licensed
premises being conducted by any law enforcement officer.
M. Hindering investigation. No licensee or employee shall directly or
indirectly fail on demand to produce, exhibit or surrender to any law
enforcement officer who is authorized or empowered to investigate,
inspect or examine, nor shall any licensee or employee directly or
indirectly fail to facilitate or hinder, delay or cause the hindrance or
delay or attempt to hinder, delay or cause the hindrance or delay of any
investigation or inspection of the licensed business or of the licensed
premises or of any search thereof by any law enforcement officer.
N. Vending machines. All machines on a licensed premises must be
registered as required by Chapter 230, Mercantile Licenses,
§ 230-2I(3)(a). No gambling devices, including claw machines or
rotisseries, where a play can obtain a stuffed animal or similar prize by
maneuvering the claw or arm, are permitted on the licensed premises.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
§ 103-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-8
100:218
§ 103-9. Pocket liquor license.
The municipal issuing authority may refuse to renew an alcoholic beverage
license granted pursuant to this chapter where the premises so licensed has
been destroyed or demolished by intentional, accidental or natural acts and
the licensee has failed to initiate steps for reconstruction of the premises
within one year of the date of the demolition or destruction.
§ 103-10. Social affair permit; fee.
§ 103-11. Prohibition of certain sales and activities.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
A. Applications. Applications for social affair permits may be made to the
City Council by organizations operating solely for civic, religious,
educational, charitable, fraternal, social or recreational purposes, and
not for private gain.
B. Fee. A fee in the sum of $50 per day must accompany each application
for a social affair permit filed by religious, civic or educational
organizations, and $75 for such other organizations, and must be
received at least seven days in advance of the date for which the permit
is requested.
C. Compliance. All applications for social affair permits, all permits issued
and all proceedings under this section shall be in accordance with the
acts, rules and regulations referred to in § 103-1 and all other
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
D. Registration with police. The application for a social affairs permit shall
contain the names, addresses, date of birth and social security number
of all persons who shall sell, solicit the sale of, mix, process or prepare
any alcoholic beverage.
A. No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage on a public street, highway, avenue, alley or road of the City;
or upon any public and quasi-public parking lots or garages or any
other parking facilities in the City; or on any public grounds, parks,
sidewalks, beaches, marine basins, beachfronts or boardwalks,
promenade or quasi-public areas; or in any automobile, other vehicle or
in any other means of transportation on the public streets, highways,
alleys, avenues, grounds, sidewalks, beaches, parks, marine basins,
beachfronts or boardwalks, promenade or quasi-public areas in the City.
B. No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage with intent to violate
any subsection of this section.
C. No owner, agent or employee of any business or mercantile established
licensed under this chapter to sell and distribute alcoholic beverages,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., shall suffer or permit any person to
§ 103-8 ALARMS § 103-11
100:219
§ 103-12. Employee regulations; identification card; fees.
consume any alcoholic beverage as defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et
seq. purchased in said establishment, except for those goods packaged
for home consumption, in any area outside or adjacent to the licensed
premises. Such areas are included, but not limited to, sidewalks,
parking lots, beaches, streets, avenues, parks, beachfronts or
boardwalks, promenade, quasi-public areas or upon any public grounds
located in the City of Long Branch. Nor shall said license holders,
their employees or agents suffer or permit any person to leave an
establishment licensed under this chapter to sell or distribute alcoholic
beverages as defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. with any unopened
container or closed container not packaged for home consumption,
containing an alcoholic beverage as defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et
seq.
D. Any person who shall violate this chapter shall, in addition to any other
penalties provided under this chapter, or by law, be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
E. All holders of a liquor license shall post in a prominent location upon
the licensed premises a sign that shall read as follows: "IT IS
UNLAWFUL TO DRINK OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON
PUBLIC STREETS OR PLACES WITHIN THE CITY OF LONG
BRANCH."
F. This section shall not apply to areas licensed in conformance with
§ 181-15 or permitted in conformance with § 247-4. [Added 4-25-2006
by Ord. No. 13-06]
A. Information of employees to Police Department.
(1) Every person, partnership or corporation holding any plenary retail
consumption license or any retail distribution license issued or to
be issued in the City shall furnish to the Police Department of the
City the name, address, date of birth and social security number of
each employee who is required to register with the police in
Subsection B. The names, addresses, dates of birth and social
security numbers shall be furnished to the Police Department prior
to the commencement of such employment. There shall be
presented to the City a social security card or other proof of
identification as acceptable to the State of New Jersey, Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Commission, and set forth in their application
forms. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 26-16]
(2) Every person, partnership or corporation holding any plenary retail
consumption license or any retail distribution license issued or to
be issued in the City shall be required to notify employees prior to
their employment of their requirement to register with the police in
Subsection B.
§ 103-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-12
100:220
(3) Every person, partnership or corporation holding any plenary retail
consumption license or any retail distribution license issued or to
be issued in the City shall not employ any person who is required to
register with the police or Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control
who has failed, neglected or refused to do so.
B. Registration with police. All persons who shall sell, solicit the sale of,
mix, process or prepare any alcoholic beverage at or from any bar or
establishment selling alcoholic beverages from the original package or
container under a plenary retail assumption license or a plenary retail
distribution license and all persons who are employed, including
persons employed as bouncers, identification and age checkers,
doormen or any other security personnel, shall register with the Police
Department; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to:
[Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord No. 20-07]
(1) Bus boys or bus girls.
(2) Entertainers.
(3) Cooks.
(4) Kitchen help.
(5) Other persons performing strictly restaurant-related functions.
(6) Any person who individually or as a partnership or as an officer,
director or holder of more than 10% of the stock of a corporation
holding a plenary retail consumption license or any retail
distribution license is required to execute a questionnaire in a form
provided by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control and maintain such form upon the licensed premises.
(7) All persons who shall sell, solicit the sale of, process or prepare any
alcoholic beverage at or from the original package or container
under a club license unless such person's employment exceeds 10
working days in any one calendar year, and/or said person receives
regular recurring monetary remuneration in connection with said
employment, who then shall register with the Police Department.
C. Application for identification card; fingerprints and photographs. Said
registration with the Police Department shall be accomplished by
completing or furnishing the following:
(1) An application for an identification card, which application shall
contain such information as the usual specifics of personal
identification, date and place of birth, address and other
employment, and such other information as deemed necessary and
proper by the Chief of Police to aid and assist in proper
enforcement of the law. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No.
10-18]
§ 103-12 ALARMS § 103-12
100:221
(2) A photograph and a set of fingerprints is to be taken by the New
Jersey State Police authorized vendor (IdentoGO by Morpho Trust,
USA). The fingerprint records shall be submitted to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and the State of New Jersey Division of
State Police Bureau of Identification for a thorough and complete
criminal history check. An applicant shall pay a fee in accordance
with a fee schedule set by the New Jersey State Police. [Amended
4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 9-04; 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
(3) No identification card will be issued to any person convicted of a
crime of moral turpitude.
(4) No licensee shall employ a person convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude.
(5) If at any time within the licensed year a holder of an alcoholic
beverage control identification card is found guilty of a crime of
moral turpitude, the Council shall immediately suspend the
alcoholic beverage control card. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord.
No. 10-18]
(6) No person shall be issued a renewal to his/her alcoholic beverage
card if he/she has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude.
D. Possession of identification card; temporary receipt.
(1) Possession of identification card. All persons required to register
under Subsection B of this section shall be required to have in their
possession, at all times when in or about the licensed premises, an
identification card on a form furnished by the Police Department,
which shall contain such information as deemed necessary and
proper by the Chief of Police to aid and assist in proper
enforcement of the law. An owner or licensee shall be required to
register and obtain an identification card although such person
may not be personally engaged in the sale, mixing, process or
preparation of alcoholic beverages. [Amended 4-24-2018 by
Ord. No. 10-18]
(2) Temporary receipt. Upon registering with the City as required by
Subsection B, a temporary receipt will be issued which may be used
as a temporary identification card for the purpose of satisfying this
section only. This temporary receipt shall expire 60 days upon
application. This receipt shall contain the applicant's name,
address, date of birth and social security number.
E. Term of identification card.
(1) Identification cards shall be valid for two years from the date of
issue thereof. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
(2) The following fees shall be imposed for the issuance of each
identification card:
§ 103-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-12
100:222
§ 103-13. Bring your own bottle (B.Y.O.B.). [Amended 2-27-2019 by
Ord. No. 1-19]
Customers of an unlicensed establishment may be permitted by the
ownership of the establishment to bring and consume only wine and beer.
The establishment may advertise the fact that beer or wine may be
permitted. The establishment can supply glasses, ice, etc., but may not
impose a cover, corkage or service charge. Also, under no circumstances
may spirituous liquors be permitted. Additionally, the owner may not permit
wine or beer to be consumed during hours in which the sale of these
products is prohibited by ordinance nor allow consumption of beer or wine
by persons under the age of 21 years or by persons who are actually or
apparently drunk or intoxicated.
(a) For each original card, the sum of that amount charged by any
state or federal agency for a fingerprint inquiry, where such an
inquiry is permitted by law, which shall be paid by certified
check or money order payable to the agency and a $50
processing fee. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
(b) For each renewal of an original card there will be a fee of $50.
[Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
(c) For any owner or licensee, the original fee and renewal fee for
the identification card is waived.
F. Age limits. The following is the minimum ages to be employed on a
licensed premises:
(1) Bartender, waiter or sales clerk: 18 years.
(2) Entertainer: 18 years.
(3) Restaurant/hotel worker (must qualify as a restaurant as defined):
16 years.
(4) Stock clerk in distribution license (permits for the employment of
minors under 18 years of age must first be obtained): 15 years.
(5) Pinsetter (permits for the employment of minors under 18 years of
age must first be obtained): 15 years.
(6) Worker (not selling alcohol) for consumption license, not a
restaurant or hotel (permits for the employment of minors under 18
years of age must first be obtained): 16 years.
§ 103-12 ALARMS § 103-13
100:223
Chapter 105
RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 106.
§ 103-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 103-13
100:224
ARTICLE I
Authorization; Violations and Penalties
§ 105-1. Authorization to conduct games.
The City of Long Branch, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50
et seq., hereby finds and determines that it shall be lawful for certain
organizations, hereinafter specified, to conduct raffles within the City when
the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to
educational, charitable, patriotic, religious and public-spirited uses.
§ 105-2. Authorized organizations.
Only the hereafter described organizations or types of organizations shall
be authorized to conduct raffles or games of chance in the City: bonafide
organizations or associations of veterans of any war in which the United
States has been engaged; churches or religious congregations and religious
organizations; charitable, educational and fraternal organizations; civic and
services clubs; officially recognized volunteer fire companies; officially
recognized volunteer first aid or rescue squads; and senior citizens
associations and clubs.
§ 105-3. Authorized games.
The games of chance authorized by this article are those games of chance
commonly known as "raffles," which are played by drawing or prizes or the
allotment of prizes by chance by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to
participate in such games of chance. Such games of chance shall be held,
operated and conducted by the active members of the organizations and
associations as herein described.
§ 105-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, company, association or organization other than those
expressly described in this article conducting a raffle in the City or any
organization or association conducting a raffle without the express
authorization from the City shall be deemed to be in violation of this article
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.
§ 105-1 ALARMS § 105-4
100:225

ARTICLE II
Fees
§ 105-5. Fees.
The City shall charge a municipal license fee for raffles in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.10, in an amount equal to the amount charged by the State
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 105-5 ALARMS § 105-5
100:227

ARTICLE III
Authority to Issue Licenses
§ 105-6. Authority granted.
The City Council designates the City Clerk of the City of Long Branch as
the person having the authority to approve the granting of raffle licenses
pursuant to the terms of N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 105-7. Filing with state.
The City Clerk shall file a certified copy of this article with the New Jersey
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 105-6 ALARMS § 105-7
100:229
Chapter 106
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See § 345-49.
§ 106-1. Findings; designation of amusement areas.
It is determined and found that the city constitutes a seashore resort
with parts customarily constituting an amusement or entertainment area
according to the customary understanding of the terms in the community
and which the parts thereof are more particularly described as follows:
§ 106-2. License required.
No person shall own or operate any amusement game, as defined by the
Amusement Games Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.,41 whether the
game is of skill, chance or both and whether the game is played and
operated with or without numbers or figures, without having first obtained
a license to do so. The license shall be issued pursuant to and subject to the
provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law.
§ 106-3. Application.
Applicants for such a license shall file with the City Clerk a written
application in such form as prescribed by the Amusement Games Licensing
Law and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Amusement Games
Control Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.
§ 106-4. Fees for specific types of licenses.
A. All of the lands fronting on both sides of Ocean Avenue between Morris
Avenue and North Broadway.
B. All of the lands fronting on the north side of Brighton Avenue between
Ocean Boulevard and Second Avenue.
A. The fees for the types of licenses to be issued shall accompany the
application for the license and shall be as follows:
(1) Games permitted under category and certification number 1.
(a) Balloon game, individually operated: $25.
(b) Barrel game: $25.
41.Editor's Note: The Amusement Games Licensing Law is more accurately located at N.J.S.A.
5:8-100 et seq.
§ 105-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 106-4
106:230
(c) Basketball game: $25.
(d) Bear pitch game: $25.
(e) Break-the-dish game: $25.
(f) Bull pen ball game, per unit: $25.
(g) Cigarette cork rifle game: $25.
(h) Cigarette dart game: $25.
(i) Cigarette toss game: $25.
(j) Dart game, multiple of $0.10 to play: $25.
(k) Dodgem game: $25.
(l) Glass pitch game: $25.
(m) Hoopla game: $25.
(n) Mammy doll game: $25.
(o) Milk bottle game: $25.
(p) Milk can game: $25.
(q) Penny pitch game: $25.
(r) Pig slide game: $25.
(s) Ping pong ball game: $25.
(t) Ring toss game: $25.
(u) Shooting gallery game, with prizes: $25.
(v) Stuffed cat game: $25.
(2) Games permitted under category and certification number 2.
[Amended 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1148]
(a) Arcade games.
[1] One to 50 machines: $100.
[2] For each machine over the original 50, an additional $10
per machine.
(b) Pokerino, unless included in arcade operation: $100.
(3) Games permitted under category and certification number 3.
(a) Nondraw raffle games:
[1] Duck pond game: $25.
§ 106-4 AMUSEMENTS § 106-4
106:231
[2] Fish pond game: $25.
[3] Grab-bag game: $25.
[4] Pick-the-stick game: $25.
(4) Games permitted under category and certification number 4.
(a) Competitive games:
[1] Bowlo game: $25.
[2] Fascination game.
[a] Fifty-unit: $2.
[b] Each additional unit above 50: $100.
[3] Greyhound game, per unit: $25.
[4] Skilo game: $25.
[5] Throw fascination game: $25.
(5) Games permitted under category and certification number 5.
(a) Games of chance; stop and go: $25.
(6) Games permitted under category and certification number 6.
(a) Guessing games:
[1] Guess your weight game: $25.
[2] Guess your age game: $25.
(b) Any game not specifically mentioned in this section, but
permissible under P.L. 1959, c. 10842: $25.
(7) Games permitted under category and certification number 7.
[Added 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1148]
(a) Ring the bell game: $25.
(b) High striker game: $25.
(8) Games permitted under category and certification number 8.
[Added 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1148]
(a) Log roll: $25.
(b) Rope climb: $25.
(c) Fishing game: $25.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.
§ 106-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 106-4
106:232
§ 106-5. Enforcing authority.
The City Council shall have and exercise control and supervision over all
amusement games held, operated or conducted under the license with
all the powers authorized or granted to it under the Amusement Games
Licensing Law and the rules and regulations of the State Amusement Games
Control Commissioner.
§ 106-6. Conformance with zoning chapter. [Added 8-12-1982 by
Ord. No. 1073]
Nothing herein shall in any manner be construed to authorize, permit or
license any arcade establishment, as defined in § 345-3, Definitions, in any
location except as authorized pursuant to Chapter 345, Zoning.
Chapter 109
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals on boardwalk and beachfront — See
§ 116-5I.
Noise made by animals — See Ch. 235.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
Animals in parks and on beaches — See
§ 247-3.
(d) Skin the wire game: $25.
B. Each applicant shall pay a fee of $1 for fingerprinting and issuance of
identification cards under the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Amusement Games Control Commissioner for each licensee and
employee of a licensee.
§ 106-4 AMUSEMENTS § 106-6
106:233

ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Ch. IX of the 1971 Code]
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey or the licensing authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.[Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Health Officer, Registered Environmental
Health Specialist, Animal Control Officer, a Police Officer or any other
authorized representative of the City of Long Branch.[Added 1-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 2-17]
CAT — Any animal of the domestic feline species, be it wild, feral or
domesticated, male, female or altered.[Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2-17]
CAT OR DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained
the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent
teeth.[Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DWELLING UNIT — Any single-family detached dwelling, a condominium,
townhouse, cooperative or residential apartment unit.[Added 1-24-2017
by Ord. No. 2-17]
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or cat or permitting
a dog or cat to remain on the premises under his/her control.[Amended
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The office of the City Clerk or any designated
representative charged with administering this section and/or issuing or
revoking licenses under the provision of this section.[Added 1-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 2-17]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, shall mean
and include every person having a right of property or custody in such dog
or cat and every person who has such dog in his/her keeping and every
person who has a cat in his keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person. A person who feeds a stray cat shall be considered its owner.
The owner of a dog or cat shall be considered the initial owner of any
puppies or kittens.[Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
§ 109-1 AMUSEMENTS § 109-1
106:235
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats seized
either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.[Amended
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs or cats are received, housed
and distributed without profit.[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98;
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which has been declared by a municipal judge
to be a vicious dog; that is, a dog which has twice attacked or bitten any
human being or which has killed another dog or domestic animal or which
habitually attacks dogs or domestic animals.[Amended 4-8-1975 by Ord.
No. 770]
§ 109-2. Licensing provisions.43
A. Dog and cat licensing provisions.
(1) Dog licensing provisions.
(a) License; when required. Licenses shall be required for the
following dogs of licensing age:
[1] Any dog owned or kept, harbored or maintained within the
City by a resident of the City on the first day of January of
any calendar year. [Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2-17]
[2] Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the City for more than 10
days after acquisition.
[3] Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the
calendar year.
[4] Any unlicensed dog brought into the city by any person
and kept within the city for more than 10 days.
[5] Any dog licensed by another state brought into the city by
any person and kept within the city for more than 90 days.
(2) Cat licensing provisions. [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
(a) License; when required. Licenses shall be required for the
following cats of licensing age:
[1] Any cat owned, kept, harbored or maintained within the
City by a resident of the City on the first day of January of
any calendar year.
43.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-14F.
§ 109-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-2
106:236
[2] Any cat acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the City for more than 10
days after acquisition.
[3] Any cat of licensing age during the course of the calendar
year.
[4] Any unlicensed cat brought into the City by any person and
kept within the City for more than 10 days.
[5] Any cat licensed by another state brought into the City by
any person and kept within the City for more than 90 days.
B. Application for license. [Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
(1) Each application for a dog/cat license under this article shall give
the following information:
(a) A general description of the dog/cat sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, whether or not neutered, age, color and
markings, whether such cat is a long- or short-haired variety.
(b) Name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the
person who shall keep, harbor or maintain, such dog/cat.
C. Application for license; when made. Applications for license for dogs/
cats which are required to be licensed by the provisions of Subsection
2A-A(1) shall be made before the first day of February of each calendar
year. In all other cases, the application for a license shall be made
within 10 days of the day upon which the dog/cat in question first
becomes subject to the provisions of this section. [Amended
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
D. License record. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed dog/cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Health Officer. [Amended
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
E. Fees. [Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1038]
(1) The dog license fee shall be as follows:
(a) Annual license: $18.44 [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 51-07; 2-26-2020 by Ord.
No. 10-20]
(2) A dog owner who presents a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian stating that the dog has been spayed or neutered shall
be subject to a reduced fee as follows:
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9-2.5b, regarding three-year license, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98.
§ 109-2 AMUSEMENTS § 109-2
106:237
(a) Annual license: $12.45 [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 51-07; 2-26-2020 by Ord.
No. 10-20]
(3) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a, any license may be issued
only when the dog owner provides evidence that the duration of the
immunization against rabies will run concurrent with the period of
effectiveness of the license. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
(4) The license shall also be subject to the current New Jersey
registration fee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.12. [Amended
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
(5) The cat license fee shall be as follows: [Amended 1-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 2-17
(a) Annual license: $7. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No.
10-20]
(6) The cat owner who presents a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian stating that the cat has been spayed or neutered shall
be subject to a reduced fee as follows: [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 2-17]
(a) Annual license: $5. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No.
10-20]
(7) A license may be issued only when the cat owner provides evidence
that the duration of the immunization against rabies will run
concurrent with the period of effectiveness of the license. [Added
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
F. Expiration date. Each dog/cat license and registration tag shall expire
on the last day of January of the calendar year following the calendar
year in which it was issued. [Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
G. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog
licensed under § 109-3 of this chapter. Dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist
handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs" or dogs
used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs
shall be licensed in the same manner as other dogs, except that the
owner or keeper shall not be required to pay any fee. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
H. Proof of licensing. The owner shall place upon each such dog/cat a
collar, harness, or other device with the registration tag securely
fastened thereto or otherwise be able upon request by an authorized
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 9-2.5c2, regarding three-year license, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98.
§ 109-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-2
106:238
§ 109-3. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
agent to affirmatively show proof that said dog/cat is licensed by the
City. [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
I. Abandonment prohibited. No person shall abandon any cat, no matter
what its age or condition, within the City. [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 2-17]
J. Limitation of cats per dwelling unit. No more than nine cats may be
harbored or maintained within any single-dwelling unit by any owner or
owners. This section shall become effective and enforceable four years
and one day following the adoption by the Mayor and Council of said cat
licensing provisions. [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
K. Nuisances prohibited. No owner or keeper shall permit or allow, either
willfully or negligently, any cat to create a nuisance either off the
property of the owner or keeper, or upon the property of another or to
destroy or deface the property of another, whether the same be real or
personal or otherwise interfere with the enjoyment of another's
property. [Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
A. License required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Health
Officer for a license entitling him to keep or operate the establishment.
Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at such
establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
C. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee submits a written statement from the Health Officer of the
Board of Health that the establishment or proposed establishment
complies with local and state rules governing the location of and
sanitation at such establishment.
D. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
year. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 109-2 AMUSEMENTS § 109-3
106:239
§ 109-4. Disposition of fees.
E. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
shall be as follows: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs: $50.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $50.
(3) Pet shop: $50.
(4) Shelter or pound: $50.
F. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Health Officer, on recommendation of
the State Department of Health or on his own motion, for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Health or the Health Officer, after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department of Health or the Health
Officer.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all city ordinances and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels,
pet shops, shelters and pounds, the preservation of sanitation
therein and the prevention of the spread of rabies and other
diseases of dogs within and from such establishments.
G. Reports to State Health Department. The Health Officer shall forward
to the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops,
shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor
are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee
and the kind of license issued.
H. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the City Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the city and shall be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under
this article; local prevention and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies
treatment under the direction of the local Board of Health for any
person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; and all
other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the
subject and for administering the provisions of this article. Any
§ 109-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-4
106:240
§ 109-5. Dog canvass. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
The Chief of Police of the city shall annually cause a canvass to be made
of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the city and shall
report to the Clerk, the Board of Health and to the State Department of
Health, not later than September 1, the results thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping
or harboring dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored
by each person, together with the registration number of each dog; and
the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person,
together with a complete description of each unlicensed dog.46
§ 109-6. Impounding or destruction of certain dogs.
unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
he used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end
of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the city any amount then in such account which is in
excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the last
two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days
after collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
A. Causes for impounding. The agency designated by the Mayor and
Council may, and at the direction of any police officer or the Health
Officer shall, take into custody and impound any of the following dogs:
(1) Any dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this
article.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog which the Health Officer or his agent has
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as defined
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., provided that such dogs may also be
seized by any police officer, and provided further that, if such dogs
46.Editor's Note: Former Section 9-6, Vicious Dogs, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98. For provisions regarding vicious dogs, see
N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 109-4 AMUSEMENTS § 109-6
106:241
cannot be seized with safety, they may be killed. [Amended
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
(6) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid. [Added
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(7) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to
or observed by a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured or
creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property. [Added 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises to seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize
and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog,
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is
present and forbids the same.
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name
and address of any person, or if the owner of or the person keeping
or harboring the dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall
immediately serve on the person whose address is given on the
collar or on the person owning, keeping or harboring the dog a
notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been seized and will be
liable to be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within
seven days after service of the notice. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
(2) A notice under this subsection must be served via certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the person on whom it is to be served.
[Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
D. Disposition of unclaimed dogs. The Health Officer is authorized and
empowered to cause the destruction of any unclaimed dog, in as
humane a manner as possible, under any of the following contingencies:
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-11]
(1) When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person
owning, keeping or harboring such dog within seven days after
notice or within seven days of the dog's detention when notice
cannot be given, as set forth in the previous subsection.
(2) If, after a hearing and any applicable appeals are exhausted, the
person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has not
paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance, not to exceed an impoundment fee and
administrative costs approved by the City Council.
§ 109-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-6
106:242
§ 109-7. Regulations.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the city except in compliance
with the provisions of this article and the following regulations:
(3) If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the
person owning, keeping or harboring such dog has not produced a
license and registration tag as provided in this article.
A. Wearing of registration. All dogs which are required by the provisions of
this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness with the
registration tag for such dog securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
D. Disturbing the peace. No person shall have, keep, harbor, maintain or
permit to be kept on any premises owned or occupied in whole or in
part by him or her within the City of Long Branch any dog or animal
which by habitually barking, howling or whining disturbs the public
peace. [Amended 3-22-1988 by Ord. No. 20-88]
E. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any
public park, public building or other public place within the city or off
the premises of the owner. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
F. Leashing of dogs. No person owning or harboring any dog shall suffer
or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of
the city or off the premises of the owner unless such dog is
accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than eight feet
long. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
G. Minors. No license to own, keep or harbor a dog shall be issued to a
minor.
H. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit or suffer it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
I. Restriction of dogs. [Added 6-29-1981 as Ord. No. 1025]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, with or
without a leash, along or east of the following designated
roadways: Beginning at the intersection of Ocean Avenue and
§ 109-6 AMUSEMENTS § 109-7
106:243
Brighton Avenue to the intersection of Ocean Avenue and Sea
View Avenue; thence, continuing along Sea View Avenue to the
intersection of Sea View and New Ocean Avenue; thence
continuing in a northerly direction along New Ocean Avenue and
Avenel Boulevard; thence, continuing in an easterly direction along
Avenel Boulevard to the intersection of Avenel Boulevard and
Ocean Avenue; thence, continuing in a northerly direction along
Ocean Avenue to the Borough of Monmouth Beach Municipality
boundary.
(2) The restrictions noted in this section shall not apply to:
(a) Dogs used as guide dogs for blind persons and commonly
known as "Seeing Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped
persons and commonly known as "service dogs" or dogs used
to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear"
dogs. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(b) Dogs used by members of the Long Branch Police Department
and more commonly known as the "Canine Unit."
J. Potentially dangerous dogs. [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
(1) Should any dog be determined to be a potentially dangerous dog
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23, the Municipal Court shall issue an
order and a schedule for compliance (in no case more than 60 days)
which, in part, shall require the person owning, keeping or
harboring the potentially dangerous dog to comply with the
following regulations:
(a) The dog shall be impounded until the person owning, keeping
or harboring the dog obtains a special municipal Potentially
Dangerous Dog License (which shall cost $150 annually); a
municipal registration number; and a red identification tag;
and
(b) The person owning, keeping or harboring the potentially
dangerous dog must, at his own expense, have the registration
number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location; and
(c) The person owning, keeping or harboring the potentially
dangerous dog must maintain an enclosure for the dog which
has sound sides, top and bottom, to prevent the dog from
climbing, digging, jumping, or otherwise escaping, and a fence
must be erected of at least six feet in height, separated by at
least three feet from the confined area. The enclosure must be
securely locked to prevent unknowing children, etc. from
releasing the dog. The City's Animal Control Officer shall
inspect the enclosure and the owner's property at least
monthly to determine continuing compliance; and
§ 109-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-7
106:244
§ 109-8. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, the individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog shall be
notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual or individuals,
the owner or keeper of the dog must comply with the following procedures:
§ 109-9. Quarantine.
The Council may, by proclamation, require all dogs and cats to be
quarantined during such period in each year which may seem advisable to
the Council.
(d) If removed from the enclosure, the dog must be securely
muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the City's
Animal Control Officer, which restricts movements to a radius
of no more than three feet from the owner and must be in
direct supervision of the owner; and
(e) The person owning, keeping or harboring the potentially
dangerous dog must display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign
on his premises warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on
the premises. The sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet
of where the dog is enclosed.
(2) The City may require the person owning, keeping or harboring the
potentially dangerous dog to maintain liability insurance in an
amount determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or
injury caused by the dog. The insurance must be separate from any
other homeowner policy and shall have the City of Long Branch
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being
notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination,
or expiration of the liability policy.
(3) The City shall publicize a telephone number for reporting
potentially dangerous or vicious dogs, which telephone number
shall be forwarded to the New Jersey Department of Health, and
any changes in this number shall be reported immediately.
A. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
B. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
C. At the end of 10 days, have the dog re-examined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
§ 109-7 AMUSEMENTS § 109-10
106:245
§ 109-10. Soiling and defilement by dogs. [Amended 5-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 30-88]
No person(s) owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of a dog
shall allow, suffer or permit such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or deposit
any urine or feces on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk,
passageway, road, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk; or upon any boardwalk, benches or beachfront in the
city; or upon any public property whatsoever; or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the private property, except that any
dog on a leash may deposit urine or feces between the curblines on the
roadway of any public street, provided that:
§ 109-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No.
15-94; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11;
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2-17]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with § 109-2 of
this article shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 for each
offense. Any other violations of this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. The person in charge of said dog shall have in his possession
appropriate sanitary means, including but not limited to implements
and plastic bags, to remove any feces so deposited.
B. The person in charge of said dog shall immediately remove all feces so
deposited by appropriate sanitary means, including but not limited to
implements and plastic bags, and shall dispose of such feces in a
sanitary manner.
C. No blind person in charge of a guide dog shall be subject to Subsections
A and B of this section.
§ 109-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 109-11
106:246
ARTICLE II
Police Dogs
[Adopted 4-26-1977 by Ord. No. 871 (Sec. 6-18 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 109-12. Mistreatment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torment,
beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the
Police Department of the City of Long Branch in the performance of any of
the functions or duties of such Department or to interfere with any such
dog while being used by such Department or any member thereof in the
performance of any of the functions or duties of such Department or of any
officer or member of such Department.
§ 109-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 109-12 AMUSEMENTS § 109-13
106:247

ARTICLE III
Horses
[Adopted 10-11-1977 by Ord. No. 893 (Sec 6-16 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 109-14. Minimum acreage.
The breeding, keeping and raising of horses, ponies and mules within the
city limits shall be limited to one of the above-mentioned animals per acre,
so as to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
city.
§ 109-15. Removal of animal wastes.
The owner of the property wherein the above-mentioned animals are kept
shall be responsible for the removal of all animal wastes. Said wastes shall
not be allowed to accumulate for a period greater than 24 hours.
§ 109-16. Temporary licensing for commercial enterprise.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
The City Health Department may license the keeping of horses, ponies and
mules on a temporary basis within the boundaries of the city for the limited
purpose of a commercial enterprise, which includes but shall not be limited
to a circus, fair or exhibition.
§ 109-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Where it is found that more than one of the above-mentioned animals is
being kept in violation of this article, each animal shall be deemed as a
separate violation thereof.
B. All penalties shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
§ 109-14 AMUSEMENTS § 109-17
106:249
Chapter 110
BALLOONS, INTENTIONAL RELEASE OF
§ 110-1. Purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that it will be the public policy of the City
of Long Branch to take action when feasible to reduce the effects of certain
products utilized, placed, or released within the environment in order to
protect the health and safety of the general public.
§ 110-2. Release of balloons.
This chapter is adopted in order to protect the environment, particularly the
wildlife, and the health, safety and well-being of persons and property by
prohibiting the release of balloons inflated with lighter-than-air gases into
the atmosphere, including, but not limited to, latex and Mylar, as it has been
determined that the release of balloons inflated with lighter-than-air gases
poses a danger and nuisance to the environment, particularly to wildlife and
marine animals so as to constitute a public nuisance and may pose a threat
to the safety of its inhabitants and their property.
§ 110-3. Prohibited releases.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to intentionally
release, organize the release of, or intentionally cause to be released
balloons inflated with a gas that is lighter than air within the City of Long
Branch limits, except for:
§ 110-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this Chapter 110 is guilty of a noncriminal
infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.
Chapter 111
PLASTIC, SINGLE-USE
A. Balloons released by a person on behalf of a governmental agency or
pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological
purposes;
B. Hot air balloons that are recovered after launching; and
C. Balloons released indoors.
§ 109-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 110-4
106:250
ARTICLE I
Single-Use Plastic Bags
§ 111-1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to adopt regulations relating to and limiting the
use of single-use plastic bags, plastic utensils, polystyrene foam containers
and plastic straws/coffee stirrers, to further incentivize the use of reusable
bags at businesses, and ultimately, to protect the environment, wildlife and
the public health, welfare and safety.
§ 111-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ALL LONG BRANCH FACILITIES — All Long Branch facilities shall be
prohibited from using single-use plastic bags, polystyrene foam food
containers plastic straws/stirrers. All Long Branch facilities shall include
City of Long Branch municipal departments, Long Branch concessions,
City of Long Branch sponsored events, and Long Branch permitted events
including event organizers, agents of the event, event food vendors and any
other party, including nonprofit organizations who enter into an agreement
with one or more of the cosponsors of the event to distribute prepared food
or merchandise at the event or otherwise provide an event-related service.
BAIT — Any live or previously live and now frozen substance used to attract
and catch fish for the purpose thereof.
BUSINESS or STORE — Any retail establishment that engages in the retail
sale of goods and products. This definition includes but is not limited to
pharmacies, supermarkets, grocery stores, convenience stores, clothing
stores, surf shops, liquor stores, food marts, bars and food service
establishments that provide carry-out plastic bags to consumers in which to
place items purchased at such an establishment.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or food truck
which serves made-to-order food or beverages for dine-in, take-out or
delivery.
GOODS AND PRODUCTS — Things and items that are prepared and made
to be sold, including, but not limited to, clothing, groceries, prepared food,
foodstuffs, meat, dairy, merchandise, books, jewelry, alcohol, tobacco
products, toys and beverages and any all other things and items sold at
retail by businesses and stores.
PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG — Any bag without handles that is used
exclusively to segregate produce, meat, other food items and merchandise
to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such items from coming
§ 111-1 AMUSEMENTS § 111-2
106:251
into direct contact with other purchased items, where such contact could
damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in
a reusable or recycled bag or a bag used to hold prescription medication
dispensed from a pharmacy.
RECYCLED PAPER BAG — A paper carry-out bag provided by a business
or street vendor to a customer at the point of sale that meets all of the
following requirements:
RETAIL — The sale of goods and product for use and/or consumption.
REUSABLE BAG — A durable carry-out bag with stitched handles for
reinforcement made from any natural or synthetic material other than
plastic film, including but not necessarily limited to woven or nonwoven
plastic or cloth that is at least 10 mils thick and that is specifically designed
and manufactured for multiple reuse and that is machine washable or is
made from material that can be cleaned or disinfected regularly.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — A bag, sheet or receptacle
produced or manufactured from material more commonly known as plastic
or polyethylene provided at the check-out stand, cash register, point of
sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting goods
or products out of the establishment. The term "single-use plastic carryout
bag" does not include reusable bags, produce bags, garbage bags or
garment bags.
STREET VENDOR — Any person or business peddling, vending, selling or
displaying for sale on a seasonal or one-time basis any merchandise or food
that is presented from a mobile setting including a vehicle, cart, tent, table
or stand. This includes all businesses at farmers' markets, street festivals
and other events requiring group or special event permits as described in
the Code of the City of Long Branch.
§ 111-3. Prohibited and permitted bags.
Except as provided in Subsection B below of this definition, the paper
carry-out bag shall contain a minimum of 50% recycled, with at least
40% postconsumer content, materials.
A.
An eight-pound or smaller recycled paper bag shall contain a minimum
of 20% postconsumer recycled material.
B.
Printed on the paper carry-out bag is the minimum percentage of
postconsumer content.
C.
A. No store, business or street vendor in the City of Long Branch shall
provide any single-use plastic carry-out bags to a customer at the point
of sale unless otherwise permitted in this chapter.
B. All stores, businesses and street vendors shall provide or make
available to a customer only recyclable paper carry-out bags or
reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other
materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit customers from using bags of any
§ 111-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 111-3
106:252
§ 111-4. Exemptions.
type that they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away
goods that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the
store.
C. Each store, business and street vendor is strongly encouraged to
educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs
encouraging customers to use reusable bags.
A. A single-use carry-out bag does not include any of the following:
(1) A bag (produce bag or product bag) to hold prescription medication
dispensed from a pharmacy;
(2) A non-handled bag (produce bag or product bag) used to protect a
purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased
items when placed in a recycled paper bag or a reusable bag;
(3) A bag (produce bag or product bag) provided to contain an
unwrapped food item;
(4) A non-handled bag that is designed to be placed over articles of
clothing on a hanger;
(5) Bags used for holding and transporting ice;
(6) Small clear plastic bags of less than four inches in depth that are
commonly provided to customers by hardware stores to hold
screws and bolts and other small items;
(7) Newspaper bags; and
(8) Bags used for the purpose of containing fish or fishing bait.
§ 111-3 AMUSEMENTS § 111-4
106:253

ARTICLE II
Single-Use Plastic Containers, Utensils, Straws and Stirrers
§ 111-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
PLASTIC UTENSILS — Disposable, single-use plastic food service ware,
which are provided with take-out or to-go food and/or leftovers from
partially consumed meals. Only recyclable or compostable service ware may
be provided by any establishments.
POLYSTYRENE FOOD CONTAINERS — A single-use, disposable food
packaging used to provide customers with prepared food or take-out food,
which contains polystyrene foam in any part of such packaging. This
definition specifically exempts the following from the category of
polystyrene foam containers:
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC STRAW/STIRRER — A single-use, disposable tube
made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a
biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, used to
transfer a beverage from a container to the mouth of the person drinking
the beverage. "Single-use plastic straw" does not include a straw made from
non-plastic materials, including, but not limited to, paper, pasta, sugar cane,
wood, or bamboo.
§ 111-6. Restrictions.
Meat and fish trays for raw or butchered meat, including poultry or fish
that is sold from a refrigerator or similar retail appliance; or
A.
Polystyrene foam food service food containers used for prepackaged
food that have been filled and sealed prior to receipt by the store.
B.
A. Any facility where food or beverages may be consumed on the premises,
including but not limited to any restaurant, hotel, cafe, delicatessen,
coffee house, food stand, food truck, street vendor, supermarket,
grocery store or bar, shall not leave out for consumer use single-use
plastic straws and shall only provide a single-use plastic straw if
expressly requested by the consumer.
B. Any facility where food or beverages maybe consumed on premises or
are offered as "take-out" or to-go," including but not limited to any
restaurant, hotel, cafe, delicatessen, coffee house, food stand, food
truck, street vendor, supermarket, grocery store or bar, shall not place
any food or food products in a polystyrene foam containers or provide
plastic eating utensils for such purposes.
§ 111-5 AMUSEMENTS § 111-7
106:255
§ 111-7. Exemptions.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict a facility from
providing a plastic straw or plastic utensil to accommodate a person with a
medical condition or a disability.
§ 111-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 111-7
106:256
ARTICLE III
Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 111-8. Enforcement.
The City' s Code Enforcement Official shall be the primary official for
the enforcement of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Official should
be notified by those citizens who believe that a violation of the terms
of this chapter may exist. The Code Enforcement Official or his designee
shall be entitled to exercise their discretion in determining the existence
of any violation or in determining whether to seek the imposition of any
combination of fines and penalties provided for a violation of this chapter or
to use other means or enforcement, including but not limited to persuasion
or issuance of warnings. Nothing shall prevent a citizen, homeowner or
other interested person from acting as a complaining witness in the City
of Long Branch Municipal Court or such other court having jurisdiction to
enforce this matter.
§ 111-9. Grace period.
Businesses will be granted a grace period from the date of enactment of this
ordinance until December 31, 2020, to distribute, transfer and/or dispose
of any on-hand inventory of prohibited single-use plastic bags, containers,
utensils and straws/stirrers as described above.
§ 111-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, business or store violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof in municipal court, be subject to a penalty of
up to $500 for a first offense, up to $1,000 for a second offense, and up to
$2,500 for a third offense. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each
day during which it continues shall constitute an additional, separate and
distinct offense.
§ 111-11. Remedies and penalties cumulative.
The remedies and penalties provided in this article are cumulative and
not exclusive, and nothing in this chapter shall preclude any person from
pursuing and other remedies provided by law.
§ 111-8 AMUSEMENTS § 111-11
106:257
Chapter 114
BEACH CLUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 116.
Beach club signs — See Ch. 284, § 284-6.
Beach clubs as conditional uses — See
§ 345-63.
§ 114-1. Annual meetings of non-profit-making beach clubs.
The City Clerk and all other officers of the city shall deny the filing of any
papers, license applications or other records of any non-profit-making beach
club operating in the city unless there is submitted with them a resolution
indicating that the bylaws of the non-profit-making beach club provide that
they shall conduct their annual meeting during a time when the beach club
is in operation and that the members of the beach club shall be notified no
sooner than July 1 or later than July 15, by mail, of the annual meeting,
and that the annual meeting shall be held during the month of August in a
convenient place at the beach club and at hours and on dates on which it
may reasonably be expected that the members can attend.
§ 114-2. Minutes of meetings.
Minutes shall be taken of all meetings of the membership or trustees of the
non-profit-making beach clubs and shall be available for inspection by any
official or employee of the city at convenient hours and on adequate notice.
Chapter 116
BEACHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach clubs — See Ch. 114.
Undressing on beaches — See Ch. 247,
§ 247-2.
Public recreational bathing places — See Ch.
303, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 116-1. Opening and closing dates; designated bathing beaches.
A. Opening and closing dates. For the protection of the general public and
for the control of the public bathing beaches of the City in each year, the
City Council shall by resolution designate dates for the opening and
closing of public bathing beaches, and the period of operation shall
extend in accordance with such resolution from a day between May 20
§ 111-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 116-1
114:258
§ 116-2. Admission rates. [Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95;
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 12-05;
6-12-2007 by Ord. No. 23-07; 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 8-08; 4-14-2009
by Ord. No. 4-09; 5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 3-10; 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
10-11; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 36-11]
and June 30 in each year to a day between September 1 and September
30 in each year.
B. Council to designate certain areas as bathing beaches.
(1) The Council shall designate protected public bathing beaches
where ropes, buoys, boats and lifeguards shall be provided by the
City and from which beaches persons must bathe or swim.
(2) No person shall be permitted to bathe or swim on unprotected
beaches or during hours protected beaches are closed. During the
times that the beach is open for operation, persons shall be
permitted thereon upon payment of certain fees and after
registration, as provided in § 116-2. [Amended 7-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 26-95]
A. Seasonal beach passes of the City of Long Branch shall be sold for the
summer bathing season (extending from Memorial Day through Labor
Day) commencing on February 1 at the below rate classification.
(1) Children 13 and under: free admission (ID required).
(2) Children 14 to 17: $30 (ID required).
(3) Person 18 years of age through 61: $45.
(4) Person 62 years of age and over: free admission (ID required).
B. Daily beach fees of the City of Long Branch shall be sold at daily rates
as follows:
(1) Children 13 and under: free admission (ID required).
(2) Children 14 to 17: $3 (ID required).
(3) Person 18 years of age through 61:
(a) Weekdays: $5.
(b) Weekends and holidays: $7.
(4) Person 62 years of age and over: free admission (ID required).
C. Sale of holiday beach passes will be on sale from November 1 through
January 31, Monday through Friday, 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. at a
discount of $5 of the current year’s rate at the Tax Collector’s office,
City Hall, 344 Broadway, Long Branch, New Jersey, or the Long Branch
Recreation Office, 231 Wilbur Ray Avenue, Long Branch, New Jersey,
§ 116-1 BEACH CLUBS § 116-2
114:259
§ 116-3. Personnel.
The Business Administrator is authorized to employ registrars, cashiers,
inspectors, gatemen, lifeguards and such other employees as may be
07740. [Amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2-13; 6-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17]
D. Seasonal beach passes can also be purchased from February 1 through
Memorial Day at the regular rate at either the Tax Collector’s office or
the Long Branch Recreation Office, 231 Wilbur Ray Avenue, Long
Branch, New Jersey, 07740. [Amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2-13;
6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17]
E. Sale of the seasonal beach passes for the City of Long Branch shall be
made at the Long Branch Recreation Office, 231 Wilbur Ray Avenue,
Long Branch, New Jersey, 07740, Monday through Friday, from 10:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Starting Memorial Day weekend, badges will be
available for sale at our beach office located at Melrose Avenue on the
Boardwalk. Seasonal beach badges will be available on a daily basis at
Melrose Avenue Beach office only from 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
[Amended 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2-13; 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
13-17]
F. Persons physically or mentally disabled: free admission. For the
purposes of this section, “physically or mentally disabled” means a
person who produces evidence that they are receiving social security
benefits for a physical or mental disability. U.S. Armed Service Veterans
of War, who reside in the City of Long Branch, receive free admission.
Veterans should contact the Long Branch Veterans Administration
officer to receive their beach pass.
G. Anyone fishing from the beach will be allowed on free of charge.
Persons fishing must have a New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection Division of Fish and Wildlife Marine Fisheries Saltwater
Recreational Registry Program Individual Certificate for free
admission.
H. Any persons in active military service in any of the Armed Forces of the
United States, and their spouses or dependent children over the age of
12; members of the New Jersey National Guard who have completed
Initial Active Duty Training, and their spouses or dependent children
over the age of 12; and retired members of the New Jersey National
Guard will be allowed free beach access with proper identification.
I. On any day when the protected public beaches remain open and
patrolled by lifeguards beyond 5:00 p.m., the sale of beach badges may
continue beyond the standard hour of 4:00 p.m. and may remain open
for sale of badges until 7:00 p.m., and any individual who wishes to gain
access to the protected public beach must obtain a daily or seasonal
beach badge. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
§ 116-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 116-3
114:260
necessary to carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to
purchase books, stationery, badges, checks, coupon books or other insignia
and such other supplies and materials as may be necessary.
§ 116-4. Lifeguards. [Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95;
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 13-12]
Lifeguards shall be maintained on duty at the protected public bathing
beaches between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except at times when
bathing or swimming shall be deemed dangerous or hazardous by the Beach
Director, the lifeguard in charge of the beach or other official designated
by the Director of Recreation and Human Services. When dangerous
conditions exist, a sign shall be displayed indicating that the beach is
closed to bathing or swimming, and no person shall bathe or swim in the
waters adjacent to the beach, whether protected or not, until the signs are
removed. On certain holidays such as Memorial Day, July 4 and Labor Day,
or any other day(s) as determined by the City of Long Branch Business
Administrator or his designee, the beaches shall remain open and protected
from 9:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.
§ 116-5. Rules and regulations.
Rules and regulations shall be as follows:
A. No person shall bathe or swim from the beachfront except from the
protected public bathing beaches where ropes, buoys, boats and
lifeguards are provided by the city, and only if lifeguards are on duty.
B. No person shall use or tamper with any boat, buoy or lifeguard
equipment without the permission of the Beachfront Director, the
captain of the lifeguards or other official designated by the Council to
have authority in that instance.
C. Lifeguards shall have charge and control and supervision of the bathing
and swimming at the respective beaches where they are stationed.
[Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1368]
D. No person shall engage in surf fishing in the bathing area during the
bathing hours.
E. No person shall play baseball or engage in any type of ball playing on
the beachfront or in the waters adjacent thereto during bathing hours.
F. No person shall engage in any type of rough athletics on the public
bathing beaches or in the waters adjacent thereto at any time.
G. No person shall disrobe or dress or undress on the beachfront or in the
water adjacent thereto, on public streets, in public places, in motor
vehicles or any other vehicle on the streets of the City or on the
boardwalk immediately adjacent to the beachfront.
§ 116-3 BEACH CLUBS § 116-5
114:261
H. No person shall throw bottles, cans, paper or other refuse upon the
beachfront or the adjacent waters, and all refuse and paper and litter
shall be placed in receptacles provided therefor.47
I. No dogs or other animals shall be permitted on the boardwalk or on the
beaches or in the waters adjacent thereto or upon any public walk
contained on the beachfront, subject to the following: [Amended
7-8-2008 by Ord. No. 13-08; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 24-08]
(1) Dogs, cats and other animals shall be permitted on the municipal
public beaches from October 1 until April 30; Seaview to Brighton
Avenue.
(2) Dogs, cats and other animals, except service animals, are
prohibited on all beaches from May 1 through September 30.
(3) Additionally, in conjunction with the City of Long Branch Beach
Management Plan and due to the nesting areas of piping plovers
and other endangered species, the City reserves the right to amend
this subsection to restrict dogs, cats and other animals where
endangered species may exist at any time.
(4) All dogs, cats and other animals, including service animals, must be
leashed at all times and are prohibited from entering any
prohibited areas.
(5) Animal owners/walkers must carry a visible device for the removal
of animal waste.
(6) Any person in violation of any of the terms of this subsection shall,
upon first offense, be subject to a fine of up to $100; for a second
offense, a fine of up to $250; and for a third offense a fine of up to
$2,000.
J. No person shall ride a bicycle, roller blades or use a skate board or
hover board on the boardwalk/promenade of the City of Long Branch.
[Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95; 7-8-2008 by Ord. No.
13-08; 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 4-17]
K. No person shall climb over, break, damage or deface any fence, railing,
enclosure or other municipal property on the boardwalk or the
beachfront.
L. No person shall be permitted to enter a public bathing beach or to bring
any article or object upon the beach except through an appropriately
designated entrance.
M. No person shall bring or consume any beer, wine, whiskey or any other
intoxicating liquor on the public beachfront or in the adjacent waters or
on the boardwalk and/or promenade, except as permitted by §§ 181-15
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Littering.
§ 116-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 116-5
114:262
and 247-4. [Amended 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 37-05; 4-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 10-06]
N. No person shall take or haul any beach sand or soil from the beachfront.
O. No hole shall be dug in the public bathing beach in such a manner as to
leave a depression more than 12 inches deep in the surface of the land.
P. No person shall use surfboards, rafts, or other swimming apparatus
upon the protected public bathing beaches or in the waters adjacent
thereto at any time lifeguards are on duty. Any person using a
surfboard, raft or other swimming apparatus within 300 feet of a
protected bathing area shall do so only after securing such surfboard,
raft or other swimming apparatus to his or her arm or leg with a surf
leash and shall cease the use of such surfboard, raft or other swimming
apparatus within that area upon being directed to do so by a lifeguard
on duty. [Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95; 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 49-07]
Q. No person shall enter into the designated lifeguard area without the
permission of the lifeguard in charge, and no person shall molest,
bother or annoy the lifeguards in the performance of their duties.
R. No person shall start a fire on a public bathing beach at any time
without the permission of the Director of Recreation. [Amended
7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95]
S. No person shall place bicycles, baby carriages or any other vehicle
upon a public bathing beach or the boardwalk adjacent thereto within
15 feet of a publicly designated entrance to the public bathing beach.
T. No person shall, while on or using any portion of the public bathing
beach or while bathing or swimming in the waters of the ocean, annoy
or molest any other person or utter any offensive or indecent language
or in any way act in a disorderly manner.
U. No person shall bathe or swim in the Atlantic Ocean from a public
bathing beach at a distance greater than that which the lifeguard in
charge shall deem safe.
V. The Council shall adopt such other and further rules and regulations as
may be necessary for the proper control and regulation of the
beachfront and waters adjacent thereto, provided that the same does
not supersede or annul any provisions of this chapter.
W. No person shall place any items, goods or wares on the boardwalk area,
whether for storage, sale or lease. [Added 7-22-1986 by Ord. No.
1282; amended 9-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1292]
X. Any person seeking access to a City beach, the waters adjacent thereto
or the City boardwalk/promenade may be requested to show and
disclose the contents of any cooler, bag, package or similar item being
carried in his/her possession. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1368]
§ 116-5 BEACH CLUBS § 116-5
114:263
§ 116-6. Lease of beachfront.
The City reserves the right to lease any portion of the beachfront of the City
in accordance with law.48
§ 116-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-8-1994 by Ord. No.
14-94]
§ 116-8. Storage lockers, bathhouses and cabanas. [Added
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 4-15]
Y. In the event that any person refuses to allow the inspection permitted
under Subsection X above, then such person(s) shall be denied access
to the City beach, waters adjacent thereto or the City boardwalk/
promenade to which he/she is seeking access or, where applicable, his/
her privilege to be on or in said area revoked if he/she is already on or in
the same. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1368]
Z. Cigarettes and tobacco products. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
13-03; amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 22-11; 7-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 14-17]
(1) No person shall smoke any cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco
products including electronic or vapor cigarettes and chewing of
tobacco on the beach, boardwalk, promenade or any beach area
covered by this chapter at any time.
(2) The penalty for violation of Subsection Z(1) shall be a fine of $100
for the first offense, $200 for the second offense and $300 for the
third offense.
A. The Council reserves the right to cancel forthwith any privilege, beach
badge, insignia or check granted or extended to any person violating
any provision of this chapter.
B. Any person losing his badge, check, coupon book or other insignia shall
lose any rights and privileges under the badge, check, coupon book or
other insignia and shall apply for a new badge, check, coupon book or
other insignia, paying the necessary monthly, seasonal or daily fee, as
the case may be. No replacement badges shall be issued at any time.
C. Unless otherwise provided and in addition to any penalty herein set
forth, any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with
any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Art. I. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A. Storage lockers, each of which shall be approximately 30 inches wide,
40 inches high and 40 inches deep, shall be made available on City
48.Editor's Note: Former Section 15-7, North End Bathing Pavilion Fees, containing portions
of Ord. Nos. 736, 776 and 911, was repealed 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 12-91.
§ 116-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 116-8
114:264
beaches in order to accommodate beach umbrellas, baby strollers,
beach chairs, belly boards and/or other beach-related items. The initial
fee, which will be set by resolution on an annual basis, shall be due and
payable at the time of execution of a rental agreement with the City.
The rental of storage lockers shall be available on the Friday prior to
Memorial Day through the Sunday following Labor Day. All renters shall
execute an agreement with the City that provides as follows:
(1) Renters shall provide their own lock for the storage locker for
security purposes;
(2) Renters shall hold the City harmless for any loss of or damage to
stored items;
(3) Renters shall relinquish possession of the storage locker to the City
no later than the Sunday following Labor Day.
The City reserves the right to confiscate all items that are left
in the storage locker once they are relinquished and any such
items shall become the property of the City. Existing renters shall
have the first right to renew their storage lockers for the following
season until March 1, after which rentals shall be made on the
first-come, first-served basis. [Amended 6-13-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17]
B. Bathhouses, each of which shall be approximately 44 1/2 inches by
34 1/2 inches by 76 1/2 inches high, shall be made available on City
beaches in order to accommodate beach-related items and for
changing. The initial fee, which will be set by resolution on an annual
basis, shall be due and payable at the time of execution of a rental
agreement. The rental shall be available on the Friday prior to
Memorial Day through the Sunday following Labor Day. All renters shall
execute an agreement with the City that provides as follows:
[Amended 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17]
(1) Renters shall hold the City harmless for any loss of or damage to
stored items;
(2) Renters shall relinquish possession of the bathhouses to the City no
later than the Sunday following Labor Day.
The City reserves the right to confiscate all items that are left in
the bathhouse once they are relinquished and any such items shall
become the property of the City. Existing renters shall have the
first right to renew their bathhouse for the following season until
March 1, after which rentals shall be made on the first-come, firstserved
basis.
C. Cabanas, each of which shall be approximately 10 feet deep and eight
feet high, shall be made available on City beaches in order to
accommodate beach-related items and for changing. Each cabana shall
have electric service, and showers shall be located adjacent thereto.
§ 116-8 BEACH CLUBS § 116-8
114:265
Chapter 119
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Riding bicycles on boardwalk — See Ch. 116,
§ 116-5.
§ 119-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A device having two wheels with tires, 15 inches or more in
diameter, connected by a frame of metal or other material and arranged to
be propelled by human power. The provisions of this chapter shall apply only
to bicycles as defined herein and to no other vehicles or devices of any kind.
§ 119-2. Registration required.
The rental of the cabanas will entitle the renter to four seasonal adult
beach passes. The initial fee, which will be set by resolution on an
annual basis, shall be due and payable at the time of execution of a
rental agreement. The rental shall be available on the Friday prior to
Memorial Day through the Sunday following Labor Day. All renters shall
execute an agreement with the City that provides as follows: [Added
6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 9-1749]
(1) Renters shall provide their own lock for the cabanas for security
purposes;
(2) Renters shall hold the City harmless for any loss of or damage to
stored items;
(3) Renters shall relinquish possession of the cabanas to the City no
later than the Sunday following Labor Day.
The City reserves the right to confiscate all items that are left in
the cabanas once they are relinquished and any such items shall
become the property of the City. Existing renters shall have the
first right to renew their cabana for the following season until
March 1, after which rentals shall be made on the first-come, firstserved
basis.
A. General. No person shall ride or use a bicycle in the City of Long Branch
unless the bicycle has been registered with the Director of the
Department of Public Safety or his designee and a license obtained
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, Fees.
§ 116-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 119-2
119:266
§ 119-3. Issuance of license plate and registration certificate.
therefrom as herein set forth, provided that any bicycle registered in
any municipality in the State of New Jersey need not be registered
under this chapter.
B. Temporary residents. Summer residents, visitors, transients,
vacationers and all other temporary and short-term residents in the city,
regardless of their length of stay in the city, shall register their bicycles
as herein provided and shall observe all other provisions of this chapter.
C. Rental businesses. Any person maintaining, operating, or conducting a
business of renting bicycles within the limits of the city shall register all
bicycles employed in such rental business.
D. Transference of ownership. Any person who purchases a new or used
bicycle or to whom ownership of a bicycle is otherwise transferred shall
register the bicycle within five days of taking ownership.
A. Application procedure. Application for a license plate and registration
certificate shall be made to the Director of the Department of Public
Safety or his designee upon a form approved by the Director. The
license plate and registration certificate shall be issued by the Director
or his designee as herein provided for, upon receipt of the application,
license fee and proof of ownership of the bicycle.
B. Qualifications and requirements. No person shall be issued a license
plate and registration certificate until it is found by an examination by
the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designee that the
bicycle is in a safe mechanical condition to operate, that the applicant
has the ability to operate the bicycle and that he has knowledge of the
rules and regulations set forth in this chapter as to the operation of
bicycles in the City of Long Branch.
C. Term; attachment and inspection of license. Licenses shall run for one
year commencing May 1 of each year to April 30 of the next year, and all
licenses shall expire on April 30. The license issued by the Director of
the Department of Public Safety or his designee shall at all times be
attached to the bicycle in a manner prescribed by the Director and,
together with the registration certificate issued to the owner, shall be at
all times subject to inspection by the Director or his designee.
D. Fee. The license fee to be paid for each bicycle registered shall be $1
per year or any part thereof; fees are to be remitted by the Director of
the Department of Public Safety or his designee to the City Comptroller.
Upon loss of a license plate, and upon satisfactory evidence of the loss,
a new license plate shall be issued upon payment of $1.50
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-2 BICYCLES § 119-4
119:267
§ 119-4. Alteration of license; identification stamping.
No person shall willfully, maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the
number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. No person
shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration
card during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration card is
operative, provided that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Director
of the Department of Public Safety or his designee from marking or
stamping on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be
found or on which such number is illegible for identification purposes. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designee may also mark
or stamp a number upon the frame of any bicycle registered which shall be
the secret number of the Department, if so required in the administration of
the provisions of this chapter to prevent bicycle larceny and recover stolen
bicycles.
§ 119-5. Regulations for bicycle operation. [Amended 3-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 17-94]
§ 119-6. Impoundment of bicycles; recovery.
A. Every person riding or using a bicycle in the city shall obey all sections
of the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 39:1 et
seq., which relate to bicycles, and obey all ordinances passed by the city
as to the regulation of traffic on stop streets, one-way streets and
through streets.
B. No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk or a boardwalk unless the
sidewalk or boardwalk has been designated for use as a bikeway by the
Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designee.
C. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
this subsection, any person convicted of a violation of this subsection or
its supplements and amendments shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.51
A. In addition to all other penalties for violation of this chapter, the
Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designee may seize
and impound the bicycle of an offender at the time the police officer
charges an offender with a violation. Such seizure and impoundment
shall be at the discretion of the police officer at the scene. Whenever
any bicycle shall be impounded for violations of the provisions of this
chapter, it shall be surrendered at the earliest opportunity to the owner
or, in the case of persons under 17 years of age, to their parents or
guardian upon payment of an impoundment fee not to exceed $2.
B. Where a bicycle has been seized because it has been found in the
possession of a person not the legal owner thereof, and the bicycle is
not reclaimed by the legal owner thereof or restored to the legal owner
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 119-6
119:268
§ 119-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 123
BOARDINGHOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouse signs — See Ch. 284, § 284-6. Zoning — See Ch. 345.
thereof, it shall be sold at public auction after the expiration of 60 days
or more from the date of seizure. Notice containing a description of the
bicycles to be sold at public auction shall be published in the official
newspaper of the city at least one week prior to the public auction
thereof. Proceeds of such auctions shall be remitted to the comptroller
of the city by the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his
designee. No impoundment fee or any other fee shall be levied against
persons claiming and recovering stolen bicycles which have come into
the possession of the Department of Public Safety.
A. Any person under the age of 17 years who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be, for the first offense, reprimanded in writing by
the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designee, which
writing shall be addressed to the parents or guardian of the offender,
stating the nature of the violation and warning that a repetition of the
violation or any other violation must be prevented by the parents or
guardian or the offender's registration shall be suspended for a period
of time not to exceed one month at the discretion of the Director of the
Department of Public Safety or his designee, and that during that
period of time the offender shall not ride his bicycle on the streets of the
city.
B. Any suspension of an offender's registration certificate beyond the first
suspension may be for a period of time up to two months, at the
discretion of the Director of the Department of Public Safety or his
designee, during which time the offender shall not ride his bicycle on
the streets of the city.
C. Any person under the age of 17 years who repeatedly violates the
provisions of this chapter may, at the discretion of the Director of the
Department of Public Safety or of his designee, be penalized by
successive suspensions of his registration certificate or by referral as a
juvenile complaint to the Juvenile Conference Committee of the City of
Long Branch, and ultimately, where deemed necessary, to the Juvenile
and Domestic Relations Court of Monmouth County.
§ 119-6 BOARDINGHOUSES § 123-1
123:269
§ 123-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than one person is
housed or lodged for hire with meals. The structure which shall contain
such boardinghouse shall be suitable for the operation and shall be in good
repair. The structure shall have firesafety features, comply with state and
local health laws and conform with the city ordinances and the housing
code.
§ 123-2. General regulations.
No structure approved as a boardinghouse shall be utilized for any other
purpose. Occupancy shall be restricted to the first floor and the second
floor; there shall be no occupancy of the basement (i.e., the story with the
floor level below the average grade at the building perimeter) nor shall
there be any occupancy above the third floor, unless the building is of Type
1 or 2 construction (BOCA). If the structure is of fire-resistive construction,
rooms above the second floor will be reviewed on an individual basis to
determine suitability for occupancy. Elevator service shall be provided for
residents above the second floor.
§ 123-3. Windows.
Residents' bedrooms shall be provided with natural light and ventilation.
Each room shall be equipped with an operable window which can be opened
by the resident without the use of tools, and said window shall offer a clear
opening of not less than 20 inches in width and 24 inches in height and
having an area of not less than 5.7 square feet. The bottom of the window
shall be not more than 44 inches off the floor.
§ 123-4. Accessways; sleeping rooms.
All rooms occupied by residents shall have direct access to corridors and
toilet facilities. Access to exits leading to the outside shall be direct and
shall not pass through any room or area which is occupied or has a door. No
exitway shall lead through a kitchen. Sleeping rooms shall have a minimum
square footage of not less than 100 square feet for each person. Beds shall
be set not less than 36 inches apart, with each bed being supplied with a
light fixture and nightstand.
§ 123-5. Heating.
Central heat from a single heating plant shall be provided in all habitable
areas of the boardinghouse. The heating unit shall be separated by onehour-
fire-rated walls and ceiling finish. All new installation for burning solid
fuels shall be located outside the building. An identifiable emergency switch
for the heating equipment shall be located on the first floor in an accessible
§ 123-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 123-5
123:270
area. The heating equipment must be capable of maintaining a temperature
of 75° during the coldest weather. Use of open fireplaces is prohibited.
§ 123-6. Lighting.
Lighting shall be by electricity only. All rooms and hallways shall have both
natural and artificial means of lighting. All halls, corridors and bathrooms
shall be equipped with night-lights. Each room shall have not less than two
duplex wall outlets and at least one outlet for each bed. Emergency lighting
shall be provided in corridors, hallways and stairways. This can be either an
automatic generator or battery-type emergency lights.
§ 123-7. Ventilation.
All rooms used by residents, including bathrooms, toilets, kitchens and
storage areas, shall be adequately ventilated by either natural or
mechanical means.
§ 123-8. Firesafety requirements.
All boardinghouses shall have an automatic fire and smoke detection system
of a type approved by the local Fire Department and installed in accord
with NFPA standard 72E. The system shall be connected with the Fire
Department alarm board located in police headquarters and shall sound
simultaneously in the facility and in police headquarters. All systems shall
have a service contract with a competent fire alarm service company,
inspected and tested semiannually, and a copy of the contract along with the
test results report shall be forwarded to the Long Branch Fire Prevention
Bureau for its file. For the purpose of providing horizontal fire zoning, all
floors above the first floor of any nonfireproof building shall be separated
into areas of not more than 3,000 square feet. Two satisfactory and easily
available means of egress, remote from each other and preferably at
opposite ends of the building, shall be provided for each floor occupied or
utilized by residents, owners or personnel. Such exits shall lead directly to
the outside.
§ 123-9. Stairways, hallways and doors.
Stairways and hallways leading to the exterior shall be made free and clear
of obstructions at all times. All exit doors to such stairways shall be clearly
marked. Two primary exits on the first floor shall open outward. No stairway
referred to as a "winder" will be accepted as satisfactory. In the event that
a fire escape is necessary to provide an acceptable second means of egress,
it shall be constructed in conformity with the Department of Community
Affairs Bureau of Housing Inspection, Report 7, Code 605.8A and BOCA
Article 6. All interior stairways, except those to the basement, shall be
properly enclosed to prevent upward spread of fire and smoke. Enclosure
shall have one-hour fire-resistance rating. Stairs to the basement shall have
a self-closing fire-rated door at the first floor level. Doors at the head of
basement stairs and on stairway enclosures shall be hollow metal doors
§ 123-5 BOARDINGHOUSES § 123-9
123:271
or solid wood doors of a flush-type, with metal frame, not less than 1 3/4
inches thick. All doors shall be at least 36 inches wide. Such doors shall
have a transparent wire glass window set in metal frame which shall not
exceed 100 square inches. All doors shall be self-closing and tight-fitting
and shall open in the direction of egress and shall be equipped with positive
latches. Panic hardware shall be installed on all primary means of egress.
Double doors shall be prohibited. Landings adjacent to all doors in stairway
enclosures shall be at least the width of the door. All laundry chutes and
dumbwaiters or other vertical openings shall be enclosed in one-hour-firerated
materials. All doors to the shaft shall be fire-rated.
§ 123-10. Basement.
Basement ceilings shall be protected by metal lath and plaster of fiveeighths-
inch sheetrock which is Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) firerated.
§ 123-11. Electrical wiring.
There shall be no temporary wiring in the structure. All accessories shall
carry the UL approval. On request of the City Code Enforcement or Fire
Prevention Bureaus, the owner of such boardinghouse shall furnish a
written statement by a licensed electrician certifying that the wiring and
electrical service has been inspected and found to conform with the
National Electric Code and that there is no overloading of branch circuits.
§ 123-12. Kitchens.
Kitchen interior finish shall be sheetrock or other noncombustible material;
use of wood panel or other wood surfaces other than the trim is prohibited.
Doors leading from kitchens to other areas shall be fire-rated and shall
swing only in one direction and have a positive latch and self-closing device.
All cooking equipment shall be equipped with an approved metal hood with
filters, ducts and exhaust fan. The cooking equipment hood and duct shall
be protected by an automatic fire-extinguisher system with an automatic
fuel shutoff.
§ 123-13. Fire escapes.
Fire escapes shall be directly accessible from the interior and so arranged
as to make clear and direct path of travel with no travel through any
occupied rooms or bathrooms. All exit doors shall be marked with lighted
exit signs. All doors shall swing outward. Fire escapes shall have a platform
of not less than 48 inches outside each door. No fire escape shall be
accepted if it does not meet the present specified regulations.
§ 123-14. Smoking regulations.
Smoking shall be prohibited in any room or compartment where flammable
liquids, gases or oxygen are located. Such areas shall be posted with
suitable NO SMOKING signs. Ash trays of noncombustible design shall be
§ 123-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 123-14
123:272
provided in designated smoking areas. Trash cans of metal construction
having a self-closing lid shall be provided in smoking areas.
§ 123-15. Fire extinguishers and fire regulations.
There shall be adequate fire extinguishers in the building; all shall bear the
UL approval. Each extinguisher shall be conspicuously hung and inspected
yearly by an approved inspection service. Each kitchen area shall have
not less than one five-pound dry chemical extinguisher. Each basement
area shall have at least one five-pound dry chemical extinguisher. General
areas throughout the house shall be fitted with two-and-one-half-gallon
pressurized water fire extinguishers. Each house shall develop specific fire
rules and regulations which shall be posted in a prominent place in the
house. Such rules shall list the phone number of the Police Department,
listing the emergencies handled by this number, fire, police and first aid
squad. The regulations shall include an evacuation plan and details on what
to do in the event of fire.
§ 123-16. Housing practices.
Good housekeeping shall be practiced throughout the premises at all times.
Storage shall not be permitted within 18 feet of any heater located within
the building. All combustible liquids, including paints and varnish, shall be
stored outside the building.
§ 123-17. Currently licensed boardinghouses; abandonment of use.
Establishments currently licensed shall be allowed a period of one year to
obtain full compliance with this chapter; failure to do so shall be cause
for revocation of their license. If from the date of notice of revocation
of licenses the premises is not used or not legally conducted as a
boardinghouse for a period of six months, the use as a boardinghouse shall
be considered abandoned.
§ 123-18. Appeals.
If any person, firm or corporation claims a special hardship by reason of
any ruling which has been or may be imposed by enforcement officials, an
appeal may be made to the City Council, and its determination shall be final.
§ 123-19. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter set forth minimum requirements for the
promotion of health, safety and public welfare, and whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive
or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 123-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 123-14 BOARDINGHOUSES § 123-20
123:273
Chapter 125
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burning of brush — See Ch. 134.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 262.
Collection of brush and branches — See Ch.
293, Art. I.
A. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.52
B. In addition, failure to comply with an order of abatement validly issued
by the Code Enforcement Bureau or the Fire Prevention Bureau by the
date set for abatement shall constitute a separate offense for each week
beyond said date.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 123-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 123-20
125:274
ARTICLE I
Removal
§ 125-1. Duties of owners and tenants. [Amended 8-23-1988 by Ord.
No. 53-88]
§ 125-2. Notice to owners or tenants. [Amended 8-23-1988 by Ord.
No. 53-88; 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 43-98]
After an investigation initiated by any complaint of a resident, officer or
employee of the city relative to a violation of this article, or upon its own
motion, the Health Department, Code or Fire Prevention Bureau, or any
inspector therein, shall make a written report of the conditions complained
of to the head of the Code or Fire Prevention Bureau. If the reported
conditions are found to exist, the head of the Code or Fire Prevention
Bureau shall notify the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands
complained of, in writing, either personally or by registered mail, to remove
such brush, hedges or other plant life, trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash or other debris within 10 days after receipt of
the notice. The Code or Fire Prevention Bureau shall reinspect the lands in
question after the ten-day period expires and report, in writing, to the head
of the Code or Fire Prevention Bureau whether the condition complained of
has been abated or remedied.
A. Brush and hedges near roadways and intersections. It shall be the duty
of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands in the city to
keep all brush, hedges or other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a
height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety.
B. Brush, weeds, debris, etc., which are a fire hazard or injurious to public
health or safety. It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in
possession of any lands in the city, where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety, general
welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, to remove from such lands brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash and debris.
C. Grass. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Subsections A and
B, it shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of
any lands in the city to keep all grass cut to a height of not more than 12
inches on any property in the city.
§ 125-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 125-3
125:275
§ 125-3. Removal by city; costs established as a lien.53 [Amended
7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 883]
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question shall fail
to abate the condition complained of within five days after receipt of notice,
the Health Department shall cause the condition complained of to be abated
and shall certify the cost to the Council, who shall examine the certificate
and, if it is correct, cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
the lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and
shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as
taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation
of this article.
53.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 38-96, adopted 12-30-1996, provides for the following: "Any such
lien created specifically from or last associated with removing brush, weeds, debris, etc.,
shall be a lien on such land and shall be added to and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14." See also § 200-18C.
§ 125-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 125-3
125:276
ARTICLE II
Weed Control Code
§ 125-4. Establishment of code.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
city in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy
of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the
inclusion of the text.
§ 125-5. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 125-6. Public record.
Three copies of the Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for the use and examination of
the public.
§ 125-7. Enforcement; modifications and amendments to code.
The Weed Control Code is amended in Section 4.1 to read as follows:
4.1. The provision of this code shall be enforced by members of the
Police Department, the Construction Code Official or building official, the
Plumbing Inspector, the Health Officer and any other official authorized by
the City Council to enforce this code and section.
§ 125-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 125-7
125:277
Chapter 128
BUILDINGS, DESIGN OF
§ 128-1. Findings.
The City Council hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior design and
appearance of buildings erected in the same residential neighborhood for
occupancy as dwellings adversely affects the desirability of immediate and
neighboring areas for residence purposes and by so doing impairs the
benefits of occupancy of existing residential property in such areas, impairs
the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property in
the areas, prevents the most appropriate use of real property, prevents
the most appropriate development of the areas, produces degeneration of
residential property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions
affecting the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants in
that it deprives the municipality of tax revenue which it otherwise could
receive and destroys a proper balance in relationship between the taxable
value of real property in such areas and the cost of the municipal services
provided therefor. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent these and
other harmful effects of uniformity in the exterior design and appearance
of buildings erected in the same residential neighborhood for occupancy as
dwellings and thus to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAIN ROOF —
NEIGHBORING BUILDING — Any building in existence or for which a
building permit has been issued at the time application is made for a
building permit for the proposed building site and which is located on:
FLAT AND SHED ROOFS:
That portion of the roof having a common plate height and covering
the largest volume of enclosed space, exclusive of the floor area,
below finished grade at the front elevation.
(1)
All flat roofs shall be deemed identical in the distance of the roof
above the plate line.
(2)
A.
GABLE, HIP, MANSARD OR OTHER ROOFS — That portion of the
roof having a common plate and ridge height and covering the largest
volume of enclosed space, exclusive of the floor area, below finished
grade at the front elevation. Dormers and intersections with other parts
of the roof within a common plate line will be deemed part of the main
roof.
B.
§ 125-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 128-2
128:278
PROJECTION LINES — Straight lines perpendicular to the center line of the
adjacent street and embracing the proposed building site or a neighboring
building.
PROPOSED BUILDING SITE — That area of land which it is proposed to
enclose within a building.
§ 128-3. Regulations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building permit shall be
issued for the erection of any one-family residence unless it differs from any
neighboring building in at least four of the following respects:
Either side of a street on which the proposed building site abuts and
within 300 feet thereof, exclusive of intervening streets, the distance
being measured along the street center line from its intersection with
the projection line of the neighboring building; or
A.
Another street which intersects a street on which the proposed building
site abuts and adjoining any neighboring building defined by
Subsection A above.
B.
A. The height of the bottom of the main eave line above the first floor or
the height of the main roof ridge above the top of the plate must differ
in height by at least two feet.
B. The length of the main ridge or, in the case of a flat roof, the length of
the main roof must differ by at least four feet.
C. The length between outside walls of the building, measured under the
main roof at right angles to the building width, the difference must be
at least three feet.
D. The width between outside walls of the building, measured under the
main roof at right angles to the building length, the difference must be
at least three feet.
E. Portions of the building not located under the main roof shall differ in at
least two of the following ways:
(1) Horizontal distance between the portion and the nearest corner in
the front elevation of the building under the main roof shall differ
by at least three feet, measured at right angles to the front
elevation.
(2) Height of the eave line of the portion, measured above the first
floor under the main roof, shall differ by at least two feet.
(3) Length of front elevation of the portion shall differ by at least three
feet.
F. In the front and each of the side elevations, the distance between door
and window openings must differ in at least two of the following:
§ 128-2 BUILDINGS, DESIGN OF § 128-3
128:279
Chapter 130
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 130-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of building
numbers to public streets for all properties that contain principal buildings
within the City of Long Branch in order to assist the general public and
the authorities in identifying any property in case of an emergency as well
as for the welfare of the general public in conducting their normal affairs,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et. seq.
§ 130-2. Property Renumbering Committee.
This chapter hereby creates a committee known as the "City of Long Branch
Property Renumbering Committee," to formulate a system to appropriately
identify, by clearly setting forth the designated marker, all properties in the
City of Long Branch.
§ 130-3. Property Number Map.
There is hereby established a uniform system for renumbering properties
along all streets, avenues and public and private ways in the City of Long
Branch. The Renumbering Committee shall prepare a Property Number
Map by superimposing upon the Official Map of the City of Long Branch
(1) The horizontal distance between openings must differ by at least
two feet.
(2) The horizontal distance between openings and the following
architectural elements must differ by at least two feet:
(a) Corners of the building under the main roof.
(b) Corners of the building not under the main roof, including
projecting chimneys.
(3) The vertical distance between floor level and the lower edge of
window openings of each floor must differ by at least one foot.54
A. Members of Committee. The Committee shall be made up of one
representative from the city's Fire Department, Planning Department,
Post Office, Police Department and the City Council. They shall elect the
Chairman from among themselves.
B. Expenditures. Said Committee's expenditures in creating a
renumbering system will not exceed $1,000, with all vouchers receiving
prior approval of the city's Committee.
54.Editor's Note: Former Section 14-5.4, Administration, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 128-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 130-3
130:280
numbers for every property in the City of Long Branch pursuant to the
following standards:
§ 130-4. Maintenance of Property Number Map and Street Guide.
After the Property Number Map and Street Guide have been prepared
by the Renumbering Committee pursuant to § 130-3 and approved by
ordinance of the city's Committee, they shall be maintained in the office of
the Planning Department. Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in
the City of Long Branch resulting in a lot or lots other than those delineated
on said map, the city shall assign a property number to each lot resulting
from said subdivision or resubdivision which shall be in proper numerical
sequence in relation to the number assigned to other lots fronting on the
same street, and shall record the same on the Property Number Map and
the Street Guide. Copies of the initial map and guide and any changes
thereto shall be filed (within 30 days of any change) with the Police Chief,
Fire Chief, Assessor and Tax Collector of the City of Long Branch as well as
with each post office serving any portion of the city.
§ 130-5. Responsibility of owner.
A. Existing numbers. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
the Renumbering Committee shall attempt to the extent possible
consistent with the maintenance of the orderly progression of property
numbers to assign to lots on which there are existing structures the
numbers which are currently in use.
B. New numbers. All property numbers for new subdivisions and lots
created by redivisions shall be consistent and uniform with existing
numbers in the immediate area as determined by the Renumbering
Committee.
C. Even and odd numbers. Even numbers shall appear on the westerly and
southerly side of each street, while odd numbers shall appear on the
opposite side of such street.
D. All parcels of property will be numbered in a uniform fashion, at fixed
intervals, as designated by the Renumbering Committee, on such
property map in order to facilitate continued numbering without the
need for change when properties are subdivided.
E. The Committee shall prepare a Street Guide listing alphabetically every
street in the City of Long Branch, with its location and the property
numbers currently assigned.
A. Whenever any improvement shall be erected or located in the City of
Long Branch after the passage of this chapter, and in order to preserve
the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the property, it shall be the
duty of the owner to ascertain the correct number or numbers as
designated by the Property Number Map from the City Postmaster for
said property and to immediately fasten on the improvement and/or by
§ 130-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 130-5
130:281
§ 130-6. Change of existing numbers.
After approval of the Property Number Map, the City Postmaster shall
notify, by regular mail or personal delivery, all owners of improvements
which do not display a number or which display an incorrect number that
they must bring their building into conformity with this chapter within six
months of the date of the notice.
§ 130-7. Numbering specifications.
some other appropriate method the proper marker, clearly setting forth
said number or numbers so assigned upon said property as provided by
this chapter.
B. No permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the
owner has ascertained the official number of the proposed or existing
improvement from the City Postmaster.
C. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified
after the effective date of this chapter shall be withheld by the
Construction Code Official until permanent and proper numbers have
been affixed to said structure.
D. Any person having a number different from that officially assigned shall
be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
A. The owner, occupant or agent of an owner or occupant shall place or
cause to be displayed upon each improvement controlled by him the
number or numbers assigned to the lot upon which it is located by the
Property Number Map provided for in § 130-3.
B. The numbers used shall be Arabic, not less than three inches in height,
and should be made of durable and clearly visible material; the
numbers shall be legible and maintained in good order at all times.
Roman numerals or script may supplement this requirement but shall
not be a substitute for compliance.
C. The numbers shall be conspicuously placed on the improvement facade
parallel to the street immediately above or within 10 feet of either side
of the main entrance to the improvement or over the garage door so
that the number can be plainly read from the center line of the street in
daylight by a person possessing at least 20/20 vision.
D. Whenever any improvement is situated more than 50 feet from the
street line, the designated number shall be displayed as provided in
Subsection C, but the numerals shall be at least five inches in height.
E. If the number would not be visible due to the orientation setback or
other features of the improvement or site if it were displayed as
provided above, then the number shall be placed near the walk,
driveway or entrance to such improvement and upon a gate, post or
fence so as to be easily discernible from the center line of the street.
§ 130-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 130-7
130:282
§ 130-8. Multiple entrances.
§ 130-9. Violations and penalties.
Provisions shall be as set forth in Chapter 345, Zoning, § 345-82.
§ 130-10. City Council approval.
The City of Long Branch Property Renumbering Committee will submit for
approval to the City Council within 60 days prior to implementation the plan
for renumbering properties as set forth herein.
§ 130-11. Summary of requirements.
A summary of the requirements of this chapter will be supplied to all
property owners specifying a period of 30 days for compliance with the
renumbering system created by the City of Long Branch Property
Renumbering Committee and approved by the City Council. On passage a
copy of this complete chapter shall be mailed to each post office serving any
portion of the city.
Such a display shall be not closer than 10 feet to the curbline nor
further away than 15 feet from the curbline. The bottom of such a
display shall be no less than 30 inches above the level of the ground, nor
shall the top of such a display be more than six feet above the ground.
A. Where any improvement has more than one entrance serving separate
occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance
serving a separate occupant and shall be posted as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
B. Where only one number can be assigned to any one improvement, the
suffix (a), (b), (c), et cetera, as may be required shall be used to
designate each separate entrance serving a separate occupant.
C. Where any building or complex of buildings is so structured that all
separate entrances serving separate occupants and the numbers
assigned to them are not clearly visible from the center line of the
street, then the number for each separate entrance shall be placed near
the walk or driveway from the street to such separate entrance and
upon a gate, post, fence or other appropriate place so as to be easily
visible from the center line of the street. The height limitations on such
a display shall be the same as those provided in § 130-7E.
D. For all multifamily improvements having apartment doors opening on
interior halls, each door shall have a number no less than two inches
high affixed thereon, and hall entryways shall have on the exterior
thereof a display indicating the sequence of apartments served by such
entryway.
§ 130-7 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 130-12
130:283
§ 130-12. Installation deadline.
It is hereby directed that house numbers as provided for by this chapter
shall be installed and such numbers shall be used within six months of the
date of final approval of the Property Number Map.
Chapter 134
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 125. Parks — See Ch. 247.
§ 134-1. Regulations for burning of brush.55
The following shall apply to bonfires and outdoor fires:
A. Burning of rubbish shall be prohibited except in approved incinerators.
B. The burning of herbaceous or infested plant life, the burning of orchard
prunings and cuttings, prescribed burnings and the clearing of
agricultural land by burning are prohibited by this chapter, unless in
accordance with a permit issued under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:27-2,
administered by the State Forest Fire Service in the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
C. A person shall not kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such
fire to be kindled or maintained unless:
(1) The location is approved by the Fire Official and is not less than 50
feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent
fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure; or
(2) The fire is contained in an approved burner located safely not less
than 15 feet from any structure.
D. Fuel for bonfires shall consist of seasoned dry wood only and shall be
ignited with a small quantity of paper only. Bonfires shall not contain
rubbish, garbage, trash, any material made of or coated with rubber,
plastic, leather or petroleum-based materials and shall not contain any
flammable or combustible liquids. The allowable quantity of wood to be
burned shall be determined by the Fire Official and shall be based upon
the requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of burn.
E. Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such
fire is extinguished. This person shall have fire-extinguishing
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 134-1
134:284
§ 134-2. Violations and penalties.57
A violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 140
CESSPOOLS
§ 140-1. Requirements for pumping and filling.
All unused or abandoned cesspools, septic tanks, seepage pits, privies or
other places used for the reception or storage of human excretion shall be
pumped out and filled to the level of the surrounding earth with clean earth
within two years after the connection with the public sanitary sewer system
or after abandonment or disuse.
§ 140-2. Certificate from Board of Health.
A certificate shall be secured from the Board of Health of the city showing
approval by the person designated by the Board of Health certifying that
the requirements set forth in § 140-1 have been met.
§ 140-3. Time frame for pumping and filling.
All presently existing unused or abandoned cesspools, septic tanks, seepage
pits, privies or other places used for the reception or storage of human
equipment readily available for use as deemed necessary by the Fire
Official.
F. The Fire Official may prohibit any or all bonfires that are or could be
offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous. The Fire Official shall order the extinguishment, by the
permit holder or the Fire Department, of any bonfire that creates or
adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
G. In districts for which fire wardens have been appointed in accordance
with the General Forest Fire Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9-44.1 et seq.),56 the
granting of permits for campfires shall be administered and enforced by
the State Forest Fire Service.
H. Open burning shall be allowed without prior notice to the Fire Official
for cooking fires, highway safety flares, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
56.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 13:9-44.1 et seq. is known as the "Forest Fire Prevention and
Control Act."
57.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 134-1 CESSPOOLS § 140-3
140:285
excretion shall be pumped out and filled to the level of the surrounding
earth with clean earth within two years from the adoption of this chapter.
§ 140-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-24-1987 by Ord. No.
132358]
Any person, persons, firm or firms violating this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I. Each day any violation or neglect is committed or
permitted to continue under this chapter shall constitute a separate offense
and be punishable as such.
Chapter 147
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exemption Uniform Construction Code
fees — See Ch. 45, § 45-15.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 147-1. Enforcing agency.
A. Establishment. A State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency is
hereby established, consisting of a Construction Code Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Code Official shall be the Chief Administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications. Each official position created in Subsection A shall be
filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.
21759 as amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any
particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be
retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. The same person may
hold more than one such official position, provided that such person is
qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each
position.
C. Location of office. The public shall have the right to do business with
the enforcing agency at one office location, except for emergencies and
unforeseen and unavoidable circumstances. Said location shall be at
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
59.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 140-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 147-1
140:286
§ 147-2. Board of Appeals.
All appeals arising as a result of actions taken under this chapter shall be
brought before the Monmouth County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 147-3. Fees. [Amended 3-26-1985 by Ord. No. 1212; 1-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 1260; 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 1287; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 27-01; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04;
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 13-11]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees as
follows and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
the office of the Construction Code Official, City Hall, 344 Broadway,
Long Branch, New Jersey.
D. It is hereby ordained that a new construction permit must be obtained
when 12 months have passed without progress on the project, except
where good cause is demonstrated to City Council that this requirement
shall be waived. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 13-11]
A. The building subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) The new construction fee shall be in the amount of $0.025 per cubic
foot of buildings and structures for all uses, groups and types of
construction as classified and defined in the building subcode.
(2) For renovations, alterations, reconstructions, and repairs: $20 per
$1,000 or fraction thereof of estimated cost up to and including
$50,000, with an additional $18 per $1,000 or fraction thereof of
estimated cost from $50,000 to and including $100,000, and $15
per $1,000 or fraction thereof of estimated cost above $100,000.
(3) For additions, the fee shall be computed on the same basis as A(1)
above for the added portion.
(4) For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and additions.
(5) For pre-manufactured buildings, the fee shall be calculated as per
A(2) above for all of the work performed on site. (Site work shall
include, but not be limited to footings, foundations, decks, and
porches.)
(6) The fee for roofing or siding work on a one- or two-family dwelling
shall be $60. The roofing and siding fees for other use groups shall
be calculated as per A(2) above.
(7) The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $100.
The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $75.
These permits shall be issued to a licensed abatement contractor.
§ 147-1 CESSPOOLS § 147-3
140:287
(8) The fee for a permit for an asbestos abatement clearance
certificate shall be $75.
(9) The fee for swimming pools shall be $75 for aboveground pools and
shall be $150 for in-ground pools associated with one- or two-family
dwellings; swimming pools associated with all other use groups
shall be calculated as per A(2) above.
(10) The fee for a demolition permit shall be $60 for one- or two-family
dwellings and $120 for all other use groups.
(11) The fee for a permit for the relocation of a building or structure
from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be
$15 per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving, for
new foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the
new location.
(12) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $2.50 per square
foot of the surface area of the sign. In the case of double-faced
signs, the area of the surface of only one side of the sign shall be
used for purposes of the fee computation.
(13) The fee for fences greater than six feet in height or installed to
provide a pool enclosure shall be $60.
(14) The fee for tents and other temporary structures not covered by the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be a flat fee of $150 per
structure.
(15) The fee for retaining walls shall be as follows:
(a) Retaining walls with a surface area less than or equal to 500
square feet and associated with a one-family or two-family
dwelling shall be a flat fee of $60.
(b) Retaining walls with a surface area greater than 500 square
feet and associated with a one-family or two-family dwelling
shall be a flat fee of $100.
(c) The fee for retaining walls associated with all other use groups
shall be based upon the cost of construction and calculated as
per A(2) above.
B. Plumbing subcode fees.
(1) In one-family or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be $15 per
fixture or stack for all fixtures except as listed in item B(2) below. In
all other use groups the fee shall be $40 per fixture or stack.
(2) In one-family or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be $35 per
special device, such as grease traps, sand interceptors, oil
separators, sewerage ejectors, water-cooled air-conditioning units
and utility service connections, low-water cut-off valves, heating
§ 147-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 147-3
140:288
system or replacement of oil tank. In all other use groups the fee
shall be $50 per special device.
(3) For the purpose of computing these fees, fixtures or stacks shall
include but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks,
urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor
drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes
washers, water heaters, gas piping per appliance outlet,
condensation lines, fuel oil piping or similar devices.
(4) The fee for the installation of cross-connection and backflow
preventors shall be $50 per device.
(5) The fee for the annual certification of cross-connections and
backflow preventors that are subject to annual testing and
reinspection, shall be a flat fee of $25 per device.
C. Electrical subcode fees.
(1) For from one to 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be in the
amount of $60; for each 25 receptacles or fixtures, or fraction
thereof, in addition to this, the fee shall be in the amount of $15.
For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall
include lighting outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures,
convenience receptacle, smoke and heat detectors or similar
fixture and motors or devices of less than or equal to one
horsepower or one kilowatt.
(2) For each motor or electrical device greater than one horsepower
and less than or equal to 10 horsepower and for transformers and
generators greater than one kilowatt and less than or equal to 10
kilowatts, the fees shall be $15.
(3) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower
and less than or equal to 50 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes; for
each transformer and generator greater than 10 kilowatts and less
than or equal to 45 kilowatts; and for each utility load management
device, the fee shall be $60.
(4) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less
than or equal to 1,000 amperes; and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $120.
(5) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower;
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than
1,000 amperes; and for each transformer or generator greater than
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $600.
§ 147-3 CESSPOOLS § 147-3
140:289
(6) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those in
plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(7) The fee for the annual electrical inspection of swimming pools,
spas, or hot tubs shall be $60.
(8) The fee for the electrical work associated with the installation of an
aboveground swimming pool shall be $75. The fee for the electrical
work associated with the installation of an in-ground swimming
pool shall be $150. These fees shall include all electrical devices
associated with the swimming pool excluding any new electrical
panels.
(9) Alternative energy systems.
(a) The fee for alternative energy systems shall be as follows:
[1] One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $60.
[2] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $120.
[3] Over 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $600.
(b) Alternative energy systems shall include, but not be limited to,
photovoltaic, wind-generated, hydroelectric, and fuel cells.
(c) These fees shall apply to the energy producing equipment only,
all other equipment shall be priced per C(1) through C(6)
above.
D. Fire protection subcode fees.
(1) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: fire sprinklers,
standpipes, fire alarm systems and devices, smoke and carbon
monoxide alarms, pre-engineered suppression systems, gas- and
oil-fired appliances, solid-fuel-fired appliances, commercial kitchen
exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums.
(2) The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads shall be $100; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $150; for each additional 100
heads, or part thereof, the fee shall be $200.
(3) The fee for smoke alarms, carbon monoxide alarms, or a fire alarm
system associated with a one- or two-family dwelling shall be a flat
fee of $75 regardless of number of devices.
(4) The fee for a fire alarm system, fire detection system, carbon
monoxide detection system associated with all use groups other
than one- or two-family dwellings shall be $100 for the first 12
alarm-initiating devices or notification appliances; and $50 for each
additional 25 devices or appliances, or fraction thereof.
§ 147-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 147-3
140:290
(5) The fee for each standpipe shall be $300.
(6) The fee for each independent pre-engineered suppression system
shall be $150.
(7) The fee for each gas, oil, or solid fuel-fired appliance shall be $50.
(8) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $100 for other
than one- or two-family dwelling.
(9) The fee for each fire pump shall be $400.
(10) The fee for the installation of each dry valve, pre-action valve,
deluge valve, detector check valve, post indicator valve, or similar
water control device shall be $60.
(11) The fee for the replacement of each fire alarm control panel shall
be $100.
(12) The fee for the installation, removal or abandoning of a flammable
or combustible liquid storage tank serving one- or two-family
dwellings shall be $60. For all other use groups the fee shall be
$120 per storage tank.
E. Elevator safety subcode fees.
(1) The City of Long Branch shall use the State of New Jersey,
Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards, Elevator Safety Unit to enforce the elevator safety
subcode.
(2) The fees for elevator device inspections and tests shall be as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
F. Miscellaneous construction code fees.
(1) The fee for a change in contractor shall be $60 when no additional
work is undertaken by the new contractor.
(2) Minimum fees and fees not covered. A minimum fee of $60 shall be
charged for each subcode permit; in addition, state fees (N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20) shall be used for any fee not addressed by municipal
ordinance.
G. Certificates of occupancy fees.
(1) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new construction and
additions in one- and two-family dwellings shall be $50; in all other
groups the certificate of occupancy fee shall be $100.
(2) The fee for a certificate granted to a change of use group shall be
$125.
(3) There shall be no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy or
certificate of approval or compliance.
§ 147-3 CESSPOOLS § 147-3
140:291
Chapter 150
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Possession and consumption of alcoholic
beverages by minors — See Ch. 103, § 103-6.
Minors in violation of graffiti
regulations — See Ch. 189.
Loitering by minors — See Ch. 218.
Noise — See Ch. 235.
§ 150-1. Power to establish.
The Mayor or, in his absence, the Chief Administrative Officer of the city is
hereby empowered to establish a curfew in the City of Long Branch on such
occasions and during such periods of time as are necessary to preserve the
public peace or to preserve order in the city or to prevent injury to persons
or property.
§ 150-2. Procedure.
The Mayor or, in his absence, the Chief Administrative Officer shall
establish a curfew by setting forth the hours and dates on which persons
or certain persons according to their age shall be forbidden to appear on
public streets or in any public place in the city or to appear or congregate
outside of private property in the city. A written statement setting forth the
H. Variation request fees. A fee of $50 shall be submitted with each
variation to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code requested for
one- or two-family dwellings. For all other use groups, the fee shall be
$200 for each variation requested.
I. Plan review fees. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before the
plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited
toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit.
J. State of New Jersey permit surcharge fees.
(1) In order to provide for the training and certification and technical
support programs required by the Act, state permit surcharge fees
as described in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19 shall be collected and
transmitted to the State Treasurer on a quarterly basis.
(2) The municipality shall remit fees to the Bureau of Regulatory
Affairs on a quarterly basis, in conjunction with report number
R-840B State Training Fee Report in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.5(e). Fees remitted shall be for the quarter. Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
§ 147-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 150-2
150:292
hours and dates of the curfew and the persons who shall be subject to it
shall be filed with the City Clerk and posted in at least 10 public places in
the city. The curfew shall then be in effect.
§ 150-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 158
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 158-1. Drug-Free Zone Map adopted. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord.
No. 60-92; 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 32-98; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No.
38-04]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), and L. 1997, c. 327 § 1 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1) the Drug-Free School
Zone Map produced on or about March 2, 1989, by Edward G. Broberg,
City Engineer, as amended December 2, 1991, and April 16, 1992, by
Edward G. Broberg, City Engineer, as amended December 2, 1991, and
April 16, 1992, by Edward G. Broberg, City Engineer, and April 20, 2001, by
Birdsall Engineering, City Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an
official finding of record of the location and areas within the municipality of
property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and of the areas on
or within 1,000 feet of such school property. Said map is also approved and
adopted as an official finding of record of real property comprising public
housing facilities, public parks or public buildings, and structures and
properties appurtenant thereto and used in connection therewith, which is
owned by or leased to a public housing facility and of the areas on or within
500 feet of such property.
§ 158-2. Location and boundaries of drug-free zones. [Amended
9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 32-98; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 38-04]
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 158-1 of
this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding of record as to
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes and any property on or within 500
feet of a public housing facility, public park or public building as defined
A. After the curfew is in effect, any person who is subject to the curfew and
who appears on a public street or in any public place or who appears or
is part of a congregation outside a private property shall be deemed to
have violated this chapter.
B. Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.60
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-2 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 158-2
158:293
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of such properties and drug-free zones.
§ 158-3. Notification of changes in location and boundaries.
[Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 32-98]
The school board or chief administrative officer, in the case of any private or
parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the City Engineer and the City Attorney of changes
or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes. The Director of Public Works and
Director of the Municipal Housing Authority shall have the same obligation
with regard to public parks, public buildings and public housing facilities.
§ 158-4. Copies of Map on file.
The Clerk of the city is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 158-1 and to
provide at a reasonable cost a true copy to any person, agency or court
which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a certification
that such copy is a true copy of the Map approved and adopted herein and
kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such Map and
of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the
office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 158-5. Map as evidence; statement of facts.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 158-1
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions
arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that pursuant to state
law, such Map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the Map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by (or leased to) a school or school board
§ 158-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 158-5
158:294
Chapter 166
FEES
and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being
the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44,61 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 158-1. The failure of the Map approved herein to
depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact,
used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
§ 158-5 FEES § 158-5
166:295

ARTICLE I
C.A.T. Program Fee
[Adopted 3-24-1992 by Ord. No. 49-92]
§ 166-1. Statutory provisions; informed consent agreement and
decal.
The City of Long Branch shall implement the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3-85.5
et seq. by making available to all resident registered owners of automobiles
an informed consent agreement and decal establishing participation in the
C.A.T. Program.
§ 166-2. Fee amount.
The City of Long Branch shall require all participants in the C.A.T. program
to pay a one-time fee of $3 per registered automobile representing a
reimbursement to the City of Long Branch for administering the C.A.T.
Program and the supplying of the informed consent agreements and decals.
§ 166-1 FEES § 166-2
166:297

ARTICLE II
Business Loan Application Fee
[Adopted 6-9-1992 by Ord. No. 65-92]
§ 166-3. Administrative processing fee. [Amended 9-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 75-92]
An administrative processing fee of $100 shall accompany all applications
submitted to the Director of Community and Economic Development in
support of the business loan program, and the fee shall be deposited as
program income in the CDBG account.
§ 166-4. Authorization of Director. [Amended 9-22-1992 by Ord. No.
75-92]
The Director of Community and Economic Development is hereby
authorized to represent the City of Long Branch in the collection of the $100
fee.
§ 166-3 FEES § 166-4
166:299

ARTICLE III
Rental Rehabilitation Application Fee
[Adopted 9-22-1992 by Ord. No. 76-92]
§ 166-5. Administrative processing fee.
An administrative processing fee of $100 shall accompany all applications
submitted to the Director of Community and Economic Development in
support of the Rental Rehabilitation.
§ 166-6. Deposit of fee.
The administrative processing fee of $100 should be deposited in the CDBG
account.
§ 166-7. Authorization of Director.
The Director of Community and Economic Development is authorized to
represent the City of Long Branch in the collection of the one-hundreddollar
administrative processing fee.
§ 166-5 FEES § 166-7
166:301
Chapter 170
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carrying of weapons by special law
enforcement officers — See Ch. 78, § 78-13.
Carrying of firearms by Parking Enforcement
Officers — See Ch. 78, § 78-20.
§ 170-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge any firearm anywhere within the City of Long
Branch except where expressly permitted by law.
§ 170-2. Possession of loaded firearm.
No person except the owner or lessee of any premises, while on such
premises, or any person specifically authorized in writing by the owner or
lessee of any premises, while on such premises, shall have in his possession
a loaded firearm within 300 feet of any occupied dwelling or any school
playground.
§ 170-3. Violations and penalties.62
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 173
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 100.
Firesafety requirements for
boardinghouses — See Ch. 123.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
§ 173-1. Adoption of standards by reference; public record.
A. Adoption of standards.
(1) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing for fire
protection and prevention and prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and where
62.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 173-1
170:302
§ 173-2. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be cited and designated as the "Long Branch
Fire Prevention Code."
§ 173-3. Local enforcement; establishment of Bureau of Fire
Prevention; powers and duties.
human life is endangered, especially in places of assembly and
institutional occupancy, the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983,
c. 383)63 and the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., as
amended).
(2) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq., the aforesaid codes, which
are in printed book form, are adopted by reference thereto.
B. Public record. Three copies of the printed code will be placed on file in
the office of the City Clerk for use and examination of the public so long
as this chapter shall remain in effect.
A. Local enforcement. Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, the New Jersey Uniform Code shall be locally enforced in the City
of Long Branch.
B. Agency designation. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, which is hereby created within the Long Branch Fire
Department.
C. Duties.
(1) The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in the buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of the
City of Long Branch other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied
buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures and premises owned or operated by the federal
government, interstate agencies or the state.
(2) The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the
requirements of the State Uniform Safety Act, N.J.A.C. 5:70, as
amended, and 5:71, as amended, and high level alarms, N.J.A.C.
5:72, as amended. [Amended 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99;
10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 38-03]
D. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall file an annual report with the
Director of Public Safety and the Fire Chief, in addition to any reports
required under the Uniform Fire Code. It shall contain all proceedings
under this chapter, with such statistics as will show the nature and
extent of the performance of the duties of the office during the year.
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 38-03]
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 173-1 FIREARMS § 173-4
170:303
§ 173-4. Public Safety Director; Fire Official; City Attorney; removal
from office; compensation.
§ 173-5. Inspections and permits.
A. Appointing authority. The Public Safety Director is hereby designated
the appointing authority of the local enforcing agency.
(1) He shall appoint Fire Inspectors as needed pursuant to Title 11,
Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey,64
meeting the qualifications set forth by the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, after consultation with the Fire Official and
the Fire Chief.
(2) He shall appoint a Fire Official pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, who is certified by
the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
B. Supervision and control. The Bureau of Fire Prevention as established
in § 173-3B shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire
Official and shall be subject to direction from the appointing authority
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:71, as amended. The Fire Official shall collect all
fees and penalties in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:71, as amended, submit
a budget for his agency in accordance with the municipal regulations
and account for the proper disposition of the same. The Fire Official
shall be responsible to the Chief of the Department for reports and such
data required by the office of the Fire Chief. [Amended 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 11-99]
C. The City Attorney shall act as legal counsel to assist the agency in
enforcing the Uniform Fire Code.
D. Removal. The Fire Official, Inspectors and other employees of the
agency shall be subject to removal by the Director of Public Safety for
good cause pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey.65
E. Salaries. Salaries of the Fire Official, Fire Inspectors and other
personnel in the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be established by the
City Council of the City of Long Branch as required by law.
A. Life hazard uses. The Bureau of Fire Prevention as established in
§ 173-3B shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70, as amended, required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs. [Amended 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99]
64.Editor's Note: L. 1986, c. 112 enacted new Title 11A, Civil Service, and repealed former
Title 11, Civil Service. (See N.J.S.A. 11A:12-3.)
65.Editor's Note: L. 1986, c. 112 enacted new Title 11A, Civil Service, and repealed former
Title 11, Civil Service. (See N.J.S.A. 11A:12-3.)
§ 173-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 173-5
170:304
B. Nonlife hazard uses. In addition to the registrations required by the
Uniform Fire Code, the following nonlife hazard uses as defined in
Article 3 of the Building Officials and Code Administrators Building
Code (BOCA) shall register with the Bureau of Fire Prevention. These
uses shall be inspected once per year and shall pay an annual fee as set
forth below: [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Business Use Group
B-1 under 2,500 square feet $35
B-2 2,500 to 4,999 square feet $45
B-3 5,000 to 9,999 square feet $60
B-4 10,000 square feet and over $100
Factory Use Group
F-2 under 5,000 square feet $75
F-2 over 5,000 square feet $100
Mercantile Use Group
M-1 under 6,000 square feet $50
M-2 6,000 to 11,999 square feet $75
Storage Use Group
S-1 under 2,500 square feet $50
S-2 2,500 to 5,000 square feet $60
S-3 over 5,000 square feet $75
Residential Use Group
R-A nonowner occupied 1 and 2 unit $35
R-B 3 to 6 units per building $50
R-C 7 to 12 units per building $70
R-D 13 to 20 units per building $85
R-E over 20 units per building $110
C. Additional permits and fees. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No.
44-98; 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
38-03; 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 21-18]
(1) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70, as amended, the fees for the
permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70, as amended, shall be as follows:
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641
§ 173-5 FIREARMS § 173-5
170:305
§ 173-6. Appeals. [Amended 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Safety Act,66 a person
aggrieved by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Monmouth County.
§ 173-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be in conformity with the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 173-8. Rapid-entry system in residences and businesses.
[Amended 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 13-00]
D. Any building having a fire suppression system or fire alarm system
required at the time of construction must have such system maintained
and certified pursuant to the NFPA standards referenced in the Uniform
Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., as amended). [Added 5-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 17-04]
E. There shall be a charge of $95 per hour for fire apparatus where a fire
watch or fire department standby is required by the Fire Official.
[Added 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
A. Required. The Bureau of Fire Prevention of the City of Long Branch
shall require the owner(s) of all of the following types of new and
existing building(s) or structure(s) to have installed on their building(s)
or structure(s) a rapid-entry key box, to be located not less than six nor
more than eight feet from grade above the main entrance on the hinge
side of the entry door;
(1) All hotels, motels or multiple dwellings that:
(a) Have locked main entrances for security purposes at any time
during the day or night; and
(b) Have common corridors to living units or spaces.
(2) Any sprinklered or interconnected alarmed residential or
commercial building or structure.
(3) Any industrial, commercial, institutional, retail or similar business
building or structure, including public and private schools,
consisting of 12,000 square feet or more.
(4) Any public or private educational institution.
(5) Any other building or structure deemed necessary by the Fire
Official.
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70, as amended.
§ 173-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 173-8
170:306
Chapter 177
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Soil removal — See Ch. 290.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 296.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
B. Approval of system; owner to provide keys upon request. The type of
rapid-entry key box system to be installed shall be approved by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention prior to the purchase of the same. In addition
to providing a rapid-entry key for the system installed to the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, the Bureau may request and the owner of the building
or structure concerned shall provide keys for the following areas within
the building or structure:
(1) Boiler rooms;
(2) Sprinkler control valves;
(3) Electrical rooms;
(4) Elevators and elevator control rooms; and
(5) Such other room(s) or door(s) requested by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention where entry may be required.
C. Key to self-contained living areas, units or rooms. Notwithstanding the
provisions of any other section of this chapter, no official, employee or
member of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or Fire Department shall
request, nor shall an owner be required to provide, a key to any selfcontained,
individual living space area, unit or room.
D. When deemed necessary, the Fire Official may require the owner of a
building structure to purchase and install locking Fire Department
connection cap(s) with a type to be approved by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
E. When deemed necessary, the Fire Official may require the owner of a
building structure to purchase and install a keyed electric override
switch with a type to be approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention for
the following:
(1) Exhaust fans for parking structure(s).
(2) Electric-operated doors for parking structure(s).
(3) Electric-operated perimeter gates.
§ 173-8 FIREARMS § 173-8
170:307
§ 177-1. Statutory authorization; finding of fact; purpose and
objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has,
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City
Council of the City of Long Branch, of Monmouth County, New Jersey,
does ordain as follows.
B. Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the City of Long Branch are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes
damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
C. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
§ 173-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-1
170:308
§ 177-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Floodplain Manager's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD — The land
within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe floodrelated
erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation of the special floodrelated
erosion hazard, the area will be designated as Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 177-1 FIREARMS § 177-2
170:309
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The effective Flood Insurance
Risk Maps or most recent Preliminary Flood Hazard Maps FEMA has
provided.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — Is depicted on the
effective FIRM or FIS, or Preliminary Flood Hazard Maps or Preliminary
FIS.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A OR AE ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward
limit of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped,
the Coastal A or AE Zone is the portion between the shore and the landward
limit of the moderate wave action delineation. Coastal A or AE Zones may
be subject to the wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour or combination
of these forces, and construction/development is to be regulated the same
as V Zones.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
A non-basement building:
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to
have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a
coastal high-hazard area, or Coastal A/AE Zone, to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor
elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water; and
(1)
A.
§ 177-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-2
170:310
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special-purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
In areas of coastal high hazard and Coastal A Zone "elevated
buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition
of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
(3)
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
B.
In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
C.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 177-2 FIREARMS § 177-2
170:311
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood (LiMWA). Base
flood conditions between the VE Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but
less severe than, those in the VE Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 177-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-2
170:312
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The draft version
of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and adoption.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 177-2 FIREARMS § 177-2
170:313
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this ordinance. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 177-3. General provisions.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. Application of provisions, lands to which this chapter applies. This
chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Long Branch, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 177-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-3
170:314
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Long Branch,
Community No. 340307, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(a) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated
September 25, 2009.
(b) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey
(All Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel(s)
34025C0184G, 34025C0192F, 34025C0194F, 34025C0203G,
34025C0211F, 34025C0213F, the effective date of which is
June 20, 2018.
(c) Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or
Base Flood Elevation conflict or overlap with the best available
flood hazard data, whichever imposes the more stringent
requirement shall prevail.
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
344 Broadway, Long Branch, New Jersey.
C. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $1,250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Long Branch from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
§ 177-3 FIREARMS § 177-3
170:315
§ 177-4. Administration.
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Long
Branch, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 177-3B. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain
Manager and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 177-5B(2); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the local administrator. The Floodplain Manager, as
appointed by City Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the
Floodplain Manager shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review:
§ 177-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-4
170:316
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the
floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of
§ 177-5C(1) are met.
(d) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard and
Coastal A Zone area of the area of special flood hazard to
determine if the proposed development alters sand dunes or
other natural coastal protections so as to increase potential
flood damage.
(e) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the
base flood level in accordance with § 177-5D(2)(d).
(2) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance
with § 177-3B, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the Floodplain Manager shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 177-5B(1), Specific standards, residential
construction, and § 177-5B(2), Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 177-4A(3).
(c) In coastal high hazard areas and Coastal A Zone areas,
certification shall be obtained from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the provisions of § 177-5D(2)(a) and
(b)[1] and [2] are met.
§ 177-4 FIREARMS § 177-4
170:317
(d) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control
section and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 177-4D.
(6) Substantial damage review.
(a) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the
damage to structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(b) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of
substantial damage structures and provide a letter of
substantial damage determination to the owner and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Flood Control.
(c) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 177-5B, Specific standards.
D. Variance procedure.
(1) Appeal Board.
(a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the City of
Long Branch shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Manager in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court, as provided in New Jersey statutes.
§ 177-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-4
170:318
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter
and:
[1] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;
[2] The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
[3] The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
[4] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
[5] The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
[6] The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
[7] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
[8] The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
[9] The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
[10] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
[11] The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of § 177-4D(1)(d) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(f) The Floodplain Manager shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
§ 177-4 FIREARMS § 177-4
170:319
§ 177-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
items in § 177-4D(1)(d)[1] through [11] have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as
identified in § 177-4D(1)(d), or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
(f) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built
with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
A. General standards in all areas of special flood hazards. In all areas of
special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable requirements of
the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the following
standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
§ 177-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-5
170:320
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation; collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
§ 177-5 FIREARMS § 177-5
170:321
(c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain
at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two
openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 177-3B, Basis
for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or in § 177-4C(2), Use
of other base flood data, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction.
(a) For Coastal A Zone construction, see § 177-5D, Coastal high
hazard area and Coastal A Zone.
(b) New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated to two feet above base flood elevation, or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, or the best available
flood hazard data elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
(2) Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE
Zone (for Coastal A Zone construction, see § 177-5D, Coastal high
hazard area and Coastal A Zone) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, either elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation, or the best available flood hazard data elevation, or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive, and require adequate drainage paths around structures
§ 177-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-5
170:322
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures; or
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two
feet, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-13, Table 6-1, or the best
available flood hazard data elevation, whichever is more
restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 177-4C(3)(b)[2].
(3) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 177-5A(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
[1] Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
[2] Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
[3] Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
[4] Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top
of the lowest floor is two feet above the base flood
elevation, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, or
the best available flood hazard data elevation, whichever is
more restrictive;
[5] The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 177-3B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
§ 177-5 FIREARMS § 177-5
170:323
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If § 177-5C(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 177-5, Provisions for flood
hazard reduction.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/
10 of a foot at any point.
D. Coastal high hazard area and Coastal A Zone. Coastal high hazard areas
(V or VE Zones and Coastal A or AE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 177-3B. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters from tidal
surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Location of structures.
(a) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the
reach of the mean high tide.
(b) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited,
except in an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
(2) Construction methods.
(a) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be elevated on piling or columns so that the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to two feet above
the base flood elevation, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 4-1, or the best available flood hazard data elevation,
whichever is more restrictive, with all space below the lowest
floor's supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of
water, except for breakaway walls as provided for in
§ 177-5D(2)(d).
(b) Structural support.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be securely anchored on piling or columns.
[2] The pile or column foundation and structure attached
thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
§ 177-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-5
170:324
lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water
loading values, each of which shall have a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval).
[3] There shall be no fill used for structural support within
Zone VE, V, and Coastal A.
(c) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop or review the structural design specifications and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for compliance with the
provisions of § 177-5D(2)(a) and (b)[1] and [2].
(d) Space below the lowest floor.
[1] Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall
not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless
breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect
screening are used as provided for in this section.
[2] Breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect
screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation,
provided that they are intended to collapse under wind
and water loads without causing collapse, displacement or
other structural damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system. Breakaway
walls shall be designed for a safe loading resistance of not
less than 10 pounds per square foot and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which
exceed a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot
(either by design or when so required by local or state
codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed
meet the following conditions:
[a] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base
flood; and
[b] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the
effects of wind and water load acting simultaneously
on all building components (structural and
nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state
or local building standards.
§ 177-5 FIREARMS § 177-5
170:325
Chapter 181
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Service of alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
Sale of food from vehicles — See Ch. 256, Art.
II.
[3] If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall
be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage and not for human habitation.
[4] Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must
be submitted to the Floodplain Manager for approval.
(3) Sand dune. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within
Zones Coastal A, VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would
increase potential flood damage.
§ 177-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 177-5
170:326
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 930 (Sec. 18-4 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 181-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 181-2. License required. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a retail food establishment
as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. within the City of
Long Branch without first having procured a license from the Department;
provided, however, that an application having been submitted and received
in accordance with the terms and procedures of this article may be
considered by the Department as permission to operate on a provisional
basis.
§ 181-3. Licensing procedure and terms.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health of the City of Long Branch.
ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.3.
LICENSEE — The operator of a retail food establishment and/or the
establishment itself.
N.J.A.C. 8-24 ET SEQ. — Sanitation and Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
OPERATOR — A person (as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3), owner or
operator legally responsible for the operation of an establishment.
B. The definitions of any other terms used in the context of this article
shall be the definitions as given in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3.
A. The operator of a retail food establishment shall apply for said license in
writing and on a form provided by the Department.
B. Such application shall be submitted to the Department prior to
December 31 of each year or 30 days prior to the proposed starting
date of operation if not previously licensed.
C. A license shall be issued only after an application has been submitted,
reviewed and approved.
D. Approval of the application shall be contingent upon:
(1) The application being complete, accurate, signed by the operator
and otherwise in order.
(2) The tendering of the applicable license fee.
§ 181-1 FIREARMS § 181-3
170:327
§ 181-3.1. Food handlers training course. [Added 8-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 23-98]
§ 181-4. License fee. [Amended 11-12-1977 by Ord. No. 37-97]
(3) A "satisfactory" inspection evaluation, based on the standards set
forth in N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
(4) Attendance by the applicant or his appropriate representative at a
periodic food handlers training course conducted or otherwise
sponsored by the Department.67
E. The license shall be effective for the given calendar year, January 1
through December 31, regardless of the date issued and shall be
renewable annually.
F. Any operator whose license is not duly renewed by January 31 of any
given year because of failure to submit an application on time shall be
in violation of this article.
A. The operator of any retail food establishment must attend a food
handlers training course offered by the Health Department or present a
certificate from a course acceptable to the Health Department, and/or
one manager or other responsible individual from each shift must
attend a food handlers training course offered by the Health
Department or present a certificate from a course acceptable to the
Health Department.
B. Anytime a food establishment is inspected and found to be less than
satisfactory the operator or his/her representative must attend a food
handlers training course.
C. The fee for this course is $25 per individual. The Health Department
shall permit a group rate of $200. All individuals attending the course
will receive a certificate.
D. The City Health Officer or designated representative will oversee
administration of this regulation and the necessary interpretation.
A. Upon application for said license, the applicant shall tender the license
fee in accordance with the following as determined by the Department,
which fee shall include any inspections made by the City: [Amended
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 50-07]
(1) Basic fee: $100. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(2) From an establishment engaged in the preparation, processing,
packaging or serving of food: $150. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord.
No. 10-20]
67.Editor's Note: See § 181-3.1, Food handlers training course.
§ 181-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 181-4
170:328
§ 181-5. Revocation or suspension of license.
(3) From an establishment engaged in the preparation, processing,
packaging or serving of food with equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet of area: $200. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No.
10-20]
(4) Special events. There shall be a licensing fee of $50 for each vendor
who will appear at a special event. This fee shall be per event per
vendor. A special event is defined as an event taking place in the
City of Long Branch for which municipal approvals are required.
(5) Mobile retail food establishments. An annual licensing fee of $50
shall be due and owing to the licensing of mobile retail food
establishments as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., as amended.
(6) Plan review fee. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(a) A plan review fee shall be required for any retail food
establishment plan which is submitted pursuant to N.J.A.C.
8:24-11.1 et seq., as amended, according to the following
seating capacities or square footage for those without seated
dining:
[1] Up to 25 seats: $100.
[2] From 26 to 100 seats: $250.
[3] More than 100 seats: $500.
[4] Up to 4,000 square feet: $150.
[5] From 4,001 to 10,000 square feet: $400.
[6] More than 10,000 square feet: $400.
(b) Plan review fee for any food establishment limited plan
alteration shall be $125 per plan.
(7) Late fee. A late fee of $25 shall be required for any renewal of an
application for a license under § 181-4A(1) through (3) of this
chapter submitted after January 31 of the effective year of the
license.
B. There shall be no exemptions from any of the above licensing fees.
However, the Council of the City of Long Branch may annually approve
a request for an exemption. Such Council-approved exemptions shall be
for a one-year period only and shall not automatically renew.
C. The Director of Health is empowered to create and promulgate forms
and regulations for the processing of licensing applications and fees
pursuant to this section.
§ 181-4 FIREARMS § 181-5
170:329
§ 181-6. Closure.
§ 181-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provision, Article I, for each violation of any of the provisions of this
article, and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
revoked or suspended by the Department for the violation by the
licensee of any provision of this article or of N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a retail food
establishment, the license of which has been revoked or suspended.
C. A license shall not be revoked or suspended until the licensee shall have
been afforded the opportunity of a hearing before the Health Officer to
show cause why such license should not be so revoked or suspended.
(1) Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served
upon the licensee at least three days prior to the date set forth for
such hearing.
(2) The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds relied
upon for such revocation or suspension.
(3) The notice shall be served via certified mail, return receipt
requested, or via hand-delivery by a representative of the
Department or by the City Police Department.
A. An order to close an establishment may be issued in accordance with
the enforcement provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
24:15-11. The Department may request of an operator voluntary
closure of his establishment in lieu of prosecution whenever the
establishment: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(1) Has received an inspection evaluation of "unsatisfactory."
(2) Has received three consecutive inspection evaluations of
"conditionally satisfactory."
(3) Presents a condition which is a threat to the public health.
B. If such a request to voluntarily close is denied, the Department may
start an action at law, including a request for a court injunction closing
the establishment.
§ 181-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 181-8
170:330
§ 181-8. Remedy not exclusive; severability.
The provisions of this article are not intended to be exclusive or to
supersede any other remedies provided by law or ordinance. If any clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 181-8 FIREARMS § 181-8
170:331

ARTICLE II
Sanitation
[Adopted 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. 21-88 (Sec. 18-5 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 181-9. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and registration thereof; prohibiting the sale or
possession with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or
misbranded foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines
and operations connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations
thereof is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy
of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the
inclusion of the text.
§ 181-10. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII, Sanitation in
Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines,"68 in
this article here and after known as "Chapter 12."
§ 181-11. Public record.
Three copies of Chapter 12 have been placed on file in the office of the City
Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 181-12. Health Authority.
The provisions of the code N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3 are amended to provide the
definition of Health Authority as follows: "Health Authority" shall mean the
duly licensed agent of the local Board of Health and/or State Department of
Health to act in the enforcement of its ordinances and sanitary laws of the
state and, for enforcement purposes, also shall mean and include regular
and special patrolmen and superior officers of the Police Department, the
Construction Code Official or any other official authorized by the City
Council to enforce this code and article.
§ 181-13. Registration fee. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
The annual registration fee to engage in the business of operating a food
and/or beverage vending machine as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-11.1 et seq.
shall be $30 for each machine each year.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 8-24 et seq.
§ 181-9 FIREARMS § 181-14
170:333
§ 181-14. Submission of application and fee. [Amended 10-27-1998
by Ord. No. 36-98]
The owner or operator of a food or beverage vending machine operating
in the City of Long Branch shall submit an application on a form provided
by the Department of Health of the City of Long Branch along with the fee
of $30 for each food or beverage vending machine operated in the City of
Long Branch; such fee and application are to be submitted to the City of
Long Branch Department of Health by January 1 of each year. Any person
intending to operate a food or beverage vending machine must submit the
fee and application prior to beginning operation, provided that the Health
Authority, upon proper application, may authorize waiving of the fee for a
charitable, religious, governmental benevolent or other not-for-profit group
or organization.
§ 181-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 181-14
170:334
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Cafes and Restaurants
[Adopted 6-23-1999 by Ord. No. 28-99]
§ 181-15. License required. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 11-06]
Sidewalk cafes and restaurants may be established in any commercial zone.
However, no such use shall be permitted on any property immediately
adjacent to a residential use unless the cafe/restaurant was established
prior to the residential use. No person shall establish, maintain, own or
operate a sidewalk cafe/restaurant nor serve food, liquor or other beverages
on any public street, sidewalk, boardwalk, promenade or alleyway without
first having obtained a license from the Clerk of the City of Long Branch. It
shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of any license under this section that
the applicant have a valid mercantile license for restaurant/food services in
the City of Long Branch.
§ 181-16. Application; investigation; issuance or denial.
An application for a sidewalk cafe license shall be available on a form to be
issued by the Clerk of the City. Once a completed application is received by
the Clerk with the appropriate fee, it shall be forwarded to the Director of
Public Safety, who shall conduct an investigation into the data contained in
the application.
A. The Director shall review the application to assess issues of public
safety, including but not limited to pedestrian access and movement,
access and movement of emergency personnel, effect on motor vehicle
traffic flows, impact on fire zones, impact on local residents, if any,
appropriateness of design, the business record of the applicant, any
proposed structures to be erected on the public sidewalks and public
safety, health and welfare considerations. The application shall include
a drawing submitted by the applicant depicting the area to be utilized,
the layout proposed and dimensions thereof, as well as proximity to the
curb, street and neighboring properties. The Director shall also obtain a
report from the City Health Department as to whether appropriate food
storage, sanitary conditions, adequate restroom facilities and waste
disposal procedures are available and in place prior to issuance of a
license. The Public Safety Director shall issue or deny the license as in
his or her unlimited discretion as he or she deems appropriate. If the
applicant is in possession of a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the
premises, as part of this application the applicant must submit to the
City Council an amended plan for the retail consumption of alcoholic
beverages on a sidewalk and seek the appropriate extension of the
license to cover the sidewalk area if alcoholic beverages are to be
served in that area. If the applicant holds a retail alcohol license or if
the applicant wishes to allow patrons to bring their own alcohol for
consumption within the cafe premises, the applicant must submit a plan
to put in a barrier, i.e. planters, fencing or the like, acceptable to the
Public Safety Director in his sole discretion, to separate and segregate
§ 181-15 FIREARMS § 181-16
170:335
§ 181-17. Application fees and licensing fees.
Any persons submitting an application for a sidewalk cafe or restaurant
shall submit an application fee in the amount of $50 with said application.
Should an application be approved by the Director of Public Safety or the
Mayor and Council of the City by resolution, as specified in § 181-16D of this
article, the applicant shall pay an annual licensing fee in the amount of $25
for one to four tables; $50 for five to eight tables; and $100 for more than
eight tables utilized for said sidewalk cafe restaurants.
§ 181-18. Season.
Any and all licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall
permit sidewalk cafe operations to begin no earlier than April 1. Any and
all sidewalk cafe operations so established shall terminate no later than
November 1 of the year in which the permit is issued.
§ 181-19. Annual renewal.
Any license for a sidewalk cafe issued pursuant to the terms of this article
shall be renewed annually in the discretion of the Director of Public Safety
or, on appeal, the Mayor and Council of the City of Long Branch.
the area in which the alcoholic beverages are to be sold and/or
consumed from areas traversed by the general public. The Director
shall make his or her findings and recommendations, if any, within 30
days of the Director's receipt of the application.
B. An applicant who is denied a license by the Director may appeal the
decision of the Director to the Mayor and Council of the City of Long
Branch. Said appeal must be received in writing by the Clerk of the City
of Long Branch within seven days of the denial of the application by the
Director of Public Safety. The Mayor and Council may then consider the
appeal, taking into consideration the findings of the Director, the issues
taken into consideration by the Director and any other relevant
information. The Mayor and Council may affirm or overrule the
Director's decision in their unlimited discretion as they deem
appropriate.
C. Both the Director of Public Safety or the Mayor and Council of the City
of Long Branch, whichever may grant an application for such a license,
may impose any restrictions or conditions deemed necessary in the sole
discretion of the Director or the Mayor and Council should an appeal
come before them.
D. No license shall be issued until an approval by the Director of Public
Safety is received by the Clerk of the City of Long Branch or a
resolution of the Mayor and Council overruling the Public Safety
Director in granting the issuance of a license shall have been adopted
by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council of the City of Long Branch.
§ 181-16 LONG BRANCH CODE § 181-20
170:336
§ 181-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six
months or by a fine not exceeding $500, or both in the discretion of the
court.
§ 181-21. General provisions.
The terms of Chapter 1, General Provisions, are fully applicable to this
article.
§ 181-22. Insurance requirements.
A. Any person obtaining a license for a sidewalk cafe or restaurant shall
submit, for the protection of the City of Long Branch and its
representatives, as well as the general public, a comprehensive policy
of liability insurance protecting the licensee and the City of Long
Branch against any liability whatsoever occasioned by accident on or
about licensed property or any appurtenances thereto. This policy shall
be written by a good and solvent insurance company or companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, and the limits of
liability shall not be less than the amount of $1,000,000 in respect of
any one person and in the amount of $1,000,000 in the respect of any
one accident or occurrence.
B. Prior to the time such insurance is first required to be carried by the
sidewalk cafe license holder and thereafter, at least 15 days prior to the
expiration of any such policy, the licensee agrees to deliver to the City
Clerk a certified true copy of the aforesaid comprehensive liability
policy naming the City of Long Branch as an additional insured and
including an endorsement that such insurance policy may not be
modified or canceled except upon 30 days' written notice to the City;
the licensee shall also deliver to the City Clerk evidence of payment for
the policy. The licensee shall promptly provide, at the request of the
City from time to time, certification or other proof acceptable to the
City that the insurance policy is in good standing and in full force and
effect.
C. Failure of the licensee to obtain and maintain insurance pursuant to the
requirements of this section shall result in the immediate closure of the
sidewalk cafe or restaurant by City officials and the termination of the
license held by the licensee.
§ 181-20 FIREARMS § 181-22
170:337
Chapter 185
GARAGE SALES
§ 185-1. Compliance.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person, association or
corporation shall conduct any commercial or business activity on residential
property in the City of Long Branch commonly known as "garage sales" or
any activity of like nature, except upon compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and upon first obtaining a license therefor as required by this
chapter.
§ 185-2. License required.
Any person, association or corporation desiring to conduct such garage sale
or like activity upon residential property in the City of Long Branch shall
first apply to the City Clerk for a license permitting such activity on such
form or application as shall be provided by the City Clerk for such purpose.
§ 185-3. License fee; duration of sale.
Upon making application to the City Clerk for such license, the person
applying therefor shall pay a license fee of $10. The City Clerk shall
thereupon issue such license to the person applying therefor. Such license
shall permit the conduct of a garage or similar-type sale for a period not in
excess of two consecutive days on any one occasion. Any alternate date(s)
for rain dates shall be submitted with the application.
§ 185-4. Number of garage sales allowed per year.
Each person, nonprofit or charitable organization or premises shall be
entitled to hold two such garage sales per year in addition to participating
in the annual city garage sale weekend.
§ 185-5. Hours.
No garage sale, flea market or similar-type sales or activity shall be
conducted pursuant to the license issued therefor except between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 185-6. Responsibility of owner.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
§ 181-22 LONG BRANCH CODE § 185-6
185:338
of the Police or Fire Departments of the City of Long Branch in order to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 185-7. Violations and penalties.69
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 189
GRAFFITI
§ 189-1. Purpose.
The use of broad-tipped pens, paint spray cans, pencils, pens, crayons or
other marking devices to write graffiti, verbal or otherwise, on the walls
or other available spaces on public or private buildings, vehicles, areas
or facilities causes a serious defacement of such buildings, vehicles and
areas, public and private, and contributes to the deterioration of property
values, as well as offending the public's right, public and private, not to have
unsightly and unlawful graffiti on, with defacement of, public and private
property, and it constitutes a deleterious practice contrary to the public
health and welfare. In addition, such contempt for the property rights of
private citizens, as well as public facilities, contributes to the erosion of
law and order and contributes to the deterioration and quality of life of the
community and must be opposed and punished.
§ 189-2. Use of graffiti prohibited.
No person shall write, print or place, with ink, paint, chalk or other
substances, graffiti on the real or personal property of another, whether
said personal or real property be publicly or privately owned, unless the
owner of said property shall have, prior to the writing, printing or placing
of graffiti, specifically consented to the same.
§ 189-3. Assisting in or encouraging violations.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having
custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to assist, aid,
abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter, as defined herein, either by words, overt act, by failing to act or by
lack of supervision and control over said minor child.
§ 189-4. Minors in violation; parent subject to penalties.
Any minor child under the age of 18 years apprehended for the violation
of this chapter shall be brought before a Judge of the Monmouth County
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court, and the parent, legal guardian or
69.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-6 GRAFFITI § 189-4
189:339
other person having care and custody of said minor who may have violated
§ 189-3 herein above shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Long Branch and be subject to
the penalties provided herein.
§ 189-5. Violations and penalties; exception.
Chapter 193
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permit for storage and use of hazardous
materials — See Ch. 173, § 173-5.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Municipal Court Judge of the City of Long
Branch, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, in the discretion of said Municipal Court Judge. Additionally,
any person who violates this chapter shall also be responsible for
cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the property which
he has damaged, defaced or vandalized so as to bring the property to
the condition it was in prior to its being covered by graffiti.70
B. In the enforcement of this chapter, all persons, directly or indirectly
involved, shall be equally responsible and guilty, not alone the
individual who may personally deface the object or area, but others in a
group who encourage and participate in such actions, as well as
persons who make available the tools, writing material, ladders,
lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly supply funds to
acquire such materials for such purposes, including parents and
friends, shall be equally guilty and liable to punishment under this
chapter.
C. An exception to this section shall be any minor child under the age of 18
years who shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed on
him by the Judge of the Monmouth County Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court.
D. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit easily removable chalk
markings on the public sidewalk and street in connection with
traditional children's games, such as bases for stickball, handball,
hopscotch and the like, nor temporary, easily removed chalk markings
in connection with any lawful business or public purpose or activity.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 189-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 193-1
193:340
§ 193-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPENSATION — A calculation of reimbursement costs for items, plus
any and all wages paid, plus an hourly rate for use of any and all equipment,
plus any and all administrative costs.
EMISSION — Spilling, leaking, flowing or running of substances into the
environment, without regard to cause, and shall include causes that are
man-made, natural, accidental, unavoidable or from any cause whatsoever.
ENVIRONMENT — The air, ground and waters in and adjoining the City of
Long Branch.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to stop or contain any discharge
involving any hazardous material which cannot be used again or cannot be
replenished without cost after that particular incident. These expendable
items include, but are not limited to, fire-fighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent and nonabsorbent materials, brooms, pads,
pillows, rope, sand, recovery drums and any protective equipment and
clothing, including but not restricted to chemical protective suits, chemical
protective gloves, goggles and any other item owned or controlled by the
City of Long Branch, its employees, agents, officers and/or officials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the National Fire Protection Association Guide of Hazardous
Materials, the Department of Transportation Guide Book, the list of
hazardous substances adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendment of 1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of
1977 (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.), and the list of toxic pollutants designated
by the Congress of the EPA, pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, and any hospital or medical waste, including but not
limited to syringes, bandages and discarded pharmaceutical products or
any substance on the New Jersey Hazardous Substance List.
§ 193-2. Unlawful acts.
§ 193-3. Compensation.
Whenever the City of Long Branch through the offices of the Health Officer,
Director of Police, Fire Chief(s), Fire Prevention Bureau, Mayor and/or
Administrator identifies an emission into the environment of the City of
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or be responsible for the
emission of any substance into the environment of the City of Long
Branch.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay compensation to the
City of Long Branch within 30 days following his receipt of a bill for
compensation pursuant to this chapter.
§ 193-1 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 193-3
193:341
Long Branch of any substance in such a manner so that, in the professional
opinion of the above, immediate cleanup and/or mitigation is required, the
above shall order, which order may be verbal, the responsible person to take
immediate action to abate the emission. Should the responsible person not
be available, or for whatever reason not take action as in the professional
opinion of the above agents of the City of Long Branch, then the agent of
the City of Long Branch may, at his discretion, engage City of Long Branch
Personnel and/or supplies and/or equipment and/or expendable items and/
or contract in the name of the City of Long Branch qualified private entities
to take action to immediately abate and/or clean up and/or mitigate the
emission. The responsible person should then be billed by the City of Long
Branch for all costs incurred in this action in response to the emission.
§ 193-4. Compliance.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any person, corporation,
partnership or other legal entity shall be required to reimburse the City of
Long Branch for any violation of the sections of this chapter.
§ 193-5. Applicability.71
This chapter shall apply to any hazardous spill that is the result of any
traffic accident arising in the City of Long Branch or any hazardous spill
arising from the discharge of hazardous materials from any automobile or
equipment on the streets of the City of Long Branch or any public property
or the air or waters continguous to the City of Long Branch from any source.
§ 193-6. Investigation.72
In the event that the Long Branch Police Department or Fire Department or
any Health Officer or Construction Code Official of the City of Long Branch
is called out to abate a spill or shall be asked to investigate any traffic
accident or is called upon to investigate any condition on the city streets or
sees any of the conditions set forth in this chapter, the appropriate officer
shall make an investigation of the scene to determine whether hazardous
materials have been spilled onto the roadways of the City of Long Branch
or other public or private property or water in the city or the air or waters
continguous to the City of Long Branch.
§ 193-7. Violations and penalties.
A. After an investigation, the appropriate officer as set forth in the
preceding section shall be authorized to issue a summons to the owner
and/or operator of any such vehicle or agent or responsible person of
any instrumentality which discharges hazardous substances onto the
streets or other public or private property or air or water in the City of
Long Branch. Said summons will be returnable in the Municipal Court
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 193-7
193:342
Chapter 195
HEAVY EQUIPMENT USE
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
of the City of Long Branch and, upon conviction of any offense, the
offender, owner and/or driver of said vehicle or agent or responsible
person of the instrumentality of such discharge shall be subject to the
following penalties [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98].
B. For a conviction under this subsection, penalties shall be as follows:
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 1-27-2004 by Ord. No.
1-04]
(1) The Municipal Court shall impose a fine in an amount not to exceed
$1,000.
(2) The defendant shall be required, as an additional penalty of the
Municipal Court, to repay to the City of Long Branch the cost of
cleanup of the hazardous spill, which shall include the cost of the
product necessary to be used on the roadway and/or streets of the
City of Long Branch and for any cost of manpower and equipment
used by the Public Works Department or Fire Department of the
City of Long Branch or any agents, representatives, contractors or
otherwise hired by the City of Long Branch to clean up said
hazardous spill. The City of Long Branch is further authorized to
apply to any appropriate judicial body, including the Superior Court
of New Jersey, for reimbursement for the full cost of cleanup of the
hazardous spill that is incurred by the City of Long Branch. Such
funds shall be returned to the line item used to purchase the
materials used.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the City of Long Branch to present to the
presiding Judge of the Municipal Court a list of the expenses incurred,
limited to the cost of the product necessitated for the cleanup, any
overtime as paid to any City employee and the cost of any equipment
used by the City of Long Branch necessitated in said cleanup. The City
of Long Branch is further authorized to present to the appropriate
judicial body, including the Superior Court of New Jersey, whether by
complaint or other application, a list of the expenses incurred, and take
whatever steps necessary for application for reimbursement.
[Amended 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. 1-04]
§ 193-7 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 195-1
193:343
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
CRANE — As used in this chapter, the term "crane" shall be defined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26- 1 through 45:26-17 (Licensure of crane
operators Act), hereafter referred to as the crane operator Licensure Act
and the 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in Construction also known as
OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
PROJECT — Refers to any work performed within the City of Long Branch.
§ 195-2. City registration of crane operators.
No person shall engage in the operation of a crane on any project unless he
or she holds a crane operator's registration certificate, issued by the City
Engineer.
§ 195-3. Application for and issuance of City crane registration
certificate.
A. At least five business days before any planned operation of a crane on a
project, the crane operator or contractor as appropriate shall apply to
the City Engineer for issuance of a City crane registration certificate. In
emergent situations, the City Engineer may grant said registration on
less than five days' notice if the operator and contractor if appropriate,
meet(s) the balance of the requirements of this chapter.
B. The following documents must be submitted to the City Engineer by the
crane operator and/or contractor as appropriate, together with the
application for a City crane registration certificate:
(1) A current crane operator's license issued by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 et seq.;
(2) Proof of current certification in the specialty or specialties
recognized by the New Jersey Department of Labor applicable to
the crane he or she is operating issued by an entity recognized by
the New Jersey Department of Labor. The specialties currently
recognized by the Department of Labor are: a) lattice boom truck
crane, b) lattice boom crawler crane, c) small telescopic boom
crane (less than 17.5 tons), and d) large telescopic boom crane
(more than 17.5 tons). The Department of Labor currently
recognizes certifications issued by:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP); and
§ 195-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 195-3
193:344
§ 195-4. Fee schedule; maintenance and renewal of registration
certificate.
§ 195-5. Insurance required for crane operation.
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification, LLC.
(3) A current medical examiner's certification card;
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection for the
crane to be operated;
(5) One or more certificates of insurance demonstrating insurance
meeting the requirements of this chapter;
(6) Proof of a current commercial driver's license if required to operate
the crane;
(7) Proof that crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program if the crane requires a commercial driver's license to
operate; and
(8) Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course on projects requiring a signal person, as set forth in 29 CFR
1926.1419 and 1926.1428.
C. Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance with
the requirements of this Section, the City Engineer shall issue or deny
the requested certificate within five business days. If the application is
denied, the reasons for the denial shall be furnished to the applicant in
writing.
A. The City crane registration certificate shall be maintained by the crane
operator in the crane at all times. A copy of the registration certificate
shall be retained at all times by the contractor or other on-site
supervisor and produced on the work site when requested by the City.
B. The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each City crane
registration certificate is valid for 60 days and may be extended,
modified and/or renewed provided that the crane operator remains in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The fee for an
extended or renewal permit is $50.
C. The crane operator and contractor shall have a continuing obligation to
notify the City Engineer of any change in circumstances that may affect
the crane operator's qualification for a City crane registration
certificate or the terms of the City crane registration certificate.
A. No crane may be operated on a project unless the crane operator and
the work are covered by policies of insurance in at least the amounts set
forth herein:
§ 195-3 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 195-5
193:345
§ 195-6. Notification of accident or safety issue required.
§ 195-7. Safety equipment required.
(1) Commercial general liability insurance: limits of $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate.
(2) Owned, leased, and hired/non-owned commercial automobile
liability insurance: limit of $1,000,000 combined single-limit.
(3) Worker's compensation insurance: Part A - statutory limits; Part B -
$500,000/$500,000/$500,000.
(4) Umbrella excess liability insurance: minimum limits of $4,000,000
per occurrence/$4,000,000 aggregate.
B. Where the contract for the project requires higher levels or additional
types of coverage, the terms of the contract shall control.
C. The City of Long Branch, its officers, and employees shall be named as
additional insured as relates to lines of commercial liability coverage.
A. The crane operator, contractor, or crane owner shall immediately notify
the City Engineer of every accident causing personal injury or damage
to property involving a construction crane covered by this chapter and
shall cooperate with the City and any state or federal authorities
investigating such accident. When an accident involves the failure,
breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the crane, it shall be
unlawful to use such device until after the contractor or crane operator
submits to the City Engineer proof of inspection of the crane and
certification that the crane is safe to operate.
B. The crane operator, contractor, or crane owner shall immediately notify
the City Engineer of any citations, notifications, warnings, violations,
notices of unsafe conditions, disciplinary, or regulatory enforcement
actions issued by any federal, state, or local agencies with jurisdiction
to inspect any crane covered by this chapter.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the crane owner, lessee if applicable, contractor, and crane operator.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
crane operator shall immediately shut down the crane until such time
that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or replaced and
the crane is restored to proper working order.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by federal, state, City, or
municipal authorities must be adhered to at all times.
D. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such crane at
intervals not exceeding one month. Such inspection shall include but
§ 195-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 195-7
193:346
§ 195-8. Unsafe cranes.
Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise dangerous to
human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate maintenance, shall
be deemed in unsafe condition. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or
removed or made safe as the City Engineer deems necessary.
§ 195-9. Administration; enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the City Engineer.
§ 195-10. Violations; penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the penalties in provided for in the Code of the City of Long
Branch.
§ 195-11. Incorporation into City contracts.
The requirements of this chapter shall be incorporated into the City's bid
specifications and contracts for all public work in which a crane may be
required. Any violation of this chapter may constitute a breach of such
contract.
§ 195-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed as
to such inconsistencies.
§ 195-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
not be limited to all blocks, shackles, sheaves, wire rope, connectors,
and various devices on the master boom, controls and breaking
mechanisms.
E. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
City. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of such.
F. Every crane shall be inspected by the operator before being erected or
operated for the first time on any job.
G. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
§ 195-7 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 195-13
193:347
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.
§ 195-14. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
Chapter 197
HOTELS AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 197-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the regulations for
maintenance of hotels and multiple dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.1 et seq., is
hereby adopted as a standard governing the maintenance of hotels and
multiple dwellings in the interest of public safety, health and welfare within
the City of Long Branch. A copy of the aforesaid regulations is attached to
and made a part of this chapter without the text being included therein.
§ 197-2. Violations and penalties.73
To the extent that it does not conflict with the provisions of the Regulations
for the Construction and Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings,
any violation of this chapter shall result in penalties as follows: Any person,
firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the City of Long
Branch of a violation of the terms of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. Except as otherwise
provided, each and every day in which a violation of any provision of
this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation. In addition, each
violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense upon each
and every day in which a violation exists.
Chapter 203
INSURANCE
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 195-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 197-2
197:348
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 9-22-1983 by Ord. No. 1119 (Sec. 2-31 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 203-1. Preamble.
N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. permits a municipality to adopt an ordinance
providing that no insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance
policies in New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 unless
and until the insured person submits an Official Certificate of Search for
Municipal Liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges levied and assessed and
due and payable against said property have been paid or the municipality
submits a certified copy of a resolution indicating that it has entered into an
agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property allowing any lien to
be paid in installments, if the governing body is satisfied that the claim for
fire damage is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property,
and the City Council of the City of Long Branch deems it in the best interest
of the citizens of the City of Long Branch to implement such an ordinance.
§ 203-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known by its short form title as the "Long Branch Fire
Insurance Ordinance."
§ 203-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the payment of taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens due and payable on real property in the City of Long
Branch, when said property is covered by fire insurance in excess of $2,500
and is damaged or destroyed by fire.
§ 203-4. Official certificate of search required.
A. No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey
shall pay any claims for fire damage in the City of Long Branch unless
or until the insured person submits an official certificate of search for
municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges levied and assessed
and due and payable against said property have been paid or the City of
Long Branch submits a certified copy of a resolution agreeing to
installment payments as set forth hereinafter.
B. The official certificate of search may from time to time be altered by the
bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order to
correct any errors or omissions or to add any city liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 203-1 INSURANCE § 203-5
203:349
§ 203-5. Charges appearing on certificate.
In the event that there are taxes or assessments or other municipal liens
or charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search
referred to above, no payment shall be made to a claimant by any insurance
company of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real
property located within the City of Long Branch pursuant to any fire
insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this chapter and
after the filing of the same with the State Commissioner of Insurance until
such time as all of the aforesaid taxes and assessments and municipal liens
or charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by the
insurance company or the municipality submits to the insurance company
a copy of a resolution authorizing payment in installments as set forth
hereinafter.
§ 203-6. Payment of liens.
Unless a resolution is received by an insurance company writing fire
insurance policies in the City of Long Branch authorizing payment in
installments, such insurance company is hereby authorized and required
prior to the payment of any claims for fire damage in excess of $2,500
to pay to the City of Long Branch the amount of the liens appearing on
the official certificate, or in any alteration thereof pursuant to § 203-4B,
and such other recorded liens or related charges as may be certified to
the insurance company in accordance with N.J.S.A. 17:36-10; provided,
however, that if an appeal is taken on the amount of the lien or charge
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full
amount of the lien or charge being contested, pending termination of all
proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon
at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings
and loan associations in the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the
final order or judgment of the court.
§ 203-7. Agreement between city and owner.
The City Council may enter into an agreement with the owner of any
fire-damaged property within the city to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19, provided that the City Council is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. Said
agreement shall be authorized by resolution, and any insurance company
receiving a certified copy of such a Resolution of Agreement from the City
Council is authorized to make full payment to the insured person.
§ 203-8. When insurance company not obligated.
Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 203-6, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to obligate the insurance company for any liens
§ 203-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 203-8
203:350
not appearing on the official certificate or in any certified changes therein
submitted to the insurance company by the bonded official.
§ 203-9. Priority of city claim.
The city's claim made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged
property where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the
mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee
to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien only to the extent
of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage
contract.
§ 203-10. Copy forwarded to State Commissioner.
A certified copy of this chapter shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to the
State Commissioner of Insurance, who shall notify each carrier of insurance
within the State of New Jersey of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 203-8 INSURANCE § 203-10
203:351
Chapter 206
LANDSCAPERS, LICENSING OF
§ 206-1. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANNUAL FEE — The fee charged by and payable to the City of Long Branch
to obtain a license.
ANNUAL LICENSE — A license issued by the Fire Official for the purposes
stated.
CUSTOMER — Anyone who employs the services of a landscaper to perform
the services of maintaining, cutting, cleaning or raking property within the
City of Long Branch.
LANDSCAPER — Any person or persons over the age of 18 doing business
with three or more residential or commercial customers for the purpose
of maintaining, cutting, cleaning or raking hedges, trees, limbs, leaves,
cuttings and other items or activities commonly performed by persons
undertaking landscaping activities.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle required to be registered with the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles for use on local roads and highways and used by
a landscaper in the performance of his work in the City of Long Branch.
§ 206-2. License required; decal.
All landscapers performing landscaping services within the City of Long
Branch shall be required to obtain a license in order to offer their services
in the city. One license shall be required for all vehicles the landscaper
owns or operates within the City of Long Branch. A license decal must be
clearly displayed on each vehicle that the landscaper owns for business
use. Multiple decals may be obtained from the Fire Official at the time
of license application. Said license shall be obtained prior to January 1 of
each calendar year. Proof of licensure will be demonstrated by the issuance
of and the display of a decal, which will be issued to each licensee and
displayed on the lower right-hand corner of the windshield of each vehicle
the landscaper owns or operates for business use in the City of Long
Branch.
§ 206-3. Application for license.
A. Applications for licensing as required by this chapter shall be made to
the Fire Official on a form furnished by him.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
§ 203-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 206-3
206:352
§ 206-4. Name on vehicles; disposal of waste material.
Every landscaper operating within the City of Long Branch shall be required
to comply with the following:
§ 206-5. Annual license fee; term; renewal; renewal fee.
§ 206-6. Revocation of license; relicensing.
(1) The applicant's name, business name, business address, home
address of owner and business and home telephone numbers.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, corporation
or any other entity.
(3) The number of years the applicant has been in business at his
present address or at any prior location, including the addresses of
such prior locations, if any.
(4) The make, year and license plate number of each vehicle used in
the business.
(5) Whether the applicant or any partners or officers of the corporation
have ever been arrested or convicted of a crime and, if so, the name
of the person arrested or convicted, the date of arrest, the crime or
charge involved and the disposition thereof. The term "officer" shall
mean the President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer of a
corporate applicant.
A. The name of the landscaping company shall be clearly displayed on
both sides of any vehicles used in said operation, shall be no less than
three inches in height and shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the landscaper.
B. All landscapers may dispose of all cuttings, clippings and their waste
materials at a location in the manner directed by the Director of the
Department of Public Works of the City of Long Branch. The landscaper
shall only dispose of said materials from properties located within the
City of Long Branch.
A. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall pay to the Fire Official
an annual fee of $50 for up to five vehicles and $5 for each vehicle over
five. Any fraction of a year will be considered a full year for the
purposes of this chapter.
B. The term of such license shall expire on December 31 of the calendar
year in which such license is issued.
C. Such license shall be automatically renewed by the Fire Official upon
payment by the applicant of an annual renewal fee of $50. Such renewal
shall be for the calendar year in which such renewal occurs.
§ 206-3 LANDSCAPERS, LICENSING OF § 206-6
206:353
§ 206-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 206-8. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by any officer who is in the employ of
any department or branch of the government of the City of Long Branch,
County of Monmouth or State of New Jersey relating to health, police/public
safety activities, fire, property maintenance, code enforcement, building
regulations or other activities concerning buildings and lands in the
municipality.
Chapter 209
LAUNDRIES, COIN-OPERATED
§ 209-1. Attendant.
All owners, operators or proprietors of coin-operated laundries in buildings
wherein apartments are located above the coin-operated laundries shall
have an attendant on the premises from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. during the
time any of the coin-operated machines are in operation.
A. If any person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be convicted of violating any statute, ordinance or regulation in
the execution of any work for which a license is required by the
applicable ordinances of the City of Long Branch relevant to
landscaping, the Fire Official shall revoke the license of such person
immediately. The Fire Official shall not restore such license during such
time as the violation for which such conviction was obtained, exists or
remains.
B. Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this
chapter may be relicensed by the Fire Official when the grounds upon
which such license was revoked are removed or corrected and upon
payment of the fee prescribed herein.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, other than
disposal requirements, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any person who violates the disposal requirements of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed with each violation of this provision.
§ 206-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 209-2
209:354
§ 209-2. Violations and penalties.74
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 212
LIBRARY
§ 212-1. Return of books or other materials.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the free public library of the City of Long
Branch after seven days have elapsed from the date of posting by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail of a notice demanding
return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished.
§ 212-2. Damaging books or other materials.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording,
audiovisual material or other article or any part thereof which is borrowed
from, owned by or is in the custody of such library.
§ 212-3. Posting of library rules and regulations.
The Library Board shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place in the Free
Public Library building rules, regulations and procedures governing the
borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets or any other item or article
which may be available for such borrowing to the public.
§ 212-4. Compliance with rules for removal of items.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual materials or any other
item or article from the Free Public Library building without complying
with the rules, regulations and procedures of the library for borrowing such
items or articles.
§ 212-5. Using false name or address.
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address or use any card
other than the one issued to said person for the purpose of borrowing any
book or other article from said library.
74.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 209-2 LIBRARY § 212-6
212:355
§ 212-6. Filing of complaint.
The Library Board of Trustees, through a designated agent, is authorized
to file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the City of Long Branch in
the extent that any of the provisions of this chapter are violated, upon the
following conditions:
§ 212-7. Violations and penalties.75
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, together
with restitution to the Library Board of Trustees for the current
replacement value of the materials.
Chapter 215
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering on beaches — See § 116-5H.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
Parks — See Ch. 247.
Solid waste — See Ch. 293.
A. A certified letter, return receipt requested, and regular mail shall be
sent by the Library Board of Trustees after eight weeks, informing the
person that the book or material is overdue and that he is subject to
prosecution pursuant to this chapter.
B. In the case of a minor, the letter shall be sent to the parents or
guardians of the minor involved.
C. The book, material or article shall be overdue for at least two months.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 212-7
215:356
ARTICLE I
General Littering Regulations
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 6-1 of the 1971 Code]
§ 215-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Long Branch or their public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
Municipal separate storm sewer systems do not include combined sewer
systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary
sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets
and other sources.[Added 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 11-07]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 11-07]
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or
other public ways and all public parks squares, spaces, docks, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land(s) surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.[Added 3-27-2007 by Ord.
No. 11-07]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 215-1 LITTERING § 215-2
215:357
§ 215-2. General prohibitions.
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any property,
whether occupied, open or vacant, whether owned by that person, or in
a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
city, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 215-3. Use of receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property.
§ 215-4. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from a building or lot or
from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 215-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property.
§ 215-6. Transportation from outside city.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the city and bring it into the city for the purpose of dumping or
disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter which has been
transported into the city shall be parked or allowed to remain standing on
any street in the city or on any public property for a period in excess of two
hours.
§ 215-7. Distribution of advertisements and other materials.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
city only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they will
not be blown away by the wind; otherwise, no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the city.
§ 215-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 215-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 215-8
215:358
ARTICLE II
Clean Communities Program
[Adopted 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 67-88 (Sec. 18-11 of the 1971
Code)]
§ 215-9. Implementation of program; program coordinator.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for grant
implementation for the application to be filed by the City of Long Branch
for the Clean Communities Model Program in the Office of Recycling, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The Public Works Director
shall serve as coordinator of the program.
§ 215-10. Litter receptacles required.
Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be required at the following
public places where they exist in the City of Long Branch:
A. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail/commercially zoned
areas. At least one receptacle shall be required every single linear
quarter-mile.
B. Buildings held out for use by the public, including but not limited to
schools, government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
C. Parks.
D. Drive-in restaurants.
E. Any street vendor locations.
F. Self-service refreshment areas.
G. Construction sites.
H. Gasoline service station islands.
I. Shopping centers.
J. Parking lots.
K. Campgrounds and trailer parks.
L. Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations.
M. Boat launching areas.
N. Public and private piers operated for public use.
O. Beaches and bathing areas.
P. At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
§ 215-9 LITTERING § 215-11
215:359
§ 215-11. Responsibility for receptacles.
The proprietors of any location set forth in § 215-10, or the sponsor of any
event listed therein, shall be responsible for the providing and servicing of
the receptacles in such number as would reasonably be required for the
amount of litter to be generated by the person(s) expected to use or be on
the site at the event in question.
§ 215-12. Household and commercial solid waste.
No household or commercial solid waste shall be discarded or dumped in
any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage
or disposal.
§ 215-13. Storage of tires.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 293, Solid Waste, Article I,
Garbage Collection and Recycling, § 293-10, Tire pickup service, no tires
shall be stored in or on any residentially zoned property unless located in a
fully enclosed structure.
§ 215-14. Storage of motor vehicles.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 332, Vehicles, Storage of, no
inoperable or unregistered vehicle shall be kept or stored on any street,
vacant lot or residential lawn unless located in a fully enclosed structure.
§ 215-15. Leakage from vehicle loads.
No vehicle shall be used to transport a load of materials without the use of a
cover to prevent the dropping, leaking or other manner of escaping of such
material.
§ 215-16. Construction site debris.
No materials or debris shall be accumulated on or around construction sites
or stored in a manner that it is likely to be removed by natural forces onto
adjacent property.
§ 215-17. Open or overflowing disposal bins.
No open or overflowing disposal bins, dumpsters or containers of any kind
shall be permitted.
§ 215-18. Curb and sidewalk maintenance.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building or
structure shall be required to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting said building or structure free from obstruction and nuisance
of every kind and to keep said sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and
alleys free from debris, litter and garbage of any kind.
§ 215-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 215-19
215:360
§ 215-19. Sweeping into gutters, streets, etc. [Amended 3-27-2007
by Ord. No. 11-07]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or
other public place any accumulation of litter, debris or garbage of any kind
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. No person shall spill, dump
or deposit any materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the City of Long Branch and no person
shall spill, dump or dispose materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants in the municipal separate
storm sewer system. The exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in this
provision are as follows:
§ 215-20. Sidewalk sweepings to be collected and containerized.
Every person who owns or occupies property upon which a sidewalk is
located shall keep the sidewalk in front of his or her property or premises
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
B. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters);
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water);
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn-watering runoff);
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows;
F. Residential car-washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges;
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water;
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities;
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or property discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 215-19 LITTERING § 215-20
215:361
free of litter, debris or garbage of any kind. All sweepings of such material
shall be collected and containerized for disposal in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 215-21. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 215-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 215-21
215:362
Chapter 218
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
§ 218-1. through § 218-6. (Reserved)76
§ 218-7. Drinking of alcoholic beverages.77 [Added 10-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 999]
§ 218-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. No person shall be drunk or in a state of intoxication in any street or
public place within the city or in any private home or place to the
annoyance of any citizen or person.
B. No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage on a public street, highway, avenue, alley or road of the city;
or upon any public grounds, parks, sidewalks, beaches, marine basins,
beachfronts or boardwalks in the city; or in any automobile, other
vehicle or in any other means of transportation on the public streets,
highways, alleys, avenues, grounds, sidewalks, beaches, parks, marine
basins, beachfronts or boardwalks in the city.
C. No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage with intent to violate
Subsection B.
D. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
subsection shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
76.Editor's Note: Former §§ 218-1, Definitions, 218-2, Certain types of loitering prohibited,
218-3, Discretion of police officer, 218-4, Loitering by minors, 218-5, Notice of violation,
and 218-6, Presumption, were repealed 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 27-09.
77.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 103, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 215-21 LITTERING § 218-8
215:363
Chapter 221
MAPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Preservation of maps as public records — See
Ch. 5, § 5-17.
Property Number Map — See Ch. 130, § 130-3.
Drug-Free School Zone Map — See Ch. 158,
§ 158-1.
Flood insurance rate map — See Ch. 177,
§ 177-2.
Subdivision maps and plans — See Ch. 300.
Zoning Map — See Ch. 345, § 345-5.
§ 221-1. Findings and determinations.
The City Council of the City of Long Branch makes the following findings
and determinations:
A. The topographic maps of the City of Long Branch prepared by
Topographic Data Consultants, Inc., constitute valuable and
irreplaceable property of the City of Long Branch.
B. These maps constitute a valuable and irreplaceable record of the
physical condition of the surface of the land in the city at the time of the
flight photograph.
C. Careful supervision of the use and custody of the foregoing is necessary
to prevent the loss or damage to the foregoing maps which have been
prepared in reproducible form on Mylar.
D. The use of these maps to make copies by tracing on tracing paper and
the unsupervised handling of these maps will accelerate the physical
deterioration of the same and will expose the same to an unreasonable
risk of damage, deterioration and destruction.
E. The city has, in the office of the Planning Department, facilities to make
prompt, accurate copies, prints and sepias of these maps by
reproduction methods, which if done by supervised personnel will not
expose these maps to any unreasonable risk or loss, damage,
deterioration or destruction.
F. The cost of the preparation of the topographical maps has been paid out
of municipal funds, and the cost of supervision of the care and custody
of the same and the cost of making prints and reproducible copies such
as sepias thereof will be paid out of general taxation and, accordingly, it
is right and proper that fees for such prints and copies shall be
established to recover these past and future costs, in advance, with the
value of the information and data that such copies have being based on
an acreage basis.
§ 218-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 221-2
221:364
§ 221-2. Custody.
The Director of Planning shall be and is hereby charged with the custody,
safekeeping, care, control and use of the herein above specified maps, with
an additional duplicate to be on file with the City Engineer. The original map
shall be kept on file in the Tax Collector's safe.
§ 221-3. Regulations for storage and use of maps.
The following regulations are established to govern the storage and use of
said maps and shall be enforced by the Planning Department and the City
Engineer:
A. The maps shall be kept in locked fireproof files.
B. No one shall take any map out of the office of the Planning Department
or City Engineer.
C. No one shall make any tracing or other hand copy by tracing methods of
any such map.
D. During normal office hours, on request, the Director of Planning or his
designee may expose to view in the office of the Planning Department
any single sheet of the aforesaid maps without releasing or
surrendering physical possession of the same without charge or other
fee.
E. Contents of receipt.
(1) During normal business hours, on written request and on receipt of
proof that the proper fees herein established have been paid to the
City Finance Director, the Planning Director or his designee shall
reproduce and deliver the requested copies, which may be either
prints or reproducible copies such as sepias, of any of the foregoing
maps and demand and receive a receipt therefore which shall
contain over the recipient's signature the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the above specified
reproducible copies of topographic maps at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet, property of the City of Long Branch, in the County
of Monmouth, agrees that he will not produce, sell, assign or
transfer copies thereof, that he will not sell, transfer or assign
the above specified reproducible copy and that he will not permit,
suffer or allow the sale, assignment or transfer of the above
specified reproducible copy nor the sale, assignment or transfer
of copies thereof during the next ten years except that he may
transfer or assign to a subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion
of a map which he has purchased or legally received, which
depicts property he owns and has contracted to sell to such
person(s)."
§ 221-2 MAPS § 221-3
221:365
§ 221-4. Application of regulations to others.
No person who obtains a print or sepia or other form of reproducible copy
of any sheet or portion of a sheet of the aforesaid topographic map to a
scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall sell, assign or transfer or permit,
suffer or allow the sale, assignment or transfer or permit, suffer or allow
the sale, assignment or transfer of such reproduction of copy thereof or the
sale, assignment or transfer of any portion thereof or the sale, assignment
or transfer of any reproduction or copy of a portion thereof.
§ 221-5. Application forms.
All applications for copies of the aforesaid maps shall be made to the
Director of Planning on application forms to be prepared by him agreeably
to the terms of this chapter.
§ 221-6. Fees.
(2) In addition, the Planning Director shall require that each print or
sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear the recipient's signature
under the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the receipt of this
copy of a topographic map of a part of the City of Long Branch
agrees that the undersigned will not sell, assign or transfer this
copy, will not sell, assign or transfer a reproduction of this copy
and will not suffer, allow or permit the sale, assignment or transfer
thereof of any copy or reproduction thereof, except that he may
transfer or assign to a subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion
of a map which he has purchased or legally received, which
depicts property he owns and has contracted to sell to such
person(s)."
(3) In addition, each print or sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear or
be clearly stamped with the following:
"The sale, assignment or transfer of this map or of any portion
of this map and the sale, assignment or transfer of any copy
or reproduction of any portions of this map is prohibited; and
any such action will, upon conviction in the City of Long Branch
Municipal Court, subject the individual to the penalties
established by law, except that he may transfer or assign to a
subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion of a map which he has
purchased or legally received, which depicts property he owns and
has contracted to sell to such person(s)."
A. All fees herein established shall, after computation by the City Planning
Director or his designee, be paid to the office of the City Finance
Director, and the office of the Finance Director is authorized to accept
and deposit the same and to issue receipts therefore on such forms as
shall be acceptable for presentation to the Planning Director prior to
§ 221-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 221-6
221:366
§ 221-7. Loaning of maps.
It is in the public interest and permissible to lend, without charge, copies
of the maps to agencies of the federal, state county or other municipal
governments whenever there will be a direct benefit to the City of Long
Branch. The Planning Director, upon receipt of a request from such an
agency or entity, may loan a paper copy of said map at no charge.
§ 221-8. Disclaimer.
the delivery of the requested prints or copies of such maps or of any
portion thereof.
B. The following fees are established for prints, sepias or other similar
reproducible copies of the aforesaid topographic maps, and such fees
computed by the Planning Director or his designee, in accordance with
the schedule or rates below, shall be charged, paid and collected before
delivery of any such copy. When the fee schedule bases the rate on the
acreage, the acreage shall be determined by the Planning Director or
his designee and noted on the application form and on the print or
sepia. The acreage shall be rounded to the nearest whole acre. When
the determination of the fee involves the application of more than one
rate per acre, the rates per acre shall be applied in the order herein
below set forth. When successive applications are made by the same
applicant, each application shall be treated as a new application for the
purpose of computing the fee. All fees shall be computed in accordance
with the following schedule of rates:
(1) Schedule of rates: Topographic maps to a scale of one inch equals
100 feet with a contour interval of 1.0 foot meeting National Map
Standards.
(2) Rate per acre: $15 per acre for the first and each acre thereafter;
however, there shall be a minimum charge of $50 for each map or
portion thereof.
A. The City of Long Branch does not certify the accuracy of the
topographical mapping prepared from the aerial photographs taken
and does not ensure the accuracy of the same nor the acceptance of the
same by the city or any of its authorities or agencies.
B. In addition to a duly executed application form, the Planning Director
shall require each applicant to execute a statement indicating his
acknowledgment of the necessity of a field check to determine the
accuracy of the mapping.
C. In addition, each print or sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear or be
clearly stamped with the following: "Accuracy of this map subject to
field check by recipient."
§ 221-6 MAPS § 221-9
221:367
§ 221-9. Violations and penalties.78
Any person who knowingly violates any section of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 224
MARRIAGE LICENSES
§ 224-1. Fee. [Amended 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 4-07]
A fee of $28 shall be charged by the City of Long Branch for the processing
of a marriage license and civil union license application and issuing of a
marriage license and civil union license. Marriage license and civil union
license applications shall be processed and licenses shall be issued by the
City of Long Branch Department of Health.
§ 224-2. Distribution of fees.
The City of Long Branch shall retain $3, representing an administrative fee,
and shall remit the remaining $25 to the Department of Human Services of
the State of New Jersey as required by state law. Payment due to the State
of New Jersey shall be remitted on a quarterly basis. At the discretion of
the City of Long Branch, moneys retained prior to transmittal to the State
of New Jersey may be held in an interest bearing account.
§ 224-3. Reports.
The City of Long Branch shall submit quarterly reports on special forms
made available by the State of New Jersey indicating the number of licenses
issued during the quarterly time frame.
Chapter 227
MASSAGE PARLORS AND BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 227-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment whose primary business
is the application to the human skin of permanent body art or makeup. In
addition, any establishment that may require a State of New Jersey tattoo
license to operate shall not be considered a tattoo parlor, provided that not
more than 5% of the total floor area of the establishment is dedicated for
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 227-1
224:368
the application to the human skin of permanent body art or makeup.[Added
2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
MASSAGE — The practice of a profession scientifically applied to the
patient by the operator's hands.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Construed and deemed to mean any
massage establishment or place of business wherein massage as to all or
any one or more of the named subjects and methods of treatments, as
defined in the definition of "massage therapist, masseur or masseuse" is
administered or used.
MASSAGE THERAPIST, MASSEUR or MASSEUSE — Any person who
practices or administers as to all or any of the following named subject
matters and who has made a study of the underlying principles of anatomy
and physiology as generally included in a regular course of study by a
recognized and approved school of massage, to wit: The art of body massage
either by hands or with a mechanical or vibratory apparatus for the purpose
of body massaging, reducing or contouring; and the use of oil rubs, heat
lamps, salt glow, hot and cold packs or tub, shower or cabinet baths.
Variations of the following procedures are employed: touch, stroking,
friction, kneading, vibration, percussion and medical gymnastics. Massage
therapists shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases nor practice spinal
or other joint manipulations nor prescribe medicines or drugs.
§ 227-2. License required; conformance to sanitary provisions.
§ 227-3. (Reserved)79
§ 227-4. Submission of application; fees; term of license; renewal;
body art establishment plan review fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in the practice
or attempt to practice massage, whether for a fee or gratuitously to
conduct massage, without a license issued by the state. [Amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or conduct any
massage establishment which does not conform to the sanitary
provisions herein contained or to employ any person as a massage
operator who does not hold a license.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage
establishment shall make application to the City Clerk, who shall refer
all such applications to the Director of Public Safety for an appropriate
investigation. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16]
79.Editor's Note: Former § 227-3, Application for license; contents, as amended, was repealed
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16.
§ 227-1 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 227-4
224:369
§ 227-5. Licensing procedures. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
61-92]
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a license fee of $50.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 12-14-2010 by Ord. No.
19-10]
C. (Reserved)80
D. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term
commencing on January 1 of each year and terminating on December
31 of each year. The license fees provided in this section shall not be
prorated in the event that an application for a license is made at any
time after January 1 of any year.
E. Upon the expiration of any license issued as set forth in this chapter, the
licensee may apply for renewal to the City Clerk. In the event that there
are no changes with regard to the information required, the applicant
may apply for renewal by merely requesting renewal of its license, in
writing, and submitting the appropriate fee as set forth in this section.
[Amended 2-24-1983 by Ord. No. 1093; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No.
6-16]
F. Plan review fee. [Added 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(1) A plan review fee of $250 shall be required for any body art
establishment submitted for review pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-2.2.
(2) Plan review fee for any body art establishment limited plan
alteration shall be $125 per plan.
A. Upon the payment of the application fee, submitting of all information
required by application and upon proper inspection, a license shall be
granted immediately, if all requirements described herein are met, and
unless it appears that any such applicant has deliberately falsified the
application or the record of such applicant reveals a conviction for a
crime as defined in Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, excluding
disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offenses. For purposes of
this section, a "crime" shall also include an offense committed in New
Jersey prior to 1979 or an offense committed in another state that, if
committed in New Jersey, would constitute a violation of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes.
B. Any person denied a license pursuant to these provisions may appeal to
the City Council, in writing, stating the reasons why the license should
be granted. The City Council may grant or deny the license. The City
Council may also review any determination of the Director of Public
Safety granting or denying a license on its own motion. All licenses
issued hereunder are nontransferable; provided, however, that a
80.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding investigation and fingerprinting, as
amended, was repealed 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16.
§ 227-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 227-5
224:370
§ 227-6. Display of license. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16]
Every establishment to whom a license shall have been granted shall display
said license in a conspicuous place at its place of business.
§ 227-7. Minimum requirements.
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless
an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:
§ 227-8. (Reserved)83
§ 227-9. Employees. [Amended 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16]
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for a massage
establishment to ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist
shall first have obtained a valid license pursuant to state law.
§ 227-10. Inspection.
An inspection of each massage establishment may be made at any time for
the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met.
§ 227-11. Revocation of license; notice and hearing.
change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted
pursuant to the provisions hereof.
A. A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the
establishment as a massage establishment, provided, also, that all such
signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of the
City of Long Branch.81
B. (Reserved)82
A. No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall
have been held before the City Administrator to determine just cause
for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and
served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The
notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of
such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing
will be had.
B. The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the
same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 284, Signs.
82.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding minimum lighting requirements, was
repealed 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16.
83.Editor's Note: Former § 227-8, Location, as amended, was repealed 5-24-2016 by Ord. No.
6-16.
§ 227-5 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 227-11
224:371
§ 227-12. Grounds for revocation. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
61-92; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16]
The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one more
more of the following grounds:
§ 227-13. Exceptions.
residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable
age and discretion. In the event that the license holder cannot be
found, and the service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in
the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed,
registered postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his
place of business or residence, at least 10 days prior to the date of such
hearing.
A. That the licensee is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage or fraud or
deceit in his being licensed to the practice of massage.
B. That the licensee has been convicted of a crime as defined in § 227-5A.
C. That the licensee is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or
assumed name or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or
different name.
D. That the licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors,
narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person
for the performance of his or her professional duties.
E. That the licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive
advertising or that he or she prescribes medicines or drugs or practices
any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor.
F. That the licensee is guilty of willful negligence in the practice of
massage or has been guilty of employing, allowing or permitting any
unregistered person to perform massage in his or her establishment.
G. That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect
upon and shall not be construed as applying to physicians, surgeons,
chiropractors, osteopaths or any nurse working under the supervision
of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to
practice said respective professions in the state.
B. Practical nurses or other persons without qualifications as massage
therapists, whether employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors or
osteopaths or not, may not render massage or massage procedures.
§ 227-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 227-14
224:372
§ 227-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-23-1982 by Ord. No.
1080; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 230
MERCANTILE LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 250.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 256.
Special sales — See Ch. 276.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT MACHINE OR DEVICE — Any machine,
operated mechanically, electrically or otherwise, which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering
a score. It shall include such devices as jukeboxes, marble machines, pinball
machines, skill ball games, mechanical grab machines and all other games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever names they may
be designated.
BUSINESS — All kinds of vocations, occupations and professions,
enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used
therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either
directly or indirectly, on any premises in the city or anywhere else within its
jurisdiction.[Amended 3-13-1973 by Ord. No. 676; 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held in such manner
as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods
damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held in such manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock
of goods on hand, the business will be discontinued, including but not
limited to sales of adjusters, adjustment, alteration, assignees, bankruptcy,
benefit of administrations, benefit of creditors, benefit of trustees, building
coming down, closing, creditors' committee, creditors, end, executors, final
days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvency, last days, lease expires,
§ 227-14 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 230-1
224:373
liquidation, loan of lease, mortgage sale, receivers, trustees and quitting
business.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale conducted under Chapter 276.
INSIGNIA — Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or other kind of device
which may be required for use in connection with any license.
JUNK — Any old, discarded and unused waste iron or other metal
substance, glass, paper, machine parts, accessories, discarded machinery or
discarded machines, in whole or in part, unregistered motor vehicles which
are unfit for reconditioning or for sale for highway transportation, used
parts of motor vehicles and any material commonly known and generally
referred to as "junk" in the ordinary meaning of the word, acquired or
collected commercially.
JUNK DEALER AND KEEPER — Any person who buys or otherwise acquires
junk for commercial purposes within the city or who collects and stores
junk.
JUNKYARD and JUNK SHOP — Any lot of land or premises within the city in
which junk of any kind or description is placed, collected, stored or kept.
LICENSE or LICENSEE — Includes respectively the words "permit" or
"permittee" or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other chapter
in this Code.
PREMISES — All structures, places and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used in any business and any personal
property which is either affixed to or is otherwise in connection with any
business conducted on the premises.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of
goods on hand and will resume business at a new location or will continue
business from other existing locations.
§ 230-2. General mercantile licenses. [Added 9-27-1988 by Ord. No.
62-88]
A. Compliance required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain
an office or place or business to conduct, engage in or carry on any
business, trade or occupation within the City of Long Branch,
County of Monmouth, without first complying with the provisions of
this section and obtaining an initial license and complying with
annual renewal procedures therefor as provided herein.
(2) For the purposes of this chapter, a person shall be deemed to be
engaged in a business when he/she does one act of:
§ 230-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 230-2
224:374
(a) Selling any goods or providing services;
(b) Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or
hire; or
(c) Acquiring or using any vehicle, machine or device or any
premises in the city for business purposes.
(3) The agents, servants, employees or other representatives of
corporations, partnerships, individual natural persons, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or
unincorporated groups shall be personally responsible for
compliance with this chapter by their principals and by the
businesses they represent.
(4) No license shall be required of any person for the mere delivery in
the city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from
such person at his/her regular place of business outside of the city
where no intent by the person is shown to exist to evade the
provisions of this section.
(5) No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose any
unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of
the state or federal government.
B. Applications.
(1) General information. Every person required to procure a license
shall submit an application on the prescribed form to the
Supervisor of Licenses and Permits. Each application may contain
the following:
(a) The name of the applicant; if a corporation, the names and
home addresses (P.O. box addresses not acceptable) and home
telephone numbers of the President and Secretary shall be set
forth; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners
shall be set forth.
(b) The name under which the business is to be conducted.
(c) The address (P.O. box address is not acceptable) at which the
business is to be conducted.
(d) The specific nature of the business.
(e) Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct
a business in the City of Long Branch which has been denied or
revoked. If such license has been denied or revoked, the
applicant shall set forth in detail the facts leading to such
action.
§ 230-2 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 230-2
224:375
(f) The details of any conviction for crimes of the first, second,
third or fourth degree, the date of the conviction and the place
where said conviction was obtained.
(g) The business telephone number of the applicant.
(h) If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
thereof.
(2) Moral character. No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to
any person not of good moral character. If the applicant is not an
individual, these provisions shall apply to the officers and
managers.
(3) Prior to the issuance of a license, the Supervisor of Licenses and
Permits may cause a routine police check to be made of the
applicant to verify the validity of the information above described.
The Police Department shall report in writing affirmatively or
negatively within 14 days after the request is made, indicating
recommendations for approval or disapproval of the granting of the
license and the reasons therefor.
(4) After submission of the application and the required fees to the
Supervisor, he/she shall make any investigation necessary and
indicate his/her written approval or disapproval of the license
application within 30 days after the application is filed. If approved,
the initial license shall be issued in the name of the applicant. If
disapproved, the Supervisor shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
disapproval and the reasons therefor, and the applicant shall have
10 days from the receipt of notice to appeal the decision of the
Supervisor to the City Council, which, after due hearing, may affirm
or reverse the decision of the Supervisor.
C. Certificate of information; agreement to comply. When submitting the
information described in the preceding subsections, the applicant shall
certify that such information is supplied to the City of Long Branch with
the full understanding that the city shall rely upon the accuracy of the
facts set forth therein in granting the mercantile license. By its
submission for a mercantile license, the applicant further agrees to
comply with all laws and ordinances of the City of Long Branch
applicable to the operation of said business.
D. Authorization to prepare forms. The Supervisor of Licenses and Permits
is hereby authorized to prepare any and all necessary forms to be
utilized for the purposes of this section.
E. Term of license. All licenses shall commence as of January 1 and expire
on December 31 of each year. No license may be transferred to any
other person, firm, corporation or location.
F. Duplicate licenses. A duplicate license may be issued by the Supervisor
to replace any license previously issued which has been lost, stolen,
§ 230-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 230-2
224:376
defaced or destroyed without willful conduct on the part of the licensee,
upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a notary
public of the State of New Jersey attesting to such fact and the payment
to the Supervisor of a fee of $25.
G. Contents of initial license. Each license issued under this chapter shall
state upon its face the following:
(1) The name of the licensee and any other name under which the
business is to be conducted.
(2) The amount of the license fee.
(3) Such other information as the Supervisor shall determine.
H. Regulations. Every licensee shall:
(1) Permit all reasonable inspections of his/her business.
(2) Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times by
the Supervisor or any other authorized city employee.
(3) Ascertain and at all times comply with the laws and regulations
applicable to the business.
(4) Avoid all forbidden, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices,
businesses or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare.
(5) Refrain from operating the licensed business on the premises after
expiration of the license and during any period when the license is
revoked or suspended.
(6) Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person or allow any other
person to use and display or destroy, damage or remove or have in
his possession, except as authorized by the Supervisor or by law,
any license or insignia which has been issued to the licensee.
(7) Any person, firm or corporation receiving a license pursuant to the
within section shall notify the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits
no later than 10 days prior to a change in the location of any
licensed business and shall apply for a new initial license.
I. License fees.
(1) All fees and charges for mercantile licenses as set forth in the
within section shall be paid in advance at the time of application to
the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits.
(2) No rebate or refund of any license fee or any part thereof shall be
made by reason of retirement of the license from the business or
revocation or suspension of the license; by reason of the nonuse of
the license for all or any portion of the license year or by reason of a
change of location of business; or by reason offered or other
§ 230-2 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 230-2
224:377
accident or other casualty rendering the use of the license
ineffective.
(3) Effective January 1, 2021, all businesses, trades and activities
conducted within the City of Long Branch regulated by the within
section shall pay a license fee of $125 for each year or part thereof
in which they shall operate said business, together with the
following additional fee, which shall be as noted hereinafter:
[Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-89; 6-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 118-89; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 47-07; 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(a) Automatic machines for weighing, vending or delivery of any
article or service or automatic amusement machines or devices
(except cigarette machines and food beverage vending
machines regulated in Chapter 181, Food Establishments,
Retail): $25 per machine per year or part of a year.
(b) Any application for renewal of a license under this chapter
submitted after January 31 of the effective year of the license
shall be subject to a late charge of $25.
J. Special events permits. The City Council may authorize the issuance of
special permits without the payment of license fees or other charges to
public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious
organizations for the conduct or operation of a temporary nonprofit
enterprise for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or
religious purpose. However, the applicant shall submit the usual
application form in the manner required in this section and shall
operate in accordance with all requirements if granted a permit.
K. Enforcement. The Supervisor, any police officer of the city, any
Construction Code Official of the city, any Health Officer of the city, the
Zoning Officer or any other city official or employee authorized by the
Business Administrator may examine all places of business and all
persons conducting business in the city to determine if this chapter has
been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against
any person found to be violating the same.
L. Revocation or suspension of license.
(1) Any permit or license granted or issued pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked by the City Council after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 230-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 230-2
224:378
(c) Violation of this chapter or of any ordinance of the City of Long
Branch.
(d) Conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.
(e) Conducting the business licensed, through the applicant
himself/herself or any of his/her agents, servants or employees,
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public or in such manner as to constitute
a public nuisance.
(2) Notice of hearing on the suspension or revocation of a license shall
be given in writing by the Supervisor, setting forth specifically the
grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The
notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the licensee, at the
address indicated on the license application at least 10 days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
(3) In addition to the provisions for suspension or revocation, the
Supervisor, any police officer or city employee or official or any
taxpayer or resident of the city may make complaint in the
Municipal Court of the city for violation of this section or chapter.
M. Conditions for issuance. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any
and all licenses under the provisions of this chapter that said business
shall be used and operated only for lawful purposes and not in violation
of the zoning ordinances or other ordinances of the City of Long
Branch.
N. Renewal applications. Every person who receives an initial license shall
file for a renewal annually on or before December 31 on forms provided
by the Supervisor of Licenses and Permits.
O. Registration of regulated persons/businesses. Any person/business that
claims exemption from licensing under this section, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:52-1, shall file an informational application with the Supervisor of
Licenses and Permits for his/her review and determination on the
validity of the request for exemption. The informational application
shall also be used for review of compliance with other applicable state,
county and local laws and regulations relating to the conducting of
businesses within the City of Long Branch. The application may require
the following minimum information: [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-89]
(1) Name of applicant, address and phone number.
(2) Address of business (P.O. box address not acceptable) and phone
number.
(3) Type of business.
§ 230-2 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 230-2
224:379
§ 230-3. Auto body shops. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
No new auto body shop business shall be commenced in the city. Existing
auto body shops can relocate in the city where said use is permitted.
Chapter 235
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Barking dogs — See Ch. 109, Art. I.
Curfew — See Ch. 150.
Loitering — See Ch. 218.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
(4) Type of materials, if any, stored on premises.
(5) Number of employees.
(6) Any other information required by the Supervisor of Licenses and
Permits.
P. Providing copy of mercantile computer records. Any person may
request a copy of the list of mercantile licenses issued as of the date of
the request. A computer search fee and reproduction fee of $25 or a fee
of $50 for said list if provided on mailing labels, shall be paid in advance
for said list. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
Q. Reward programs. [Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 18-18]
(1) Any vendor who offers reward programs which include the
payment of taxes for Long Branch taxpayers or residents who shop
at participating Long Branch-based businesses shall before
implementing such a program obtain a license as provided for in
this section.
(2) The program shall be administered solely by the vendor who shall
undertake to register interested taxpayers, residents and Long
Branch-based businesses.
(3) The vendor shall pay to the City a license fee in the amount of $50
yearly and shall submit to the Health/Mercantile office all
information necessary as may be reasonably required to determine
the truth or validity of the statements contained in the application.
(4) Conditions. The City shall establish the necessary reporting
requirement for any payment of taxes made to the City by the
vendor. The City shall not be responsible for any impact of program
participation on mortgage escrow calculations. The City shall not
be responsible for any changes in property ownership.
§ 230-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 235-1
224:380
§ 235-1. Loud or unnecessary noises prohibited. [Amended
5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 944]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the community or which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety
of others nearby or near to or upon a public highway, road, street, lane,
alley, park residence, square or common whereby the public peace is broken
or disturbed or exceeds the sound pressure levels enumerated in § 235-4.
§ 235-2. Acts enumerated. [Amended 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 944]
A. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary,
disturbing and a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
community and its people, in violation of § 235-1, but the enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(1) Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car, bus or
other vehicle in the city except as a danger warning; the creation
by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time; the use of any horn, whistle or
other device operated by engine, exhaust or by compressed air or
gas or by vacuum; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.
(2) Radios, televisions, phonographs, tape recorders, etc.
(a) The using, operation or permitting to be played, used or
operated, either indoors or outdoors, of any radio receiving set,
television receiver, musical instrument, phonograph, tape
recorder or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing
for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle,
chamber or premises in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of such a set, instrument, phonograph, machine or
device shall conform to the values in Table I84 as measured in
an attached or neighboring apartment, townhouse,
condominium, living quarters, etc., or at the property line,
whichever is less. [Amended 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 944]
(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection,
chapter, Code or any other ordinance of the City of Long
Branch, no person other than a duly licensed business legally
84.Editor's Note: Table I is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-1 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 235-2
224:381
operating on the property shall operate, play or permit the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or
similar device that produces or amplifies sound on any public
road, highway, right-of-way, street, sidewalk, boardwalk, park
or beach unless the person operating or playing said device is
using earphones which restrict the sound emanating from said
device to hearing of the operator only. This prohibition shall
not apply to the playing of a motor vehicle radio or cassette
that is part of the equipment that is installed in such vehicle.
[Added 6-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1283]
(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, tape recorder or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which
is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial
advertising or for any other purpose, except as authorized by
governmental authorities in connection with law enforcement or
public emergencies, provided that such devices may be employed
in connection with nonprofit charitable, educational, civic, religious
or recreational activities in accordance with permits first obtained
therefor from the Director of Public Safety pursuant to § 235-5
hereof.
(4) People noise. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing or conducting
unnecessarily loud or annoying vocal utterances at any time or
place so as unreasonably to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any person in any residence, office, hospital, school, place
of business, street or public place or of any persons in the vicinity.
(5) Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by
causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort
or repose of any persons in the vicinity, but nothing herein
contained is intended to apply to a dog pound or kennel licensed in
accordance with Chapter 109, Animals, Article I, Dogs.
(6) Nonvehicular whistles, horns and other signaling devices. The
sounding of any whistle, horn or other signaling device except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire
or danger or upon request of proper city authorities or as may be
required by general law or ordinance.
(7) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary jet or internal combustion engine or
motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(8) Vehicles and their loads. The use of any automobile, motorcycle,
truck or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such a
manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
§ 235-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 235-2
224:382
(9) Construction work.
(a) The excavation, grading, paving, erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any premises, street, building or
structure at any time on Sundays, or other than between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays or between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all other days, except in
case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety and if the nature of the emergency will admit of the prior
procurement of a permit, then only in accordance with a permit
first obtained from the City Engineer as to public street work,
or from the City Construction Code Official as to other work,
pursuant to § 235-5 hereof. Such permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency
continues.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Engineer or Construction
Code Official, as the case may be, shall determine that the
public health and safety will not be impaired by such work
within the prohibited hours, and if he shall further determine
that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest,
he may grant permission for such work to be done within the
prohibited hours upon application being made at the time the
permit for the work is issued or during the progress of the
work. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
interior or exterior repairs or to interior alterations, the work
for which is actually performed by a homeowner or occupant,
personally, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
upon residential premises that are owned by such homeowner
or that are occupied by such occupant, provided that the work
shall be done without undue noise or disturbance of the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood.
(10) Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of loud and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and
containers.
(11) Excessive noise.
(a) The creation of excessive noise in any school grounds, church,
synagogue, hospital, school building, institution of learning,
court or public building or place of public assembly while the
same are in use and which unreasonably interferes with the
working of the institution or place or unduly annoys persons
therein.
(b) The creation of excessive noise on any street adjacent to such
grounds, places or buildings, while the same are in use, which
unduly interferes with the working of the institution or place or
unduly annoys persons therein, provided that conspicuous
§ 235-2 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 235-2
224:383
§ 235-3. Sound trucks.
Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following regulations
upon the issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Safety for each
occasion and each location:
signs are displayed in such street indicating that it is a zone of
quiet for a specified reason.
(12) Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance show or sale,
except in connection with any school or civic activity or where a
parade permit has been issued.
(13) Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
(14) Commercial transport. The causing, permitting or continuing of
any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of
railroad cars, locomotives, buses and trucks.
(15) Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the
noise from such blower or fan is adequately muffled and such
engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such
noises.
(16) Lawn mowers, chain saws, etc. The operation or use of any power
lawn mower, chain saw, fence post driller or the like, between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(17) Miscellaneous night noises. Any of the following activities, when
occurring in close proximity to residences between 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.: the unnecessary warming up or idling of buses, trucks or
tractors and the unnecessary and repeated idling, acceleration and
deceleration or starting and stopping of automobiles and
motorcycles.
(18) Outdoor gatherings. Outdoor concerts except in accordance with
permits first obtained therefor from the Director of Public Safety
pursuant to § 235-5 hereof.
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
A. Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the city
before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
B. Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the city
before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
§ 235-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 235-3
224:384
§ 235-4. Measured sound pressure levels. [Amended 5-22-1979 by
Ord. No. 944]
No person shall use or operate any facility, machine or instrumentality or
produce or cause to be produced any sound in the City of Long Branch when
the same shall produce noise and a sound pressure level in excess of the
level permitted by Tables I and II attached to this chapter; subject, however,
to the exceptions attached to and made a part of Table I and together with
the addendum attached to and made a part of Table II.
§ 235-5. Permits.
§ 235-6. Appeal of denial of permit.
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall have the right to appeal to the
City Council from the denial of the permit by the issuing officer. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal addressed to the City
Council. Such notice shall be filed within three days after the issuing officer
C. Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme right-hand side of the
road and shall proceed at a speed of not less than 10 miles per hour.
D. Stationary sound trucks are prohibited in all residential zones in the
city, but may be operated in commercial zones during the hours
referred to above.
E. For the purpose of this chapter, "residential zones" shall mean the zones
so designated in Chapter 345, Zoning, of the city and "commercial
zones" shall mean and include all parts of the city other than residential
zones.
A. The officer charged with the responsibility of issuing permits for the
activities requiring permits in accordance with § 235-2 hereof shall
issue permits for such activities if such officer shall find that the
activities will not unduly or unnecessarily annoy, disturb, injure or
endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, that the
activities will not violate any other ordinance or law or create a public
nuisance and that the public health and safety will not be endangered
thereby.
B. Permits shall specify the dates and hours of the permitted activities,
which shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. unless the issuing officer shall determine that it is in the best
interest of the community that the activity take place wholly or partially
during such hours.
C. The issuing officers are authorized to adopt and use such forms of
applications and permits as may be reasonably required in the
performance of their duties. Each application for a permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of $2, which shall be payable to the City of Long
Branch.
§ 235-3 MARRIAGE LICENSES § 235-6
224:385
shall have notified the applicant of the denial of the permit. The City Council
shall act upon the appeal as soon as practicable after receiving the notice
thereof and shall give the applicant an opportunity to be heard before taking
action. The City Council may affirm or reverse the issuing officer's denial of
the permit or may grant the permit with modifications or conditions.
§ 235-7. Exemptions. [Amended 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 944]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to church bells, or
chimes; or to the playing of bands or orchestras in a hall or building owned
or operated by an eleemosynary organization in a manner which will not
annoy the peace, comfort and quiet of the neighboring inhabitants; or to
municipal, county, state or federal government agencies in connection with
any emergency; or to normal working activities of or sponsored by the
City Council or to warning devices on vehicles used only for traffic safety
purposes or as specifically permitted in § 235-2.
§ 235-8. Enforcement.
§ 235-9. Violations and penalties.85
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. In addition to public law enforcement officers
and others who by law are entitled to enforce or bring complaints under
this chapter, the officers who are designated hereunder for the issuance
of permits as well as the Construction Code Officials shall have the
power to enforce and bring complaints under this chapter.
B. A violation of this chapter shall be cause for summons and complaint to
be issued forthwith, and failure to desist upon being warned by an
enforcement officer shall constitute an additional separate offense;
provided, however, that if the noise source is not a readily identifiable
individual or a motor vehicle moving on a public right-of-way, in lieu of a
summons and complaint, enforcement personnel may issue a twentyfour-
hour notice, in writing, which may be served personally or by
certified mail to the last known address of the person or persons in
charge of or in control of the device, building or premises producing the
noise, to abate said violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with this
order so issued and served shall constitute an additional violation of
this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 235-10
224:386
§ 235-10. Remedy not exclusive; severability.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive or to
supersede any other remedies provided by law or ordinance. If any clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
Chapter 238
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 109.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 181.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 193.
Housing standards — See Ch. 200.
Littering — See Ch. 215.
Noise — See Ch. 235.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 262.
Solid waste — See Ch. 293.
§ 238-1. Establishment of code.86
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the city in removing or
abating such nuisance and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion of the
text.
§ 238-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
86.Editor's Note: Authority to adopt health ordinances stems from the general grant of police
power, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29 and 40:69A-30. More specific powers of the municipality in
respect to health regulations are found in N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
§ 235-10 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 238-3
238:387
§ 238-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for the use and examination
of the public.
§ 238-4. Amendments to code.
The Public Health Nuisance Code is amended in Section 1.1 to read as
follows:
1.1. Enforcing officials shall mean and include regular and special
patrolmen and superior officers of the Police Department, the Construction
Code Official or Building Official, the Plumbing Inspector of the city, the
Health Officer or any other official authorized by the City Council to
enforce this code and section.
Chapter 244
PARKING LOTS AND METERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 244-1. Metered parking areas. [Amended 6-9-1971 by Ord. No.
603; 3-13-1973 by Ord. No. 677; 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 955;
8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 958; 10-9-1979 by Ord. No. 963; 10-27-1983
by Ord. No. 1131; 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 1249; 12-11-1986 by Ord.
No. 1305; 6-23-1987 by Ord. No. 1352; 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 43-88;
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 19-11]
A. Zones established. Parking meters are hereby established pursuant to
the attached grid (Schedule A).87
B. Installation and placement of parking meter pay stations.
(1) The Chief of Police shall cause parking spaces to be striped and
numbered, and parking meter pay stations (also referenced as
"meters") to be installed at various locations to service the said
parking spaces, within the zones established in § 244-1A above (see
Schedule A). Parking in the zones shall be controlled by meters
during the hours and for the time limits specified for each zone in
Subsection A. The meters shall have the legend upon them visible
to the person using it, stating that the meters are in effect during
such hours, and the time limitation shall be designated by an
87.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 238-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-1
238:388
appropriate sign posted in proximity to the meter in the zone.
[Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 13-19]
(2) Metered parking shall be effective only between the time period
from May 1 through September 30 of each year.
(3) The metered rates set forth herein (see Schedule A)88 shall take
effect in the respective areas when the all of following actions have
been completed by the Long Branch Parking Agency (LBPA), which
agency is a division of the Department of Public Safety:
(a) Striping and numbering of on-street and off-street parking
spaces;
(b) Activation of meters; and
(c) Notification of public via publication in an official newspaper,
and posting on the City website (www.longbranch.org/
parking).
C. Markings and signs. The Chief of Police shall have markings painted for
the purpose of designating each parking space which is subject to
metered parking, and shall have signs erected in the vicinity thereof to
alert the public as to the requirements of metered parking. Each vehicle
utilizing a metered space shall be parked within the lines or markings.
No person shall park any vehicle across any line or marking or park a
vehicle in such position that shall not be entirely within the area
designated by the lines or markings. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 13-19]
D. Charges for parking.
(1) When any vehicle shall be parked in any metered space, the
operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space,
immediately thereafter pay the appropriate parking fee for the
desired time through the use of United States cash or currency, or
through the use of a credit or debit card, by entering the numbered
parking space into the meter and by following the direction on the
meter. Failure to make payment for the use of a metered space shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. Upon making proper payment,
the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for a
period as set forth on the attached Schedule A.89
(2) If any vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the
parking limit, as fixed by the amount paid for the parking space, the
vehicle shall be considered parked overtime and beyond the period
of legal parking time and shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
88.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
89.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 244-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 244-1
238:389
§ 244-2. Nonmetered municipal parking lots.
(3) For those patrons who utilize a credit or debit card as their mode of
payment for a metered space, the City may be charged an
administrative or transaction fee by the credit or debit card
companies for the transaction. It is hereby recognized that the City
shall create a line item in its budget for the gross receipts received
from metered parking as well a line item for administrative/
transaction costs associated with the use of credit and debit cards
for this purpose.
(4) The City of Long Branch may offer business owners an automated
payment method through a smart card or a mobile application or
other electronic device at a discounted rate, which rate shall be
determined by resolution of the City Council.
(5) No change or refunds will be provided by the City.
E. Certain acts prohibited.
(1) No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter pay station
installed under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No person shall deposit in any parking meter pay station, any slug
device or metallic substitute or any other substitute currently of
the United States.
F. Enforcement. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 13-19]
(1) The Chief of Police, or any police officer (including Class I and Class
II Special Officers) of the Long Branch Police Department, is
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Business Administrator of the City of Long Branch shall have
the discretion to suspend the enforcement of metered parking at
such times and for such periods as he or she deems appropriate.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 7-1-1980 by Ord. No. 986; 9-9-1980
by Ord. No. 993]
OPERATOR AND VEHICLE — Shall have the meanings and definitions
set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, which definitions are incorporated in this
section as if fully set forth herein.
PARKING — The standing or waiting of a vehicle upon a municipal
parking lot, whether or not the vehicle is occupied, whether or not
the vehicle be accompanied by an operator, other than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers or merchandise.
PARKING LOT — Any lot now or in the future owned or operated by the
city and used for the parking of vehicles.
§ 244-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-2
238:390
B. Areas established. The following municipal parking lots are established
and designated as nonmetered parking areas for the parking of
vehicles:
(1) Municipal Parking Lot 1. Located on both sides of Russell Court
between Grand Avenue and Branchport Avenue in Blocks 245 and
247 on the revised tax map of the city.
(2) Municipal Parking Lot 2. Located on the easterly side of Branchport
Avenue in Block 256 on the tax map.
(3) Municipal Parking Lot 3. Located on the southerly side of Union
Avenue between Rockwell Avenue and Third Avenue in Block 274
on the tax map.
(4) Municipal Parking Lot 4. Located on the southerly side of Union
Avenue between Third Avenue and Liberty Street in Block 274 on
the tax map.
(5) Municipal Parking Lot 5. Located on the northerly side of Belmont
Avenue at its intersection with the westerly side of Memorial
Parkway in Block 282 on the tax map.
(6) Municipal Parking Lot 6. Located on the northerly side of Belmont
Avenue at its intersection with the easterly side of Memorial
Parkway in Block 283 on the tax map.
(7) Municipal Parking Lot 7. Located on the northerly side of Belmont
Avenue west of Academy Street in Block 281 on the tax map.
(8) Municipal Parking Lot 8. Located on the northerly side of Belmont
Avenue east of Third Avenue, being Block 281, Lot 1 on the tax
map. [Added 11-23-1971 by Ord. No. 619]
(9) Municipal Parking Lot 9.
(a) Located in designated areas of city-owned property known as
the "North End Beach Park area," and bounded on the south by
Seaview Avenue and on the east by New Ocean Avenue.
[Added 5-28-1974 by Ord. No. 741]
(b) This municipal parking lot shall encompass all of the cityowned
lots used for parking in conjunction with Seven
Presidents Park. [Added 7-1-1980 by Ord. No. 986]
(10) Municipal Parking Lots 9 and 12. In Parking Lots 9 and 12, a
parking charge of $4 per day or part thereof shall be charged for
passenger cars, motorcycles, motor scooters and self-contained
camper-type vehicles. No parking shall be permitted from 3:00 a.m.
to 5:00 a.m. [Amended 7-1-1980 by Ord. No. 986; 10-27-1998
by Ord. No. 36-98; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2-16]
§ 244-2 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 244-2
238:391
(11) Municipal Parking Lot 11. Located on the west side of Ocean
Avenue between South Broadway and Laird Street, and known as
"Garfield Park." In Parking Lot 11, a parking charge of $3 per day
or part thereof shall be charged for passenger cars, motorcycles
and motor scooters and self-contained camper-type vehicles and
$10 per day or part thereof for buses or tractor-drawn trailer-type
vehicles. No parking shall be permitted between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. [Amended 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 929A; 7-1-1980 by Ord.
No. 986; 4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1016; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2-16]
(12) Municipal Parking Lot 13. Located on the north side of Atlantic
Avenue between Ocean Boulevard and Ocean Avenue. [Added
7-2-1984 by Ord. No. 1176]
(13) Municipal Parking Lot 14. Located on the west side of Kossick Way,
between Brighton Avenue and West End Court. [Amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 46-88]
(14) Municipal Parking Lot 15. Located on Montgomery Avenue and
Second Avenue. [Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 31-11]
(15) Municipal Parking Lot 16. Located on Melrose Terrace and Ocean
Avenue. [Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 31-11]
C. Markings.
(1) The Chief of Police shall cause lines or appropriate markings to be
painted on the surface of the municipal parking lots outlined and
designated each parking space. Every vehicle shall be parked
within the lines or markings. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No.
13-19]
(2) It shall be unlawful for any operator to park any vehicle outside of
the lines or markings or to park any vehicle in such a position that
it shall not be entirely within the space designated by the lines or
markings.
D. Vehicles permitted in lots. The parking of vehicles on any of the
municipal parking lots covered by this section shall be limited to types
of vehicles commonly referred to as private passenger automobiles,
motorcycles, motor scooters and light commercial vehicles not in
excess of 25 feet in length, and it shall be unlawful to park any other
vehicles in the lots.
E. Time limit.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle to be parked or remain parked in any of the municipal
parking lots for a period in excess of two hours, except on Sundays
and legal holidays, and except as hereinafter provided.
§ 244-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-2
238:392
§ 244-2.1. Metered municipal parking lots. [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 9-15; amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 8-17]
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle to be parked in the municipal parking lots or any of the
reserved parking areas daily between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. [Amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2-16]
(3) The two-hour time limit imposed by Subsection E(1) shall not apply
to the northerly portion of Municipal Parking Lot No. 1, known and
designated as "Block 247, Lots 7, 8 and 9" on the Official Tax Map
of the City of Long Branch, and to the northerly portion of
Municipal Parking Lot No. 2, known and designated as "Block 256,
Lot 13A," on the Official Tax Map of the City of Long Branch.
Parking on said portions of said municipal parking lots shall be
unlimited except as provided for in Subsection E(2). [Amended
6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 817]
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle to be parked in the Municipal Parking Lot No. 13 for a
period in excess of 30 minutes during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. any day of the week. [Added 7-2-1984 by Ord. No. 1176]
F. (Reserved)90
G. Tampering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface,
damage, tamper with, remove or destroy any sign or marking provided
for by this chapter.
H. Signs. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being
erected and posted as required by law.
I. Enforcing authority. The Police Department shall enforce this section.
Any police officer observing any violation shall make a record of the
violation, including the number of the municipal parking lot, the area of
the same involved, whether general parking or reserved parking, the
state license or registration number of the vehicle, the date and hour of
the overtime or illegal parking and any other pertinent details. Each
police officer shall also attach to the vehicle involved a summons as
provided in the rules governing the New Jersey Courts.
J. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. If any vehicle is parked in any
municipal parking lot in violation of any of the provisions of this section,
the Police Department may cause the vehicle to be removed to such
place as is designated by the Chief of Police. The owner or operator of
any vehicle so removed shall pay the reasonable cost and expense of the
removal and storage which may result therefrom, and any person
desiring to reclaim the motor vehicle may do so by paying the cost and
expense of the removal and storage.
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Reserved parking, as amended, was repealed
4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2-16.
§ 244-2 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 244-2.1
238:393
A. Block 288 Lot 1 and Block 287 Lots 1, 2, 22.03, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33.01 and 34 being in the same hereby are designated as
City-owned metered parking lots. This section shall also apply to any
property leased by the City of Long Branch from a private property
owner or corporation or other business entity for the purpose of
seasonal parking.
(1) Parking shall be permitted in said lots between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to midnight, subject to the discretion of the Business
Administrator of the City of Long Branch closing of said lot for any
reason.
(2) There shall be no overnight parking in said municipal City-owned
metered parking lot. Any vehicle found on said City-owned metered
lot after 3:00 a.m. is subject to summons and towing at the owner's
expense.
(3) Payment for parking.
(a) Payment for parking shall be fixed as follows:
[1] Monday through Thursday: $5 per day.
[2] Friday, Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $10 per day.
(b) If a vehicle leaves the parking lot and re-enters the parking lot,
the vehicle is obligated to pay a second parking fee as there is
a no re-entry policy.
(4) All vehicles must display faceup in the windshield of the parked
vehicle the parking metered receipt. Any vehicle that has parking
metered receipt facedown in the windshield shall be subject to a
summons.
(5) Rules and regulations governing the parking on City-owned
metered parking lots as set forth in this section shall be subject to
rules and regulations that shall be enforceable as posted at the
municipal parking lot.
(6) Subject to amendment at any time by the City Business
Administrator upon the advice of the Chief of Police, the Code
Officials of the City of Long Branch, the Fire Marshal of the City of
Long Branch the regulations governing this section may be
changed at any time. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 13-19]
(7) The rules and regulations shall subject any violators to the
violations and penalty provisions of § 244-4.
(8) This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage.
(9) All other provisions of Chapter 244 shall remain in full force and
effect;
§ 244-2.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-2.1
238:394
§ 244-3. Exemptions permitted by Council.
The City Council of the City of Long Branch is hereby authorized, in its
discretion, to exempt controlled metered public streets, or any portion
thereof, from the payment of any charges for parking for certain periods.
§ 244-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-27-1979 by Ord. No.
935; 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 19-94; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 19-11;
5-15-2014 by Ord. No. 9-14]
(10) The City of Long Branch assumes no liability or responsibility for
loss or damage to any vehicles or its contents parked in City
parking area or facilities.
(11) Lot is a self-park facility; please park and lock vehicle and note area
in which you have parked.
(12) All signs and markings are in the interest of parking control and
safety, and must be obeyed under penalty of citation and/or towing
at owner's expense. Removal or damage of such signs or markings
is illegal; violators are subject to arrest and prosecution. Vehicles
parking in NO PARKING ZONES are subject to ticketing/towing.
NO PARKING ZONES include but not limited to yellow-curbed
areas, driveways, sidewalks, handicapped ramps, fire zones and
other designated areas.
(13) The speed limits in the City of Long Branch Parking Lots have been
restricted to 10 miles per hour. Persons exceeding the posted speed
limit may receive a City of Long Branch Municipal Court traffic
violation summons.
(14) The City of Long Branch reserves the right to close any parking
area or part thereof or roadway for reasons of repair, safety, and
other instances as needed. Vehicles parked within such areas
closed by barricades, signs, or notification may be towed at owner's
expense.
(15) Absence of signage is not an authorization to park. Parking is
permitted in designated area only.
(16) If damage is caused to a motor vehicle being towed by an
independent contractor, the City of Long Branch is not liable or
responsible for any such damage. This does not affect the liability
of any independent contractor carrying out the towing.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $50 for each and
every violation of this chapter. However, Subsections B and C below
prescribe specific fines and penalties for the specific offenses identified
therein.
§ 244-2.1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 244-4
238:395
§ 244-5. Monmouth Medical Center. [Added 2-27-1973 by Ord. No.
675]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, providing that institutions of
a semipublic character not for pecuniary profit, incorporated under Title
15, may request the provisions of Subtitle I of Title 39 be made applicable
to the semiprivate roads, streets, driveways and parking areas used by
said institution, the provisions of Subtitle I of Title 39, at the request of
Monmouth Medical Center, are hereby made applicable to the following
described areas:
B. For persons violating the parking time limits or the parking prohibition
requirements specified in this chapter who wish to plead guilty and pay
the fine through the Violations Bureau, the fine shall be $48 for each
and every violation.
C. For persons violating § 244-1E above (Certain acts prohibited), a fine
shall be imposed in the minimum amount of $250 and in the maximum
amount of $1,000, which shall be determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge, plus restitution to the City in the amount
required to repair the parking meter pay station as certified by the
LBPA.
A. Employees' and visitors' parking: Second Avenue lot bounded by
doctors' parking to the north and Dunbar Avenue to the south. Parking
restricted to visitors, employees and some vendors.
B. Doctors' parking area: bounded on the north by Alexander Pavilion
Tunnel and on the east by Second Avenue. Restricted to doctors,
clergymen, evening nursing personnel and those authorized by the
Parking Coordinator.
C. Driveway and entrance of Alexander's Pavilion Second Avenue:
prohibited parking.
D. Rear yard and driveway of 124 Pavilion Avenue and rear driveway of
Alexander Pavilion Building: restricted for use of authorized house
personnel. [Amended 6-12-1973 by Ord. No. 695]
E. Rear yard and driveway of 128 Pavilion: restricted for use of authorized
maintenance and security personnel.
F. Rehabilitation parking area: bounded on the east by 136 Pavilion and on
the south by the Alexander Pavilion Tunnel and situated directly behind
physical therapy. Parking restricted to rehabilitation patients,
authorized physical therapy employees, hospital courier and those
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
G. Semicircular drive that starts on Pavilion and circles the laundry back
into Pavilion in a one-hundred-eighty-degree arc: parking restricted to
authorized lab personnel, emergency service vehicles and those
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
§ 244-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-5
238:396
H. Steinman-Housman visitors' and doctors' parking: L-shaped area
bounded by Third Avenue and Pavilion and the north and west sides of
the Steinman-Housman Building. Parking restricted to doctors of
Steinman-Housman, their patients, other authorized physicians and
those authorized by the Parking Coordinator. [Amended 6-12-1973 by
Ord. No. 695]
I. Dunbar Avenue emergency entrance driveway and ambulance parking
area: parking prohibited. [Amended 6-12-1973 by Ord. No. 695]
J. Radiation therapy parking: the gate-controlled parking on the Dunbar
Avenue side of therapy as well as that area of the north side of the
radiation therapy building. Parking restricted to radiation patients,
authorized radiology personnel and those authorized by the Parking
Coordinator. [Amended 6-12-1973 by Ord. No. 695]
K. Interior drive and main entrance driveway fronting the Greenwald
Pavilion and exiting into Dunbar Avenue: prohibited parking.
L. Patient pickup area: located at the double doors of the Alexander
Pavilion Tunnel, at the west end of the doctors' parking lot. Parking
restricted to allow patient discharge and pickup.
M. Parking strip known as the "tower parking area" and bounded on the
north by Dunbar and on the south by Bath Avenue: parking restricted to
those authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
N. Driveway and rear of 130 Dunbar: restricted for use of personnel
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
O. Driveway and rear of 134 Dunbar: restricted for use of personnel
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
P. Driveway and rear of 156 Dunbar: restricted for use of personnel
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
Q. Driveway and rear of 158 Dunbar: limited parking for authorized
construction personnel.
R. Rear driveway of the P & E Building running north and south from
Dunbar to Lowden and bounded on the west by the rear of the P & E
Building: prohibited parking.
S. Parking area opposite Lowden Avenue tennis courts and bounded on
the north by Dunbar and on the south by Lowden: restricted parking for
the use of P & E and Steinman-Housman nursing personnel and those
authorized by the Parking Coordinator.
T. Parking areas on the north, south and west side of the P & E Building:
parking restricted to the use of P & E doctors and their patients.
U. Borden Apartment and Auxiliary Hall property bounded on the north by
Lowden Avenue, on the west by Third Avenue, on the south by Bath
§ 244-5 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 244-5
238:397
Chapter 247
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 35.
Police Department — See Ch. 78.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Dogs — See Ch. 109, Art. I.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 134.
Littering — See Ch. 215.
Loitering — See Ch. 218.
Noise — See Ch. 235.
Avenue and on the east by the Lowden Garden Apartments: parking
restricted for the use of Borden Apartment tenants and authorized
Auxiliary Hall personnel.
V. Pollack Clinic: parking area to the rear of Pollack Clinic and bounded on
the west side by the railroad tracks. Parking restricted for the use of
authorized clinic personnel.
W. The above-cited parking areas are specifically designated in the plot
plan attached to and made a part of the ordinance of 1-26-1971 as
amended 2-27-1973, which are hereby incorporated as a part of this
section as if fully set forth herein.
X. Vehicles will be permitted to park only in designated parking areas and
only within the parking stalls delineated by painted fines. All vehicles
permitted to park will be properly identified.
§ 244-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 244-5
238:398
ARTICLE I
Park Use Regulations
[Adopted 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 979 (Ch. XXVI of the 1971 Code)]
§ 247-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Long Branch.
DIRECTOR — A person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities and to whom all park attendants of such areas are responsible.
PARK — A park, recreation, playground, recreation center or any other area
in the City owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC SPACE — Includes locations such as the Gazebo Pier Village, band
shells at West End Park and Broadway Park, Senior Center, Great Lawn,
boardwalk, promenade, City parking lots and beaches.[Added 5-27-2014
by Ord. No. 12-14; amended 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 15-17]
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size,
kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in
the service of any City parks.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.[Added
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 28-07]
§ 247-2. Prohibited activities.
No person in any public park shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or
paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary
or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or
other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Dig or remove any sand, earth, rock, stone, tree, shrub, plant, flowers,
grass, timber or log, whether standing or cut, or any other material or
make any excavation by tool equipment, blasting or other means or
agency or attach or cause to be attached any rope, wire or other device
to any tree, plant or building.
C. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
§ 247-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-2
238:399
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written
permit issued hereunder.
D. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
E. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are
provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
F. Fail to observe and obey all traffic laws, including parking signs
indicating speed, directions, caution, stopping, parking or no parking
and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and
property.
G. Park and leave a motor vehicle overnight in any area of the park.
H. Park a motor vehicle on park property unless the operator or owner
thereof shall use or by making use of the recreation facilities of such
park during the time that the motor vehicle is parked in said park.
I. Ride a minibike or motorized bike in or on any park or recreational
facility.
J. Bring or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode
or discharge or burn, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks
or explosives of inflammable material or discharge them or throw them
into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that
in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
K. Bring in or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motorpowered
or not, upon any waters in the park except at such time, in
such places and under such conditions as may be approved by the
Mayor and the Council.
L. Enter upon ice except such ice designated.
M. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor
and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
be hereinafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or
places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing
§ 247-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 247-2
238:400
§ 247-3. Additional rules authorized.
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person
shall:
or congregate thereat when such activities are prohibited by the Mayor
and City Council upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
N. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Mayor and City Council
for such purposes for each individual site.
O. Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit so as to indecently
expose his person.
P. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place
except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that
purpose.
Q. Fish in any waters except in waters designated by the Mayor and City
Council for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have
or may be prescribed by the Mayor and City Council.
R. Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
S. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If
no such trash receptacles are available, then trash shall be carried
away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
T. No persons shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for wildlife within
the City of Long Branch on publicly owned lands. [Added 8-10-1999
by Ord. No. 34-99; amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 28-07]
(1) Exception. This subsection shall not be construed as to prohibit
humane acts towards wildlife in individual cases, such as
temporary nurturing of a wounded bird on publicly owned lands.
U. No person shall be permitted to operate or use rollerblades, in-line
skates, skates, skateboards or other similar devises in or about the
following parks or any of the public walks adjacent thereto: [Added
8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 28-03]
(1) Martin Luther King Memorial Park, Atlantic Way.
A. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink the same at any time, nor shall any
person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park.91
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 247-2 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-3
238:401
§ 247-4. Permits for special events. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord.
No. 12-06]
B. All dogs and domestic animals are prohibited from all beaches,
boardwalks and park property. Nothing herein shall be construed as
permitting the running of dogs at-large.92
C. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
D. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use
or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
E. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Mayor and City Council
he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall
desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with
any ordinance or rule.
F. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
G. Go onto park property and/or use park facilities or equipment from dusk
to 8:30 a.m. [Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 1296]
H. No golfing or striking of golf balls is permitted. [Added 6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 16-00]
I. No person shall smoke any cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products,
including electronic or vapor cigarettes and chewing tobacco, on the
beach, boardwalk, promenade or any park covered by this article at any
time. [Added 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 15-17]
A. Whenever a person, organization, or other entity desires to use a park
or a certain area of the park, public street or place, or quasi-public
private property when the use may impact public safety or City services
for a period of one day or any part thereof, or when a private event on
private property is such that it may impact on public safety or City
services, that person shall make application to and obtain from the City
Clerk a permit for the special event, which includes, but is not limited
to, a performance, show or entertainment, labor strikes, road closings,
large gatherings requiring other City permits, protests or
demonstrations.
B. All events and activities must comply with applicable state statutes and
City ordinances. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all
necessary and required permits and approvals.
C. Applications for a special event permit shall be submitted to the City
Clerk no less than 60 days before or within a reasonable amount of time
to be reviewed by the Special Events Committee and approved by the
Mayor. There shall be a late fee of $10 per day for applications
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Animals, Art. I, Dogs.
§ 247-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 247-4
238:402
submitted less than 60 days before the event date. [Amended
5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 12-14]
D. Special event permits shall be deemed to be either:
(1) City-sponsored: City services paid by the City.
(2) City-sanctioned: City services paid by the applicant as per law and
regulation and via equity account established with the City of Long
Branch Finance Department.
E. The application shall state the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and name and telephone
number of contact person, as well as the name and number of an
on-scene manager of the event.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The portion of the park area or place for which such a permit is
desired.
(5) A description of and purpose for the special event.
(6) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(7) The anticipated charges or fees to members or persons attending.
(8) Any other information which the Special Events Committee shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
(9) A description of City equipment or services requested.
F. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Special Events Committee
shall include the following findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park or requested area will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park or said area.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably restrict,
obstruct, interfere with or impede pedestrian right-of-way, a
vehicle's right-of-way, or ingress or egress from the requested or
abutting property.
§ 247-4 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-4
238:403
§ 247-5. Enforcement. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 12-06]
§ 247-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1986 by Ord. No.
1273; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98; 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 12-06]
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense upon the City when the event is deemed
"sanctioned."
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
(6) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime, or disorderly conduct, nor create a
nuisance.
(7) That the appropriate certificate of insurance, if required, is issued
to the applicant naming the City as an additional insured for said
place, date, and time.
(8) Applicant shall meet any and all requirements and conditions (fees,
salary costs, public safety coverage, traffic control plans, etc.)
listed on an approval permit.
G. Any application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a
charge of $50. Any application for a special event permit for the Great
Lawn area shall be accompanied by a charge of $100. [Added
12-31-2010 by Ord. No. 24-10; amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
12-14]
A. The appropriate authorities shall, in connection with their duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The appropriate authorities shall have the authority to eject from the
park or said area any person or persons acting in violation of this
chapter.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
summarily evicted from the park, beach or other recreational area or
said place, and may, at the discretion of the appropriate authorities
empowered by the Business Administrator to enforce this chapter, be
denied further admittance to the park, beach or any other recreational
area.
B. At the discretion of the appropriate authorities empowered by the
Business Administrator to enforce this chapter, violations of any
provision of this chapter may be cause for revocation of the special
events permit and termination of the event.
C. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be cited by the
appropriate authority and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 247-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 247-6
238:404
ARTICLE II
Fees; Insurance Requirement
[Adopted 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. 4-10]
§ 247-7. Fees.
A. Daily use of parks, pavilions, beaches and public spaces as previously
defined. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 8-11; 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 12-14]
(1) Great Lawn Park and Stage.
(a) June 1 through Labor Day: Resident, $750; nonresident,
$1,500.
(b) April 1 through May 31: Resident, $500; nonresident, $1,000.
(c) Labor Day through March 31: Resident, $375; nonresident,
$750.
(d) Events held at this location under four hours are reduced by
50%.
(2) Manahasset Creek Park softball fields.
(a) There shall be no fee for youth City residents (for purposes of
this article, a youth shall be an individual under 18 years of
age);
(b) For adult residents of the City (for purposes of this article,
where 85% or more of participants are City residents), $30 for
two hours of use and $20 for each additional hour; and
(c) For nonresidents of the City (for purposes of this article, where
less than 85% of participants are City residents), $50 for two
hours of use and $30 for each additional hour.
(d) For nonresident youth groups and teams, $40 for two hours of
use and $20 for each additional hour.
(3) Manahasset Creek Park turf fields.
(a) There shall be no fee for youth City residents;
(b) For adult residents (where 85% of participants are City
residents), $60 for two hours of use and $30 for each additional
hour; and
(c) For nonresident adults of the City, $80 for two hours of use and
$40 for each additional hour.
(d) For nonresident youth groups and team, $80 for two hours of
use and $40 for each additional hour.
§ 247-7 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-7
238:405
(4) All other locations.
(a) Residents, $125; nonresidents, $250.
(5) Wedding events.
(a) Groups of 0 to 49: Local business, resident, $150; nonresident,
$300.
(b) Groups of 50 to 99: Local business, resident, $200;
nonresident, $400.
(c) Groups of 100 plus: Local business, resident, $250;
nonresident, $500.
B. League use of parks and pavilions. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
8-11]
(1) Manahasset Creek Park ball fields.
(a) There shall be no fee for youth City residents;
(b) Adult residents.
[1] Two hundred dollars per team, one time use per week, up
to a ten-week season;
[2] Forty dollars per team per week over 10 weeks; and
[3] A refundable security deposit of $200 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of
the field by City of Long Branch officials during and after
league play. If no damage or added maintenance is
required as a result of the league play, the security deposit
will be refunded at that time.
(c) Nonresidents.
[1] Three hundred fifty dollars per team, one time use per
week, up to a ten-week season;
[2] Sixty-five dollars per team per week over 10 weeks; and
[3] A refundable security deposit of $200 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of
the field by City of Long Branch officials during and after
league play. If no damage or added maintenance is
required as a result of the league play, the security deposit
will be refunded at that time.
(d) Youth camps. For nonresident organizations, groups or
businesses, there shall be a fee of $300 per week per field
Monday through Friday for up to four hours per day.
§ 247-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 247-7
238:406
(e) For nonresident youth groups and teams, $30 for two hours of
use and $15 for each additional hour.
(2) Manhasset Creek Park turf fields.
(a) There shall be no fee for youth City residents for league use;
(b) Adult residents.
[1] Four hundred fifty dollars per team, one time use per
week, up to a ten-week season;
[2] Eighty dollars per team per week over 10 weeks; and
[3] A refundable security deposit of $200 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of
the turf field by City of Long Branch officials during and
after league play. If no damage or added maintenance is
required as a result of the league play, the security deposit
will be refunded at that time.
(c) Nonresidents.
[1] Six hundred dollars per team, one time use per week, up to
a ten-week season;
[2] One hundred dollars per team per week over 10 weeks;
and
[3] A refundable security deposit of $400 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of
the turf field by City of Long Branch officials during and
after league play. If no damage or added maintenance is
required as a result of the league play, the security deposit
will be refunded at that time.
(d) Youth camps. For nonresident organizations, groups or
businesses, there shall be a fee of $300 per week per field
Monday through Friday for up to four hours per day.
(e) For nonresident youth groups and teams, $50 for two hours of
use and $25 for each additional hour.
C. All other ball fields in Long Branch for league use.
(1) There shall be no fee for youth residents.
(2) Adult residents:
(a) $75 per team, one-time use per week, up to a ten-week season;
(b) $15 per team per week over 10 weeks; and
(c) A refundable security deposit of $100 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of the
§ 247-7 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-7
238:407
field by City of Long Branch officials during and after league
play. If no damage or added maintenance is required as a result
of the league play, the security deposit will be refunded at that
time.
(3) Nonresident:
(a) $100 per team, one time per week, up to a ten-week season;
(b) $15 per team per week over 10 weeks; and
(c) A refundable security deposit of $200 is required to be
provided to the City, to be refunded only after inspection of the
field by City of Long Branch officials during and after league
play. If no damage or added maintenance is required as a result
of the league play, the security deposit will be refunded at that
time.
(4) Youth camps: For nonresident organizations, groups or business, a
fee of $200 per week per field, Monday through Friday, for up to
four hours per day.
D. Tournaments at Manhasset Creek Park.
(1) There shall be no fee for youth residents.
(2) For nonresident adults.
(a) $1,500 per-day fee for concession stand use, along with proof
of insurance as required in this article; and
(b) $150 per team, per two-day tournament.
(3) For adult residents:
(a) $900 per-day fee for concession stand use, along with proof of
insurance as set forth in this article; and
(b) $100 per team, per two-day tournament.
(4) For nonresident youths:
(a) $1,000 per-day fee for concession stand use, along with proof
of insurance as set forth in this article; and
(b) $65 per team, per two-day tournament.
E. Trash and recycling receptacles. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
12-14]
(1) A fee of $10 per receptacles for the collection of trash and/or
recycling; $175 per dumpster.
(2) Estimates for receptacles at events:
§ 247-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 247-7
238:408
§ 247-8. Insurance required.
Those wishing to utilize these City parks and pavilions must have the
appropriate certificate of insurance in place, a copy of which must be
provided to the City, naming the City as an additional insured, with
minimum insurance coverage of $1,000,000, and as otherwise required by
Chapter 247 of the Code of the City of Long Branch.
(a) Under 500: five each.
(b) One thousand: 10 each.
(c) Two thousand five hundred: 15 each.
§ 247-7 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 247-8
238:409
Chapter 250
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 230.
§ 250-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide licensing and regulation
of individuals dealing in precious metals, gems, secondhand goods and
pawnbrokering to protect the residents of the City of Long Branch, and
those transacting business in the City of Long Branch as permitted, in part,
by N.J.S.A 51:6A-1 et seq. Further, the licensing and regulations of these
individuals will further assist the City of Long Branch Police Department
and others in recovering stolen goods. In addition, in regard to precious
metals and gems, this chapter shall be complied with in addition to the laws,
rules and regulations as contained in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C
13:47C-1.1 et seq.
§ 250-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
SECONDHAND DEALER —
Except as provided in Subsection B below, any person, partnership,
limited-liability company, corporation or other entity who, either wholly
or in part, engages in or operates a trade or business of buying and/
or selling used goods or equipment in the City of Long Branch, such
as antiques, precious stones, gold, silver, platinum or other precious
metals, jewelry, coins, any tools, television sets, radios, record or stereo
sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, firearms, cameras
and camera equipment, and video equipment.
A.
The business of secondhand dealer shall not be deemed to include:
(1) Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators.
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes.
(2)
(3) Auctions of real estate.
The occasional sale, purchase or exchange of coins or stamps by
a person at his permanent residence, or in any municipally owned
building by a person who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps, and who does not solicit the sale, purchase or
exchange of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by
(4)
B.
§ 247-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 250-2
238:410
§ 250-3. License required; advertising.
No person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation or other
entity shall engage in business as a secondhand dealer without first
obtaining a license from the City Clerk.
§ 250-4. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license.
billboard, sign, handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television or
other form of printed or electronic advertising.
A. A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of
business.
B. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any articles
or goods referred to in the definition of "secondhand dealer" are being
bought in any location within the City of Long Branch shall constitute
engaging in business as a secondhand dealer for the purposes of this
chapter. No person shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement,
the license number issued to the individual or entity by the City of Long
Branch. In any print advertisement and in the electronic media, the
license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to indicate
the license number shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. Upon receipt of an application by the City Clerk completed pursuant to
this chapter, the Police Department shall make an investigation of the
prospective purchaser/licensee, pursuant to this chapter, for the
purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing.
Each license shall authorize the purchaser/licensee to conduct business
only at the location in which is indicated therein. Such investigation
shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of the purchase and
sale of those items as defined Subsection A of the definition of
"secondhand dealer," although nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack
of experience.
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources which shall be
disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
(3) Criminal record of the applicant. All background checks shall be
conducted through an authorized New Jersey State Police vendor.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious gems and
metals and related items and other factors bearing upon whether
the licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
provision, however, shall not be construed to require denial of any
§ 250-2 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 250-4
238:411
§ 250-5. Identification of sellers; receipt book.
license solely on the grounds that the business is not conducted
from a fixed location.
B. The Police Department shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of receipt of all required documentation,
including results of any background checks and the submission of the
application to the City Clerk, fully completed by the applicant.
C. The Director of Public Safety shall, upon completion of the
investigation, recommend, grant or deny the requested license to the
City Council. The recommendation of the Director of Public Safety shall
be in writing and in the case of a recommendation of denial, shall state
fully and specifically the reasons for said recommendation. If the City
Council accepts the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety to
deny any license, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant by certified
mail within 10 days of such denial and forward to the applicant a
statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of a license by the Director of Public
Safety may include reliable information indicating that the applicant
has in the past engaged in fraudulent or deceptive business practices in
a business identical to or similar to the business for which the applicant
seeks a license pursuant to this chapter. A license may be denied if the
investigation conducted by the Police Department reveals conviction of
the applicant or any of its principal officers or employees of any crime
or disorderly persons offense involving theft or receiving goods,
whether such conviction was a principal or accessory before or after the
fact, or conspirator.
E. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety,
the City Council shall issue or deny the license accordingly (contingent
upon the receipt of a bond of $10,000 pursuant to § 245-8). In the event
of a denial of the license by the City Council, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the City Council, if requested, in writing,
within 10 days of receiving the notice of denial, at which time the
applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as he/she shall
deem proper. The burden of proof in any such hearing shall be on the
Police Department. The City Council shall, within 10 days of the close of
the hearing, make known its decision in writing.
A. A licensee shall require of each person selling used goods or
equipment, such as antiques, precious stones, gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metals, jewelry, coins, any tools, television sets, radios,
record or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting
goods, automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, firearms,
cameras and camera equipment, and video equipment, suitable
identification setting forth the true name and home address of the
seller. Acceptable identification includes a valid driver's license issued
by the State of New Jersey or a valid government-issued photo
§ 250-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 250-5
238:412
identification. If any other form of identification is presented other than
the aforementioned, then one fingerprint (preferably thumb) shall be
recorded on the receipt retained by the dealer. This information shall
be forwarded to the City of Long Branch Police Department within 36
hours.
B. A purchaser/licensee shall complete and issue to each seller a serially
numbered receipt setting forth the following information:
(1) A detailed, legible description of the item, including the price at
which it is being purchased. In the case of jewelry, the description
must include style, length, color, design and stones, if any.
(2) Statement in full of any identifying marks, such as initials, names,
dates, inscriptions, serial numbers, series numbers or any other
information appearing calculated to set apart the particular object
said from others of like kind.
(3) If the item is purchased by weight, the troy ounce weight of the
item.
(4) The name of the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
transaction legibly set forth.
(5) The name and permanent business address of the purchaser/
licensee.
(6) The name, address, sex, date of birth and driver's license number
or other government-issued ID which shall be verified by proof of
identification on a receipt form provided by the City of Long Branch
Police Department.
(7) No purchaser/licensee shall purchase items from any person under
the age of 18.
(8) A photographed recording of the item(s) being purchased by the
purchaser/licensee. The photograph should be of digital JPEG
format and quality, with the ability to be electronically transferred
to a computer and shall include a photograph of the identification
presented by the seller, the serially numbered receipt, and a clear
image of the purchased item(s). All jewelry will be photographed on
a black background. This photo image shall be printed by the
purchaser/licensee and stored on location until it is picked up by
the City of Long Branch Police Department.
(9) A thumb print will be recorded on the receipt that is retained by the
dealer in accordance with and under the conditions as provided in
this subsection.
C. A record shall be kept of all receipts and photographs in the regular
course of business by the purchaser/licensee.
§ 250-5 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 250-5
238:413
§ 250-6. Time limit for disposal of merchandise.
No person regulated by this chapter shall sell, melt down or otherwise
dispose of any merchandise covered by this chapter purchased by such
person until after the close of business on the 30th day, after the date of
purchase. All items must remain on location.
§ 250-7. Maintenance of records; display of license.
§ 250-8. Bond required.
D. All receipts shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement
officer and shall be maintained on location for two years from the date
of purchase.
A. Each purchaser/licensee shall maintain duplicate copies of all seller
receipts and photographs pursuant to § 250-5 in legible form for a
period of two years from the date of each purchase by the purchaser/
licensee.
B. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for the
sale or sales licensed under this chapter.
C. Within 36 hours of any purchase, the purchaser/licensee shall deliver or
fax to the City of Long Branch Police Department the serially numbered
receipt(s) listing all items purchased. Said list shall contain a
description of each item, any identifying numbers or inscriptions, the
time of purchase and the name and address of the seller pursuant to
§ 250-5.
D. A digital JPEG format photograph containing image(s) of the receipt
number, photo, ID of the seller and close-up of the item(s) purchased
shall be printed by the purchaser/licensee and maintained in a file.
These printed images will be picked up periodically by City of Long
Branch police officers.
A. Within 10 days of the issuance of a license, each purchaser/licensee
shall deliver a bond to the City Clerk executed by the applicant as
principal, with a surety company authorized to do business under the
laws of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, to be approved by
the City Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, continued for
the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions
and requirements of all ordinances of the City of Long Branch in force
or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and
conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any
person or persons who shall have received judgment against the
purchaser/licensee licensed under this chapter by reason of any
damage sustained by any such person as a result of the operations of
the purchaser/licensee under this chapter, which damage shall be
established by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond
shall contain the following language:
§ 250-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 250-8
238:414
§ 250-9. License fee; renewal of license.
§ 250-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 253
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Curfew — See Ch. 150.
Firearms — See Ch. 170.
Graffiti — See Ch. 189.
Littering — See Ch. 215.
Loitering — See Ch. 218.
Noise — See Ch. 235.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
"The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the City of Long
Branch, be and remain for the benefit of any person who shall obtain
a judgment against the obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under City ordinance."
B. Said bond shall be kept in force for a minimum period of one year from
the date of issuance of the license and must be renewed annually along
with the license.
A. The fee for the initial application and license shall be $50, and each
annual renewal fee shall be as set at $50.
B. Said license and renewal shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance. At the time of renewal, no new application must be
filed with the City Clerk unless any matters set forth in the original
application are changed.
A. Any individual person, partnership or corporation found in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of
$500, not to exceed $2,000, and imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or
both, at the discretion of the court.
B. Each and every day a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 250-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 250-10
253:415

ARTICLE I
Urinating in Public
[Adopted 3-13-1984 by Ord. No. 1154 (Sec. 6-19 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 253-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in public upon any property,
private or public, within the City of Long Branch.
§ 253-2. Violations and penalties. 93
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
93.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 253-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 253-2
253:417

ARTICLE II
Motor Vehicles94
[Adopted 7-28-1998 by Ord. No. 21-98]
§ 253-3. Use restrictions.
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person(s) to drive, maintain or use
a motor vehicle in any manner so as to:
A. Create or cause to be created a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to comfort
and repose of any persons.
C. Obstruct the free passage of other motor vehicles.
D. Interfere with the safety of pedestrians or other vehicles;
E. Engage in any course of conduct alarming to any reasonable person.
94.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 235, Noise, particularly Table II, Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle
Sound Limits.
§ 253-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 253-3
253:419
Chapter 256
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 230.
Shouting and crying of peddlers and
vendors — See Ch. 235, § 235-2.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 253-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 253-3
253:420
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-27-1988 by Ord. No. 61-88 (Sec. 7-10 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 256-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for sale any food,
beverage, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of any
nature or description without first obtaining a license from the City.
§ 256-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED PARKING SPACE — All areas on any street in the City of
Long Branch designated as a parking space by either signage, metering, or
stripping at such location.[Added 8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 30-01]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association or business entity and any principal or agent thereof.
PUBLIC STREET OR SIDEWALK — All areas legally open to public use as
public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, parking lots or
spaces, alleys and any other public ways.
STAND — Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart,
vending machine or any other fixture or device which is not required
to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles used
for the display, storage or transportation of articles offered for sale by a
vendor.[Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 10-01]
VENDOR — Any person, including an employee or agent of another, who
sells or offers to sell or barter food, beverage, goods, confections, wares,
merchandise, services or commodities of any nature or description on any
public street or sidewalk, on or from any public or private property, from
a stand, cart or motor vehicle or from his or her person; or one who
travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or any other method of
transportation from house to house or street to street selling or offering
to sell or barter food, beverages, goods, confections, wares, merchandise,
services or commodities of any nature or description. The term "vendor"
shall also include "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient merchant," "itinerant
merchant," "peddler," "hawker" or any other term which describes an
activity which is similar to those activities conducted by a vendor.
§ 256-3. Exemption from license requirements.
Requirements of this article shall not apply as follows:
A. Exemption from fee requirement.
(1) Any charitable or religious body or group that shall conduct sales
or personal property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to
§ 256-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-3
253:421
§ 256-4. Application for license.
the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or
religious objects for which the body exists.
(2) Any person honorably discharged from the military service who has
a license under N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
(3) Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire
department as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, possessing a license
conforming with said law.
B. Exemption from all ordinance requirements.
(1) Any public utility or its employees, which said utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employee shall display the
identification badge or card issued by his employer.
(2) Any person, not otherwise subject hereto, engaged in the delivery
of goods, wares or merchandise or other articles or things in the
regular course of business to the premises or persons who had
ordered the same or were entitled to receive the same by reason of
a prior agreement.
(3) Any person going from house to house for the purpose of obtaining
the views of any person on any economic, political, religious or
social question or project or for the purpose of distributing
literature, pamphlets, circulars, samples and the like for the
purpose of information and advertising for a governmental or
noncommercial agency.
(4) Any person or group engaged in a city-sponsored or co-sponsored
event.
C. Lack of grandfather clause. The requirements of this article shall not
establish the right to continue a use in a manner which contravenes this
article as a result of prior activities of the licensee, so that this article
shall not grandfather any prior uses which are inconsistent with this
article. [Added 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 38-9795]
A. General information. Every applicant for a license under this article
shall file with the Supervisor of Mercantile Licenses a sworn written
application in a form to be furnished by said Supervisor, which may
contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a
particular license may be issued, including but not limited to:
(1) The name of the applicant; if a corporation, the names and home
addresses (P.O. box address not acceptable) and home telephone
numbers of the President and Secretary shall be set forth; if a
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 256-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 256-4
253:422
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners shall be set
forth.
(2) The name under which the business is to be conducted.
(3) Business address of the applicant (P.O. box address not acceptable);
permanent home address and full local address of the applicant
(P.O. box address not acceptable).
(4) A brief description of the nature of the business and a description
of the merchandise or service to be sold.
(5) If employed by another, the name and business address of the
person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation
(P.O. box address not acceptable).
(6) If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a
description of the vehicle, together with the motor vehicle
registration number and the license number.
(7) A description of the proposed location(s) of the vending business
and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business
shall be conducted.
(8) Three photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the application, which photograph
shall clearly show the head and shoulders of the applicant and shall
measure two inches by two inches, which may be waived in a
renewal application.
(9) Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct a
business in the City of Long Branch which has been denied or
revoked. If such license has been denied or revoked, the applicant
shall set forth, in detail, the facts leading to such action.
(10) The details of any conviction for crimes of the first, second, third or
fourth degree, the date of the conviction and the place where said
conviction was obtained.
(11) The business telephone number of the applicant.
(12) If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
thereof (P.O. box address not acceptable).
B. Moral character. No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any
person not of good moral character. If the applicant is not an individual,
these provisions shall apply to the officers and managers.
C. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Supervisor of Licenses and
Permits may cause a routine police check to be made of the applicant to
verify the validity of the information above described. The Police
Department shall report in writing affirmatively or negatively within 14
days after the request is made, indicating recommendations for
§ 256-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-4
253:423
§ 256-5. Fees. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 90-89]
An applicant for a license under this article shall pay an annual license fee
of $50 per vendor in 1989 and $100 per vendor in 1990 and thereafter. This
fee shall cover the vendor. For each additional employee the fee shall be $25
per employee per year. A vendor in receipt of a license under this article for
a nonfixed location operation shall not be required to obtain a mercantile
license under Chapter 230, Mercantile Licenses.
§ 256-6. Insurance.
No license shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant furnishes
proof to the city of a public liability bond or insurance policy in an amount
not less than $100,000 for property damage and injuries, including injury
resulting in death, caused by the operation of the vending business. The
city shall be listed as an additional insured under such policy. Multiple
applicants from one company may be covered under a blanket policy so long
as the minimum coverage required herein applies to each occurrence each
employee may be liable for.
§ 256-7. Licenses and identification badges.
approval or disapproval of the granting of the license and the reasons
therefor.
D. After submission of the application and the required fees to the
Supervisor, he/she shall make any investigation and indicate his/her
written approval or disapproval of the license application within 30
days after the application is filed. If approved, the initial license shall be
issued in the name of the applicant. If disapproved, the Supervisor shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of disapproval and the reasons therefor,
and the applicant shall have 10 days from the receipt of notice to appeal
the decision of the Supervisor to the City Council, which, after due
hearing, may affirm or reverse the decision of the Supervisor.
A. The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor while he
or she is engaged in the business of vending.
B. In addition to the license, the city shall issue an identification badge to
every vendor. Vendors shall wear their badges in such a way that the
badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge becomes
damaged or obscured, the vendor shall return it to the city and receive
another badge at a fee of $25.
C. Licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
D. The license holder shall produce such license at the request of any
official of the city or of any resident of the city with whom he or she
wishes to conduct his or her business or activity.
§ 256-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 256-8
253:424
§ 256-8. Prohibited practices.
No vendor shall:
A. Conduct or attempt to conduct his or her business at any residence or
on any property on which is posted a sign expressly prohibiting such
activity.
B. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street or private property if to do so would place him or
her closer than 30 feet to any other vendor who is selling thereon.
C. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand on the sidewalk or
allow it to remain there except at the curbline for the purpose of selling
food, beverages, goods, confections, wares, merchandise or
commodities of any nature or description therefrom.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in Subsection C,
conduct or attempt to conduct his or her business on the promenade
located between Laird Street and Seaview Avenue on the boardwalk
from Laird Street to Brighton Avenue or on Ocean Avenue between
Seaview Avenue and Madison Avenue or in any city park or in any part
of the Redevelopment Zone unless permission is first obtained from the
Redevelopment Agency of the City of Long Branch. [Amended
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 38-97]
E. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street in such a way as would:
(1) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
pedestrian's right-of-way;
(2) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the driver
of a vehicle's right-of-way;
(3) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
ingress or egress from the abutting property;
(4) Create or become a nuisance;
(5) Increase traffic congestion or cause or increase traffic delays or
hazards;
(6) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health or property;
(7) Be located within 25 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop,
loading zone or driveway;
(8) Sell food, drinks, ice cream or confections of any kind for
immediate consumption unless he or she has available for public
use his or her own covered litter receptacle which shall be clearly
marked and maintained for his or her patronage use (with separate
recyclable compartments), nor shall any vendor leave any location
§ 256-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-8
253:425
without first picking up, removing and disposing of any trash or
refuse remaining from sales made by him or her; or
(9) Occupy or block any designated parking space. [Added 8-28-2001
by Ord. No. 30-01]
F. Use a cart the dimensions of which exceed two feet in width, four feet in
length and four feet in height, including wheel height.
G. Use any cart which, fully loaded with merchandise, cannot be easily
moved and maintained under control by the licensee, his employee or
attendants.
H. Use, set up, attach, place or permit the use of any table, crate, carton,
rack device or structure of any kind to increase the selling or display
capacity of his or her stand.
I. Leave any stand unattended, or store, place or leave the same overnight
on any public street or sidewalk or private property without the
permission of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment as is required
by Chapter 345, Zoning, § 345-14, Site plan review. Any vendor who
operates on private property in any section of the city must comply with
all zoning requirements. This excludes mobile vendors which service
commercial and/or industrial businesses from parking facilities of said
establishments, provided that the vendors shall comply with all other
aspects of this article. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 38-97]
J. Engage in the business of vending between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. It
shall be unlawful for any vendor to fail to move from the location upon
which it is using its business or to hook up to any utility which is on the
premises. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 38-97]
K. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any part of the street and offer for sale or display or sell any goods if
to do so would place the vendor or his or her food, beverages,
confections, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of any nature
or description closer than 10 feet to intersecting streets or sidewalks.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
L. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street if to do so would reduce the unobstructed
pedestrian or vehicular right-of-way to less than four feet on any
sidewalk or 15 feet on each lane of any public street. The City Engineer
and traffic safety officer may from time to time, by regulation, increase
or decrease the width of pedestrian and vehicular right-of-way space
required, as circumstances dictate, in a particular area or on a
particular street.
M. Engage in the business of vending within 10 feet of any location where
the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or vehicle
movement.
§ 256-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 256-8
253:426
§ 256-9. Compliance with health requirements and No Knock
Registry. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 38-97; 5-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 7-19]
N. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand against display
windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall it be within 20 feet from
an entranceway to any building, store, theater, library, school, museum,
movie house or other place of public assembly.
O. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or vehicle on any
portion of a public street or public parking lot in spaces designated for
the parking of motor vehicles while conducting business therefrom.
P. Place a vehicle or stand or conduct a general vending business at a
location in the street where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited
or during a time period when stopping, standing or parking is
restricted.
Q. Violate any traffic parking law, ordinance or regulation or operate in
such a manner as to restrict the continued maintenance of a clear
passageway for vehicles.
R. Have exclusive right to any location in or upon the public streets, nor
shall any vested rights arise from the use of any location.
S. Station, place, set up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street where the posted speed limit is in excess of 25
miles per hour.
A. Any perspective vendor of any food or beverage, in addition to the
license required herein, must apply to the Health Department and the
Fire Prevention Bureau, if deemed applicable by the Fire Official of the
City of Long Branch.
B. A registry shall be established in the City Clerk's office which contains a
list of addresses of those premises where the owner or occupant has
notified the City Clerk that they wish to prohibit persons and entities
from canvassing, soliciting, peddling, itinerant vending or attempting
door-to-door sales on their premises.
(1) Any owner or occupant who requests their property be listed on the
No Knock Registry shall be able to procure at no charge from the
City Clerk's office a sticker for display at their premises which shall
serve as notice that the property, is on the No Knock Registry.
There shall be no charge for registering.
(2) If any premises is on the No Knock Registry, the owner or occupant
shall be obligated to post the sticker for display in a readily
observable location near the front door.
§ 256-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-9
253:427
§ 256-10. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer, Health Officer, Construction Code
Official, Zoning Officer or other appropriate city employee or official to
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 256-11. Records.
The Supervisor of Mercantile Licenses shall maintain a record of all licenses
issued under the provisions of this article and shall record therein all
convictions for violations of this article and other pertinent circumstances
and incidents reported to him by the enforcement officers/officials.
§ 256-12. Suspension or revocation of license.
(3) The list of addresses referred to in Subsection B shall be available
at the City Clerk's office during normal business hours and shall be
updated monthly.
(4) Any vendor shall be obligated to obtain a current up-to-date copy of
the registry. It is therefore, the obligation of the canvasser, solicitor,
peddler, itinerant vendor or door-to-door salesperson to have the
most up-to-date list from the registry. The City Clerk shall provide
any person seeking to canvass, solicit, peddle, act as an itinerant
vendor or undertake any door-to-door sale with a copy of the
current registry.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by
the City Council after notice and hearing for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the application for
the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the course of
conducting the business of vending.
(3) Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of
the license.
(4) Violation of this article or of any ordinance of the City of Long
Branch.
(5) Conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving moral
turpitude.
(6) Conducting the vending licensed, through the applicant himself/
herself or any of his/her agents, servants or employees, in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
§ 256-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 256-12
253:428
§ 256-13. Expiration and renewal of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire December
31 of the calendar year in which they are issued. Any such license may
be renewed upon payment of the license fee as stated in § 256-5 and upon
submission by the licensee of a new application in conformity with the
requirements of § 256-4 or, in lieu thereof, a sworn statement, in writing,
setting forth all changes in the information contained in the application for
the expired license which are necessary to bring said application completely
up-to-date, together with proof of insurance and bonding renewals.
§ 256-14. Violations and penalties.
B. Notice of hearing on the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
given in writing by the Supervisor, setting forth specifically the grounds
of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be
mailed, by certified mail, to the licensee, at the address indicated on the
license application at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. In addition to the provisions for suspension or revocation, the
Supervisor, any police officer or city employee or official or any
taxpayer or resident of the city may make complaint in the Municipal
Court of the city for violation of this section or article.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
the City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this article shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
B. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this article exists shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of each section of this article shall
be considered a separate offense upon each and every day in which a
violation of that section exists.
C. Any person who appears at the property on the No Knock Registry,
where the property has been so posted in accordance with § 256-9B2 of
this article, shall be considered to be in violation of this article. Each
property entered into or upon in violation of the No Knock Registry
shall constitute a separate violation. The minimum fine for violation of
the No Knock Registry shall be $100 for the first offense and $200 for
the second or subsequent offense. [Added 5-22-2019 by Ord. No.
7-19]
§ 256-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-14
253:429

ARTICLE II
Sale of Food and Merchandise from Vehicles
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 6-11 of the 1971 Code]
§ 256-15. Location restrictions.
§ 256-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. No seafoods, ice cream, peanuts, candy, frankfurters or foods, wares or
merchandise shall be sold or exposed for sale from any wagon, cart or
vehicle on Ocean Avenue or on any public street, avenue or alley within
100 feet west of Ocean Avenue in the City of Long Branch.
B. No itinerant vendor of seafoods, ice cream, peanuts, candy, frankfurters
or goods, wares or merchandise shall sell or expose for sale any such
article or merchandise within 100 feet of the west side of Ocean Avenue
in the City of Long Branch.
§ 256-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 256-16
253:431
Chapter 262
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 173.
Graffiti — See Ch. 189.
Hotels and multiple dwellings — See Ch. 197.
Littering — See Ch. 215.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 293.
Snow and ice removal — - See Ch. 297, Art. IV.
Trees — See Ch. 319.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 332.
§ 256-16 LONG BRANCH CODE § 256-16
253:432
ARTICLE I
General Standards; Procedures
[Adopted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
§ 262-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the City of Long Branch and thereby
the population of the same from the increasing burden of costs incurred
by the City in maintaining neglected and/or abandoned property which has
become dangerous to the citizens of the City of Long Branch as a whole and
detrimental to the life, health, property and safety thereof.
§ 262-2. Scope and application.
The provisions of this article are remedial and shall apply to the condition of
all land and materials thereon, whether man-made or natural, and premises
and the use, occupancy, structural condition, removal and demolition of all
structures and appurtenances connected or attached thereto, irrespective
of their date of construction, alteration, repair or installation.
§ 262-3. Enforcement after notice.
§ 262-4. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this article,
shall have the respected meanings assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which is without
a currently valid license plate and is in either a rusted, wrecked, discarded,
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or an abandoned condition.96
BLIGHTING — To allow or cause deterioration of structures and/or
premises, including unsightly conditions which affect the health, welfare
and safety of the community, including any diminution in property values of
the surrounding area.
A. Except for emergency circumstances, this article shall be enforced only
after violations have first been brought to the attention of the owner (as
defined herein) of the premises by the issuance of a violation notice and
a reasonable time and full opportunity for voluntary compliance has
been afforded to said owner as enumerated in § 262-10.
B. After such notice and reasonable opportunity for compliance, the City
may proceed to enforce this and other Code sections in Municipal Court
and the Superior Court to recoup all costs incurred by the City in
remediating said violation, including attorneys' fees and costs.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 262-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-4
253:433
CODE — The revised Municipal Ordinances of the City of Long Branch
and those documents, statutes, regulations and rules adopted by reference
therein.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings, or any part thereof,
and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings are
situated, where commercial activity of any kind takes place. Commercial
activity shall include but is not limited to gasoline service stations; stores
for retail sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns; restaurants, including but
not limited to drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog, hamburger or ice
cream stands; professional activities, including but not limited to medical,
dental, legal, architectural and accounting; personal services, including but
not limited to real estate, insurance, barbershops and hairdressers; repair
shops of all kinds; and amusements, including but not limited to movies,
skating rinks and bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not.
Commercial activity shall not include sale of agricultural products produced
on the premises.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or structure or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, missing
members, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or land or any part thereof of
any building or structure or any part thereof which may be lawfully viewed
by the public or any member thereof.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Open space on the premises outside of
any building located thereon.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food. (See also
"refuse" and "rubbish.")
HABITABLE ROOMS — Rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, home laundries, serving and
storage pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms, boiler
rooms or utility rooms. Other rooms or spaces that are not used frequently
or for an extended period of time or have less than 50 square feet of interior
floor area shall not be considered as habitable rooms.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which may afford a
breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitutes a health hazard either to the occupants of
the premises and/or to surrounding properties and/or residents.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure and any land
appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof, in which three or more units
§ 262-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-4
253:434
of dwelling space are occupied or intended to be occupied, or as defined in
the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act, N.J.A.C. 5:10, as amended.
NUISANCE —
Any public nuisance recognized in common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey
or the ordinances of the City of Long Branch.97
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building on the exterior of premises
or upon an unoccupied lot. Attractive nuisances include but are not
limited to abandoned swimming pools, abandoned ice boxes and/or
refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or holes and/or excavations
or vegetation, such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove
hazardous for inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of the State Fire
Code and/or N.J.A.C. 5:10, the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act, as
amended, and/or Article II, Adoption of BOCA Standards, of this
Chapter 262 of the Code of the City of Long Branch.
D.
Inadequate or insanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities in violation of
the Uniform Constitution Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., as amended, and
this Code and any laws, regulations and rules adopted thereby.
E.
Insanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this Code.
F.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
G.
Fire hazards/dangerous conditions or any dangerous or hazardous
conditions that are outlined as follows:
Dangerous conditions that are liable to cause or contribute to the
spread of fire in or on said premises, building or structure or
endanger the occupants thereof.
(1)
Conditions that would interfere with the efficiency and use of any
fire-protection equipment.
(2)
Obstruction to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows liable to interfere with the egress of occupants or the
operation of the Fire Department in case of fire.
(3)
Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
(4)
H.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Nuisances, Public Health.
§ 262-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-4
253:435
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or
premises or any part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate
or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or assigning any part of any
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor
and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or
assigned by said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations who
have interest of record in a building, structure or property and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
PERSON — Includes all manner of corporations and commercial entities as
well as individuals.
PEST CONTROL — The control and elimination of insects, rodents, vermin,
vegetation and fungus.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY/ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any officer who is in
the employ of any department or branch of the government of the City
of Long Branch, County of Monmouth or State of New Jersey, relating
to health, police/public safety activities, fire, property maintenance, code
enforcement, building regulations or to other activities concerning
buildings and land in the municipality.
Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment or oil,
grease or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment.
(5)
Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings or other
combustible materials or excessive storage of any combustible
material.
(6)
Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or
installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances.
(7)
Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or use of combustible, explosive
or otherwise hazardous materials.
(8)
I. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this Code.
§ 262-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-4
253:436
PUBLIC OFFICER — The City Administrator is hereby designated to serve
as the public officer hereunder, and all inspections, regulations,
enforcement and hearings on violations of the provisions of the following
Code sections, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under his
direction and supervision. He may appoint or designate such other local
public officers or employees to perform duties as may be necessary to
the enforcement of this Code, including but not limited to the making of
inspections and the holding of hearings.
REFUSE — Any putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except bodily
waste), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, offal, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes. (See also "garbage" and "rubbish.")
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustibles
and wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. (See
also "garbage" and "refuse.")
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof designed or
existing as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by one or more businesses for
the conduct of retail sales with parking space.
§ 262-5. Maintenance of exterior premises.
The exterior of the premises, the exterior of structures and the condition
of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners. Such maintenance shall include the following:
A. In a residential zone, there shall not be stored or used at a location
visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas equipment and
materials and/or vehicles relating to commercial or industrial uses
unless permitted under Chapter 345, Zoning.
B. Premises with landscaping and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept
trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed
to public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining property.
C. Reconstructed walls and sidings of nonresidential structures shall be of
standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character of
the properties in the same block and on both sides of the street on
which the premises front such that the materials used will not be a kind
that, by their appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and
standards, would depreciate the values of the neighboring and
adjoining premises as aforesaid.
D. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or block, excessive
peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or
§ 262-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-5
253:437
§ 262-6. General maintenance and structural standards.
§ 262-7. Multiple dwellings and structures.98
inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property itself may be
preserved safely, fire hazards eliminated and properties protected from
blighting influences. Sidewalks and driving and/or parking areas shall
be maintained in good repair. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A. Outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards or any
broken or missing members or cracked or damaged finish which admits
rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects and/or vermin.
B. Every building shall be so maintained as to be weathertight, watertight
and verminproof. All exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration
shall be protected against weathering by a protective coating
appropriate for the particular material involved, as needed.
C. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces shall be free of moisture resulting
from seepage, and cross ventilation shall be required where necessary
to prevent accumulation of moisture and dampness, shall be paved with
stone or concrete not less than four inches thick and shall be
maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean and free
from cracks, breaks and/or other hazards. This subsection does not
apply to single-family owner-occupied dwellings.
D. All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent
infestation.
E. All parts of the dwelling shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of nuisance and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
F. Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rainwater conductor and roof cornice
shall be weathertight, raintight and verminproof and shall he kept in
good repair.
A. The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of
removing garbage whenever a janitor is required for the premises in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection C.
B. All accumulations of trash and debris shall be removed daily from
collection areas and trash chutes if a trash compactor is not provided or
if the existing trash compactor is out of order. In a dwelling containing
four or more dwelling units, storage areas or storage bins of fireproof
construction and containing fireproof walls and partitions of at least
two hours', rating shall be provided, except when storage areas are
outside and not adjoining the building.
98.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 197, Hotels and Multiple Dwellings.
§ 262-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-7
253:438
§ 262-8. Leaves on streets.
No person, owner, occupant and/or tenant of a residential property in the
City of Long Branch shall rake, blow, push and/or drag leaves from his
property onto the public streets of the City of Long Branch, except as
prescribed by ordinance.
C. In every dwelling containing three or more dwelling units or rooming
units, or combinations thereof, the owner shall provide or designate a
superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper who shall at all times
maintain the premises in compliance with this Code and keep the
premises free from filthy garbage, refuse and rubbish and who shall be
responsible for the daily collection of garbage and other refuse from the
occupants on a regular schedule. Said person shall be regularly
available on the premises to perform the foregoing duties in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:10. In the event that said superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper fails to comply with the provisions of this
Code, actions of the superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper
or alternative individuals referred to in this Code, even in disobedience
of instructions received from the owner or operator, shall not relieve
the owner or operator from the duties and responsibilities imposed by
this Code. It shall be the obligation of the owner or operator to register
the name, address and telephone number of said owner and operator
with the public officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this Code.
D. Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions of the
premises subject to regular and recurrent use by occupants at night
shall be illuminated continually from 1/2 hour before sunset to 1/2 hour
after sunrise unless the lighting is connected to a dusk-to-dawn
photoelectric control device to enable safe passage of persons of
normal vision.
E. All interior walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces in units of
dwelling space shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking, loose or
peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of being maintained free of
visible foreign matter and vermin and in a sanitary condition. If and
where necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, such
interior surfaces shall be spackled, painted, papered or otherwise
provided with a protective coating appropriate for the surface material
and shall be done at least once every three years unless it is clearly
unnecessary. Responsibility for the cost of said painting, papering,
surface preparation or other protective coating shall be as set forth in
the lease to the premises. Where the lease makes no provision for said
cost, it shall be presumed to be the responsibility of the landlord. It
shall also be the responsibility of the landlord when required to correct
conditions under this article other than normal wear and tear.
§ 262-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-9
253:439
§ 262-9. Removal of branches and trees.
No owner, occupant and/or tenant of residential properties in the City of
Long Branch shall place, put or stack branches, trees or parts of trees in
any paved right-of-way. Branches, trees and/or parts of trees may be placed
immediately adjacent to the curb of the premises in question so as not to
block the sidewalk extending not further than three feet from the curb. Such
placement may occur not sooner than one day prior to scheduled pickup of
branches, trees and/or parts of trees after having scheduled such pickup
with the Department of Public Works of the City of Long Branch.
§ 262-10. Notice of violations.
After inspection or the discovery of violations of this or any chapter of
this Code, except as to emergency circumstances (see § 262-18 hereof), the
enforcement officer, upon first determining that a violation of this or any
chapter of this Code exists, shall issue a written violation notice advising
the owner of the property in violation of the following:
§ 262-11. Prosecution.
In case any notice provided in § 262-10 is not complied with, the
enforcement officer may institute an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to:
A. Nature of the violation(s), stating applicable Code sections.
B. A reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, to achieve voluntary
compliance.
C. If this notice is not complied with, then the City of Long Branch shall
issue a summons, to be heard in the Municipal Court of the City of Long
Branch, which Court shall hear the matter within 60 days of the
issuance of such notice.
D. A violation notice need not be issued when conditions constitute an
emergency and present an eminent or immediate threat of danger to
human life or limb, health, property or the public safety.
E. Upon evidence of good faith efforts to commence compliance with such
notice, the enforcement officer may, in his sole discretion, grant a
reasonable extension of the time to complete compliance.
A. Restrain, correct or remove the violation.
B. Prevent the trespass, occupation or use of the structure in violation of
or not in compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Order the payment of the civil penalty authorized by this article.
D. Order such other relief as shall be just or equitable to secure and
protect the general public from conditions on premises found to be
dangerous or detrimental to human life, limb, health, property or safety.
§ 262-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-11
253:440
§ 262-12. Notice to vacate, repair or remove.
The enforcement officer shall issue a written notice to vacate and to repair
or remove whenever:
E. Certain costs, including attorneys' fees, may be charged to the owner,
including the record owner, as well as any other person prosecuted
under this section. Such costs, fees or penalties may be charged to the
property and constitute a lien as provided in § 262-16.
F. The notice provided to institute the appropriate action in a court of
competent jurisdiction shall be via the same means as required by
§ 262-13.
A. An emergency circumstance that exists and presents an eminent or
immediate threat of danger to human life or limb, health, property or
the public safety.
B. Voluntary compliance with the violation notice is not achieved within
the time indicated and a municipal court adjudication has not resulted
in abatement of the violation.
C. Hearing.
(1) Within 10 days of the issuance of this notice, a hearing shall be held
before the public officer as defined in this article, at which time
there will be an administrative determination of the violation in this
matter. The hearing shall follow these procedures: the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony
at the time and place fixed in the complaints; and the rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in such hearings. Upon the termination of this hearing,
the public officer shall make an immediate finding as to whether or
not the violation charged has been substantiated and proven. If the
violation has been proven by a preponderance of the evidence, then
the public officer shall give the property owner an amount of time
to cure the violation no greater than 60 days from the date of the
hearing. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(2) A finding of guilt in the Municipal Court or any court of competent
jurisdiction shall create a presumption that a violation exists, and
the burden shall then be on the property owner to rebut the
presumption by clear and convincing evidence that the violation
has been abated.
D. The owner shall comply with the terms of the order issued by the public
officer at the public hearing. Failure by the owner to comply with the
terms of the order within the time frame enumerated in the order shall
allow the City to take action pursuant to the terms of the order under
§ 262-14.
§ 262-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-13
253:441
§ 262-13. Service of notice.
Whenever the enforcement officer shall issue a violation notice or notice
to vacate and repair or remove, he shall give such notice to the owner of
record or agent as defined in this article of the Code and to the person in
control of the premises if the same may be located with reasonable effort,
by return receipt registered or certified mail or by personal service issued
through an officer of the City of Long Branch or through other legally
accepted means. Service on nonresidents or persons who cannot be found
in the City of Long Branch shall be made by sending a copy of such notice
to the owner of record by registered or certified mail to such owner's last
known address.
§ 262-14. Abatement of violation.
§ 262-15. Municipal resolution.
§ 262-16. Costs.
A. In the event that the owner of record fails to comply with a notice to
vacate, repair or remove within the time period enumerated in the
order given by the public officer, or in the event that there exists an
emergency circumstance which presents an eminent or immediate
threat of danger to human life or limb, health, property or public safety,
the enforcement officer may enter the premises concerned and cause
the same to be repaired or removed and any dangerous conditions to be
remedied, as the case may be, and any violation to be abated at the
expense of the owner of record as defined by this article.
B. The enforcement officer shall certify as to the steps that were taken to
abate the nuisance, violation or eminent and immediate threat and the
costs incurred thereby.
A. The City of Long Branch by resolution may instruct any department or
agency thereof to clean property or abate violations, nuisances or
emergency circumstances which present eminent or immediate threat
of danger to human life or limb, health, property or public safety, as
defined under this article of the Code, or hire an independent
contractor to do the same as such situations arise.
B. The municipality may enact a resolution which will contain a list of
contractors available for such work. Such resolution may be enacted on
an annual basis, and the same shall be sufficient for the incurrence of
such costs which are less than the legal amount which would require
public bidding.
A. Costs of cleanup, remediation, abatement or correction of other
violations as defined in this or any chapter of the Code, including but
not limited to relocation fees, shall be certified to the Tax Collector, to
be enforced on a parody as and with the lien for unpaid real estate
taxes. Said expenses shall thereby constitute a lien on the premises and
§ 262-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-16
253:442
§ 262-17. Fee schedule for recovery of costs and enforcement.
[Added 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
shall be entered on the tax records kept by the Tax Collector and shall
be collectible as are overdue taxes pursuant to this Code.99
B. The municipality may bring an action in the Superior Court to recoup
any and all costs and fees not made a part of a tax lien, including
attorneys' fees incurred in the abatement process and in the effort to
recoup costs.
A. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) Cutting and/or clearing and removal of grass, weeds, overgrowth
and brush:
Property Size
Growth Height
Up to 12 Inches Over 12 Inches
Up to 2,500 square
feet
$ 75 $100
2,501 to 5,000 square
feet
$100 $150
Over 5,000 square
feet
$200 $225
(2) Cutting and/or trimming and removal of trees:
(a) Hourly labor rate: $40.
(b) Disposal fee: 20% over cost.
(3) Clearing and/or removal of debris:
(a) Hourly rate: $40.
(b) City to provide dumpster containers at current rate.
(4) Extermination services:
(a) Services to be provided by City contractor a current contract
rate.
(5) Boarding and/or securing of buildings and/or structures:
(a) Hourly labor rate: $40.
(b) Twenty percent over cost of materials.
(6) Demolition services:
(a) Competitive bid/quote as required by the Purchasing Agent.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 306, Taxation.
§ 262-16 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-17
253:443
(7) Relocation of tenants/residents:
(a) Actual costs per occurrence.
(8) Repair of excavations of dangerous conditions of property:
(a) Hourly rate:
[1] Backhoe/loader: $85.
[2] Rubber tire loader: $100.
[3] Dump truck, five to 10 yards: $40.
[4] Tandem dump truck: $55.
[5] Pickup truck: $25.
(b) Zone 3 select, clean fill: $140 per ton delivered.
(c) Laborer: $16 per hour.
(9) Towing/vehicle removal:
(a) Police Department SOP will be used to remove abandoned/
unregistered vehicles.
(10) Licensed plumber and electrician, hourly labor rate:
(a) Licensed plumber:
[1] Regular rate: $49.95.
[2] Overtime: $59.95.
(b) Licensed plumber helper:
[1] Regular rate: $14.95.
[2] Overtime: $19.95.
(c) Licensed electrician:
[1] Regular rate: $45.
[2] Overtime: $67.50.
(d) Licensed electrician helper:
[1] Regular rate: $25.
[2] Overtime: $37.50
(e) Twenty percent costs of materials.
B. All of the fees set forth above shall be first certified to the Administrator
of the City of Long Branch and the Chief Financial Officer of the City of
Long Branch then shall be added as liens against the property through
§ 262-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-17
253:444
§ 262-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I. Each day that a violation continues after due notice of
the penalty has been effectively served shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 262-19. Emergencies.
§ 262-20. Conflict with other provisions.
In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard
then set forth in any other ordinance of the City of Long Branch or other
laws within the State of New Jersey, then the standards set forth herein
shall prevail; but if the provisions of this article impose a lower standard
the Office of the Tax Collector. In addition, any and all filing fees
incurred by the Office of the Tax Collector shall be includable as
additional liens.
A. Whenever the public officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order requiring that such action be
taken as he determines necessary, applying the statutes and provisions
of this article to meet the emergency, and such order shall be effective
immediately, and any person to whom such order is directed shall be
obliged to comply immediately. Any such person may petition to the
public officer for a hearing on such order, which hearing shall be
conducted not later than five days after receipt of this petition.
B. In the event that the public officer orders immediate action by the City
of Long Branch's Department of Public Works, or such independent
contractor as may be hired by the City, to protect the public health or
safety pursuant to Subsection A hereof, the following costs and fees
shall be charged to the affected property owner or owners for such
emergency work, and which costs and fees shall be a lien against the
subject property and collectible as provided in § 262-16 of this article:
(1) During regular work hours: at an amount to be established by the
Council of the City of Long Branch on an annual basis via
resolution.
(2) After working hours: at an amount to be established by the Council
of the City of Long Branch on an annual basis via resolution.
(3) Holidays and Sundays: at an amount to be established by the
Council of the City of Long Branch on an annual basis via
resolution.
(4) Materials and equipment used to be charged based upon costs
incurred by the City.
§ 262-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-20
253:445
then any other ordinance of the City of Long Branch or other laws within the
State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance or laws shall prevail.
§ 262-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-20
253:446
ARTICLE II
Adoption of 2015 International Property Maintenance Code100
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 14-3 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
§ 262-21. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 1-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-15]
§ 262-22. Copies on file. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Three copies of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code have
been placed on file in the office of the Clerk and will remain there for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 262-23. Modifications.
The BOCA Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, is amended and
revised in the following respects:
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the 2015
International Property Maintenance Code be in the same hereby is
adopted by reference excluding [A]111.1 et seq., Means of appeal, is
hereby adopted as a standard governing supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to make buildings
and dwellings, both residential and nonresidential, safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation, occupancy or use and governing the conditions of
building and dwellings, both residential and nonresidential. A copy of
the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code is attached to and
made a part of this chapter without the text being included therein.
B. This article shall not apply to newly constructed buildings which have
been constructed in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., as amended.
A. In Section PM-101.1, insert "City of Long Branch."
B. In Section PM-106.2, insert "$50" and "$1,000."
C. In Section PM-106.2, insert "180 days."
D. In Section PM-304.15, insert "May 1" and "October 1."
E. In Section PM-602.2.1, insert "October 1" and "May 1."
F. In Section PM-602.3, insert "October 1" and "May 1."
G. Section PM-111.0, Means of appeal, is repealed.
100. Editor’s Note: The title of this article was changed from “Adoption of BOCA Standards” to
“Adoption of 2015 International Property Maintenance Code” 1-12-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15.
§ 262-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-24
253:447
§ 262-24. Enforcing authority.
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this chapter
shall be the Inspectors in the Bureau of Fire Prevention and Health
Department.
§ 262-25. Amendments to code. [Amended 7-27-2004 by Ord. No.
27-04; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 37-11;
1-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
Nothwithstanding anything in the 2015 International Property Maintenance
Code to the contrary, in addition to all other means of enforcing the 2015
International Property Maintenance Code, it shall also be enforced with the
following provisions:
A. No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant or occupants or transfer
title on any property, nor shall any person or persons lease or occupy
any vacant dwelling unit or lodging unit or nonresidential property,
unless a certificate of occupancy certifying that the dwelling, lodging
unit or property complies with the provisions of the 2015 International
Property Maintenance Code shall first be obtained from the Bureau of
Fire Prevention. The certificate of occupancy so issued shall apply only
to the tenant for which it is issued.
B. The administrative and enforcing authority shall cause to be prepared
appropriate application forms for such a certificate of occupancy, which
forms shall be available to applicants at the office of the administrative
and enforcing authority.
C. The administrative and enforcing authority shall also cause to be
prepared appropriate forms of such certificate of occupancy.
D. A charge of $60 for residential property and $60 for nonresidential
property to cover the cost of initial inspection in connection with such
application and first reinspection for leasehold units and for said
inspection and reinspection for a resale fee. Any requests for a second
or subsequent reinspection shall be accompanied by an additional fee of
$60 for residential property and $60 for nonresidential property. All
such fees shall be paid to the administrative and enforcing authority at
the time the application is filed or request made and shall not be
refundable.
E. Certificate of occupancy limitations; exceptions.
(1) Limitations on certificates of occupancy. All one-family dwellings,
as defined herein in the City of Long Branch, shall be limited to two
certificates of occupancy per year for the entire premises with no
subletting, except upon bona fide sale to a third party. A new
certificate of occupancy is required whenever a majority of the
tenants residing in a one-family dwelling have changed.
(2) Exceptions.
§ 262-24 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-25
253:448
(a) A permanent resident seeking to travel and rent his or her
property on a seasonal basis.
(b) A bona fide family unit, a member of which owns the property
and uses said property for seasonal occupancy, may apply for
an exception to the two-certificate-of-occupancy-per-year
maximum to rent the premises for the remainder of the year to
a family as defined at § 345-3 of the Code of the City of Long
Branch.
(c) If the owner of a one-family dwelling dies, his executor/
executrix can rent out the premises temporarily to a family unit
as described in the chapter until it can be sold or otherwise
disposed of.
(d) Any one-family dwelling which is situated within a mixed-use
neighborhood containing a variety of uses, such as
commercial, industrial, apartment and multiple dwelling,
which mixed-use predominates over the number of one-family
dwellings in the neighborhood.
(e) Any other circumstances in which the Fire Official makes a
determination on the particular factual scenario presented that
issuance of an additional certificate of occupancy would not
unduly frustrate the purposes of this chapter and would cause
undue hardship to the applicant if not granted. The Fire Code
Official shall render his decision in writing within five business
days of the application for an exception under this section. Any
decision under this provision by the Fire Code Official may be
appealed to the City Business Administrator, or his designee,
for a de novo review of the decision of the Fire Official. The
Business Administrator, or his designee, shall conduct the de
novo review and shall render a written decision within five
business days of the receipt of the appeal.
F. In addition to the provisions set forth in the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code, the following enforcement mechanism for a
violation of this regulation shall be enforced: Any space heater not
conforming to the requirements of the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code, may be immediately confiscated by Municipal
Inspectors, and such space heaters shall not be returned to the owners
thereof until compliance with the aforesaid provisions is guaranteed.
G. An application form for a certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed
complete by the Fire Code Official unless the applicant:
(1) Provides proof of payment of property taxes, assessments against
property, municipal sewer charges, any other municipal charges or
assessments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
§ 262-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-25
253:449
(2) Provides a notarized affidavit on a form to be furnished by the Fire
Code Official in which the property owner acknowledges that he or
she has:
(a) Retained a fully executed copy of any lease agreement
executed by all adult persons who will be tenants of the
dwelling unit; provided, however, that this provision shall not
be construed to require the property owner to enter into a
written lease agreement. If there is no written lease, the
applicant must provide names and permanent addresses of all
individuals who will be occupying the premises.
(b) [1] Give an accurate statement of the term of the lease;
[2] Obtained a true and correct copy of the driver's license or,
if not available, alternative proof of identification for each
adult tenant.
(c) Received acknowledgement from the tenants that any tenant
under the age of 21 years is subject to a suspension or
revocation of license for up to six months and a fine of $250 for
the first offense and $350 for each subsequent conviction in
Municipal Court for unlawful consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages.
(3) The property owner shall be required to maintain, in his possession
and control, the documents and information described in
Subsection G(2) above during all times that the tenants, or any of
them, are in possession of the dwelling unit and for at least one
year following the termination or expiration of the lease in
connection herewith; provided, however, that the property owner
shall not be required to produce these documents or information to
any official or employee of the City of Long Branch, except
pursuant to and in accordance with § 262-25G(4) of the Code of the
City of Long Branch.
(4) At any time that an official or employee of the City of Long Branch,
including without limitation an employee of the City's Fire
Prevention Bureau, has reason to believe that any ownership, use
or occupancy of a dwelling unit regulated by this section, or any of
the residents thereof, may be in violation of any federal, state or
municipal law, the City of Long Branch, or its officers, employees or
agents, may require that the property owner provide the City with
the documents and information he or she is required to maintain
pursuant to Subsection G(2); provided, however, that rental
amounts may be redacted. The property owner shall be required to
provide this information to the City of Long Branch no later than
the fifth business day following date the request was mailed by the
City of Long Branch to the address provided by the landlord on his
application.
§ 262-25 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-25
253:450
§ 262-26. Rules and regulations.
The Fire Official or his duly designated designee may make rules and
regulations which interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or
for the purpose of making the provisions of this chapter more effective.
No regulation, however, shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any
provision of this chapter and no regulation shall impose any requirement
which is in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly
or by implication imposed by any provision of this chapter. Rules and
regulations shall be subject to the same penalty as other violations of this
chapter.
§ 262-27. Inspections.
The Fire Official and the Director of the Department of Health or their
agents or employees shall make inspections to determine the condition of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the
City. For the purpose of making inspections, the aforementioned officials,
agents or employees are authorized to enter and examine any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at such reasonable hours as the
circumstances of the case permit. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the entry of the aforementioned officials, agents or employees at
any time when an actual emergency exists which tends to create a danger
to the public health or safety or at any time when an inspection is requested
by an owner or occupant.
H. Any person who is found to have submitted false information,
documentation or identification in connection with an application for a
certificate of occupancy, or has failed to provide information requested
pursuant to Subsection G(2), shall pay a minimum fine of $250, plus
court costs. Any person who submits a false affidavit or certification
shall be subject to criminal prosecution in addition to the penalties
contained herein. In addition to the foregoing, a certificate of
occupancy that is issued on the basis of information or documentation
that is knowingly false or fraudulent when made shall be subject to
revocation pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions herein.
[Added 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 27-04]
I. A Fire Code Official shall not inspect any dwelling unit for purposes of
issuing any certificate of occupancy during a period that it is occupied
by another tenant except upon a bona fide transfer of title. Any tenant
renting a premises in the City in the R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 Residential
Zoning Districts who occupies the premises prior to the obtaining of a
certificate of occupancy shall be subject to immediate removal from the
premises. Any costs associated with the removal and subsequent
relocation of tenants that are incurred by the City of Long Branch shall
be the responsibility of the landlord and/or tenant. Any such costs shall
become a lien on the property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 70:18-2 et seq. and
§ 262-37 of the Code of the City of Long Branch. [Added 7-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 27-04]
§ 262-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-28
253:451
§ 262-28. Identification.
Upon presentation of proper identification, the Fire Official and the Director
of the Department of Health or their agents or employees shall be given
free access to the premises by the owner, occupant or person in charge of
a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of inspection or of
making any repairs or alterations which are necessary to effect compliance
with this chapter.
§ 262-29. Search warrant.
The Fire Official and Director of the Department of Health or their agents
or employees may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court
of the City for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions
and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the premises, or that an
inspection is to be made pursuant to § 262-27, and if the Municipal Judge
is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the
issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that
part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 262-30. Violations and notice of abatement. [Amended 1-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-15]
Whenever the Director of the Department of Buildings or the Director of
the Department of Health or their agents or employees determines that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto or under the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code she or
she may issue a summons returnable in the Long Branch Municipal Court
for said violation or violations. In addition thereto, or as an alternative
method of remedy, he or she may give notice of abatement of the alleged
violation to the person or persons responsible therefore as hereinafter
provided. The notice shall:
A. Be put in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if
he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. The notice may contain an outline
of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
§ 262-28 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-30
253:452
§ 262-31. Abatement provisions.
Notice, prosecution and abatement proceedings shall be as set forth in
Article I, General Standards; Procedures, of this Chapter 262.
§ 262-32. Serving of complaints or orders on unfit dwellings.
Complaints or orders issued by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Health Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the Health Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of the complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having
circulation in the City. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the Monmouth County recording officer.
§ 262-33. Powers and duties of Director of the Department of
Health and Fire Official.
The Health Director and Fire Official are hereby authorized and empowered
to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following, in addition to others herein granted:
§ 262-34. Compliance with 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of the 2015 International Property
provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City in order to determine
which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 262-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-34
253:453
Maintenance Code established hereby as the standard to be used in
determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation.
§ 262-35. Repairs in absence of owner.
Whenever a condition is found by officials of the City of Long Branch
empowered to enforce this chapter to exist in an occupied dwelling that
adversely affects and/or threatens the life, safety and/or health of the
inhabitants, and following reasonable effort to contact the owner and/or
other responsible party at the address and/or phone number listed and
posted at the property for emergency response and/or on the most recent
application for certificate of occupancy, the officials of the City of Long
Branch may contract with approved vendors to perform emergency repairs
to mitigate the condition. Such conditions might include, but not necessarily
be limited to: inadequate heat, failure of the water supply system,
inoperative waste water disposal system, failure of the fire alarm system,
failure of the fire suppression system, failure of the means of emergency
egress, failure of the electrical supply systems, failure of the exterior
building finish to protect from the elements, presence of vermin or presence
of wild animals. Reasonable effort to contact the owner shall be determined
by the officials at the scene using their judgment as guided by their
experience in light of the nature of the event.
A. Approved vendors.
(1) Approved vendors shall consist of individuals and/or business
entities that have been approved annually by the City of Long
Branch Finance Department to provide such services. The lot of
approved vendors shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(a) Plumber.
(b) Electrician.
(c) Boiler repair company.
(d) Carpenter.
(e) Exterminator/live animal remover.
(f) Alarm service.
(g) General contractor.
(2) The list shall be generated in a manner that is consistent with
routine municipal bid practices and provides the City of Long
Branch with assurance of availability and responsible performance
in areas of expertise. The list, whenever updated, shall be provided
to all City officials powered to enforce this chapter.
B. Any expense incurred by the City of Long Branch in investigating any
condition as noted above shall be cause for action in Municipal Court to
§ 262-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-35
253:454
§ 262-36. Violations and penalties.
Unless a different penalty is mandated by state law or regulations duly
adopted thereunder, any violation of this chapter shall result in penalties as
follows:
§ 262-37. Municipal lien.
gain restitution. Restitution shall consist of payment for repairs and/or
services noted above and payment for any overtime after-hours wages
paid City officials in the investigation of such conditions or monitoring
such repairs, as well as an administrative penalty equal to the above for
the inconvenience caused to the occupants and the City officials due to
the absence and/or lack of availability of the owner or other responsible
party. The aforementioned penalties are to be considered in addition to
any other penalty provided in this chapter for violations of the code.
C. It is the intention of this section to encourage property owners to at all
times be responsible for the maintenance of their properties, to have
property owners establish and maintain systems for notification in
times of emergency occurrences and, finally, to provide the City of Long
Branch with a method to make necessary emergency repairs to protect
health, life and safety in a manner that limits the use of relocation
efforts and assures the City of restitution for any efforts put forth by the
City on behalf of absent property owners.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
the City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provision, Article I.
B. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of this chapter shall be considered
a separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:18-2 et seq., any costs incurred by the City or
any department or subagency thereof in the abatement of violations of
this chapter of the Code of the City of Long Branch or in the
maintenance of properties pursuant to such ordinances, including but
not limited to property maintenance, property cleaning, yard upkeep,
beautification, improvements to property and any other expenses
incurred in maintaining structural integrity or safety, abatement of a
public hazard or nuisance or the improvement of the general
appearance of any such property shall become a lien on that property as
of the time that such cost is incurred. Such lien shall include any costs
incurred directly by the City or its subagencies or through any
contractor or subcontractor or independent private entity which the
City may employ to take such action on its behalf.
B. Such liens shall become a first lien on the land and paramount to all
prior and subsequent alienation and descents of such lands or
§ 262-35 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-37
253:455
encumbrances thereon except subsequent municipal liens pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 and other applicable law.
C. Any such lien created specifically from or last associated with removing
brush, weeds, debris, etc., shall be a lien on such land and shall be
added to and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14.
§ 262-37 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-37
253:456
ARTICLE III
Abandoned Property List
[Adopted 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 24-18]
§ 262-38. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When consistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the
plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, is defined as
follows: any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria may
be deemed to be abandoned property upon a determination by the public
officer that:
CITY — The City of Long Branch.
CREDITOR — The creditor having a right of foreclosure, including but not
limited to the holder of a mortgage on a property, and any agent, servant
or employee of the creditor, a loan servicing company, or any successor
in interest and/or assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations
under the document granting foreclosure rights.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that sixmonth
period;
A.
Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued prior
to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no
construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of a
determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;
B.
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent
on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes of the date of the determination by the public officer pursuant
to this section; or
C.
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with § 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-82).
A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et al.) so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage
of the building was previously legally occupied as residential or
commercial space and none of the residential or commercial space
has been legally occupied for at least six months at the time of the
determination of abandonment by the public officer and the property
meets the criteria of either Subsection A or D of this definition.
D.
§ 262-38 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-38
253:457
FORECLOSING — The process by which property, placed as security for
a real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any commercial, industrial and mixeduse
real estate, or portion thereof, located in the City of Long Branch,
including improvements thereon.
NUISANCE —
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly with several others, shall have
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any
property unit as owner or agent of the owner as lessee, executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or
as a foreclosing mortgagee or mortgagee in possession, regardless of how
that possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
assigning any part of any property or property unit shall be deemed to be
co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion
of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PROPERTY — Any real estate, including residential, commercial, industrial
and mixed use, or portion thereof, located in the City of Long Branch,
including any improvements thereon and land appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The City's Business Administrator and/or his/her
designee shall serve as the public officer (as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80) to
carry out the responsibilities under this article.
Any common nuisance known as common law or inequity jurisprudence
or as provided by the Statutes of the State of New Jersey or the
ordinances of the City.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to,
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, boats, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, such as poison
ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
D. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this Code.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this Code.
E.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this Code.
F.
G. Fire hazards.
§ 262-38 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-39
253:458
§ 262-39. Abandoned property criteria.
A. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, a property will be deemed
"abandoned" if the property, as determined by the public officer:
(1) Has not been legally occupied for a period of six months; and
(2) Meets any one of the following additional criteria:
(a) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable
judgment of the public officer and no rehabilitation has taken
place during that same six-month period; or
(b) Construction was initiated on the property and was
discontinued prior to completion, leaving the building
unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction has taken place
for at least six months as of the date of a determination by the
public officer pursuant to this section; or
(c) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination
by the public officer pursuant to this section; or
(d) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the
public officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 if:
[1] The property has been found to be unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3;
[2] The condition and vacancy of the property materially
increases the risk of fire to the property and adjacent
properties;
[3] The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed
to take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in
order to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to
do so;
[4] The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris,
uncut vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure
or grounds have created potential health and safety
hazards and the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to remove the hazards; or
[5] The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the
property materially affects the welfare, including the
economic welfare, of the residents of the area in close
proximity to the property, and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the
conditions.
§ 262-39 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-39
253:459
§ 262-40. Establishment of abandoned property list.
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to APRA so long as 2/3 or more
of the total net square footage of the building was previously legally
occupied as residential space and none of the residential space has
been legally occupied for at least six months at the time of the
determination of abandonment by the public officer.
A. The public officer shall identify abandoned property within the City of
Long Branch for the purpose of establishing and maintaining an
abandoned property list. The abandoned property list shall include, for
each abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot number, the
name of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.
The public officer may add properties to the abandoned property list at
any time and may delete properties at any time when he or she finds
that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the City of Long Branch has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate which has been placed
on the abandoned property list may be removed if the owner of the
certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the property within
30 days after the property is placed on the list; provided, however, that
if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure proceedings
within six months after the property was first placed on the list, the
property shall be restored to the abandoned property list in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list and any
additions or deletions thereto by authorizing the publication of the list
in the official newspaper of the City of Long Branch, which publication
shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after publication,
shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail, to the owner of record of every property included on the
list. The published and mailed notices shall identify property
determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if
known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The public
officer, in consultation with the tax collector, shall also send out a notice
by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property
tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the owner of record is not known
for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence by the tax collector, notice shall not be mailed but
instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for
§ 262-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-40
253:460
the public officer's finding that the property is "abandoned property" as
that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and shall specify
the information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases a copy
of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the public officer
in the office of the Monmouth County Clerk. This filing shall have the
same force and effect as a formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The
notice shall be captioned with the name of the City of Long Branch
as "plaintiff" and the name of the property owner as "defendant," as
though an action had been commenced by the City against the owner.
D. The public officer, within 10 days of the establishment of the abandoned
property list, or any additions thereto, shall send by regular mail,
facsimile or electronic mail, a copy of the abandoned property list to the
electric and gas utilities serving the municipality.
E. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the public officer shall have 40
days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer shall
accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a request
for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice, the public officer
shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any
property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned
property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned property,
can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list.
The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation such as, but not limited to, photographs, repair invoices,
bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be
that the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is
defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The public officer shall decide
any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and
shall promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons
therefor.
F. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer pursuant to Subsection D of this section
by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary trial proceeding in the Superior Court, Monmouth County.
Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of
decision mailed by the public officer. The sole ground for appeal and
new hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in
question is not an "abandoned property" as that term is defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely
basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
§ 262-40 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-40
253:461
§ 262-41. Additions to abandoned property list.
§ 262-42. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the court may extend
the deadline for instituting the action.
G. The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined by him or her on
appeal not to be abandoned and may, in his or her discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever he or she deems such removal
appropriate under the circumstances.
H. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the City of
Long Branch shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with
respect to properties on the list, at any time after at least one property
has been placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for
appeal with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an
appeal brought by the property owner of that first property.
I. The City may also, in addition to and irrespective of the actions and
limitations established by this article, continue to move forward with
the habitability hearing process, whether or not the property involved
in that process has also been placed on the abandoned property list.
A. Any interested party may submit a written request to the public officer
asserting that any property within the City of Long Branch should be
included on the abandoned property list. The written request must
specify the street address and block and lot number of the property to
be included, and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30 days of receipt
of any such request, the public officer shall provide a written response
to the party, either indicating that the property will be added to the list
or, if not, the reasons for not adding the property. For the purposes of
this section, the term "interested parties" shall include any resident of
the City of Long Branch, any owner or operator of a business within the
City of Long Branch or any organization representing the interests of
residents, business owners or otherwise engaged in furthering the
revitalization and improvement of the neighborhood in which the
property is located.
B. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the public officer shall
provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such hearing. The
party shall provide the public officer with notice at least 10 days before
the hearing of its intention to participate, and the nature of the
testimony or other information that it proposes to submit at the
hearing.
A. An owner may request removal of his or her property from the
abandoned properties list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by
§ 262-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-42
253:462
§ 262-43. Sale of restricted tax liens.
paying all taxes and City liens due, including interest and penalties,
and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of an environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the City
Business Administrator or his or her designee, stating that the cash
or bond adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of both the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee and City Council that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee finds that the owner is actively
engaged in remediating the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned, as evidenced by
significant rehabilitation activity on the property, the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee may grant an extension of time
of not more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work,
during which time no further proceedings will be taken against the
owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the City
which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has accrued
thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the property or
performing the environmental remediation. Any funds remaining after
the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be
returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other City liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list or, if
an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
§ 262-42 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-43
253:463
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax
Sale Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following the
expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The City of Long Branch may, at its option, require that the sale of the
tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax
sale certificate held by the City be subject to the express condition that
the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude any
rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and to post a
bond in favor of the City to guarantee the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee may
waive a requirement to post a bond imposed by the City for any
purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides
documentation acceptable to the City Business Administrator or his or
her designee that the purchaser, assignee or transferee is a qualified
rehabilitation entity as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80. The cost of
rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be added to the
amount required to be paid by the owner for redemption of the
property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale
certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall
be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the tax collector,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of monies
expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at the
delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the City of Long Branch, shall be
permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of
appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation or
repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement, holding the City of Long Branch harmless,
has been filed with the City Business Administrator or his or her
designee.
C. If the City of Long Branch acquires the tax sale certificate for a property
on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written notice to
the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the filing of the
notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, the City shall be permitted to enter
upon the property and remediate any conditions that caused the
property to be included on the abandoned property list. No remediation
shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day period the owner
or mortgagee shall have notified the City in writing that the owner or
mortgagee has elected to perform the remediation itself. When the
owner or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself, it shall be
required to post bond in favor of the City of Long Branch in order to
§ 262-43 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-43
253:464
§ 262-44. Special tax sale and criteria for bidders.
ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the bond shall be
determined by the City Business Administrator or his or her designee.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the City of Long Branch, as so
certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the
remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and
right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after
the filing of any lien by the City, except for City taxes, liens and
assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill Compensation
and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together with any interest
thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and recorded as a lien by
the entity incurring the cost with the Monmouth County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this article
shall be considered a public purpose and public use for which the power
of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
A. The City of Long Branch may hold special tax sales with respect to
those properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which
are also on the abandoned property list.
B. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, shall establish criteria for eligibility to
bid on properties at the sale, which may include, but need not be limited
to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property, consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the City Business Administrator or his or her
designee, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
determine are necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold
will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent
with the public interest.
C. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may establish minimum bid
requirements for a special tax sale that are less than the full amount of
the taxes, interest and penalties due, to help ensure that the properties
will be rehabilitated or otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with
the public interest.
D. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may combine properties in said special
§ 262-43 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-44
253:465
§ 262-45. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
tax sale into bid packages, and require that bidders place a single bid
on each package, rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that
are submitted.
E. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may sell said properties subject to
provision that, if the purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that
has been set forth as a condition of sale or misrepresents any material
qualification that has been established as a condition of eligibility to bid
pursuant thereto, then the properties and any interest thereto acquired
by the purchaser shall revert to the City, and any amount paid by the
purchaser at the special tax sale shall be forfeited to the City.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the City may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the City pursuant to this section and his or her interest in
the property or properties reverts to the City, the City may
subsequently designate the entity previously designated as an eligible
purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or properties, and
assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis of that entity's
bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and conditions of the
special tax sale.
G. The City of Long Branch shall provide notice of a special tax sale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms
of sale established by the City pursuant to this section. Nothing shall
prohibit the City from holding a special tax sale on the same day as a
standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the City of Long Branch acquires a
tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property list at tax
sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of
redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months following
the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the City of Long Branch is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an
action to foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
§ 262-44 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-45
253:466
§ 262-46. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
§ 262-47. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remedied in
full.
A. If an entity other than the City of Long Branch has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate on a property that has
not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property shall
not be added to the abandoned property list under the following limited
circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all City taxes and
liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either Subsection a or b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86,
as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure proceedings in a
timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed abandoned only if
it meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of this article and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee or the tax collector shall, in a
timely fashion, provide the requester with a certification that the
property fulfills the definition of an "abandoned property" according to
the criteria established in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and 55:19-82.
E. Nothing in this article shall preclude the City from addressing concerns
regarding the condition of the property through the City of Long Branch
habitability hearing process, irrespective of any ongoing foreclosure
proceedings.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the City of Long Branch
may be brought by the City in the Superior Court, Monmouth County. If
§ 262-45 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-47
253:467
the Court shall find that the property is abandoned and that the owner
or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a rehabilitation
plan, then the Court may authorize the City to take possession and
control of the property and to develop its own rehabilitation plan for the
property.
B. Where the City has been granted possession and control, the City may
commence and maintain those further proceedings for the
conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part thereof,
that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost and
expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property; provided,
however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the property if the
owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control and possession
of the property as permitted by N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the City, obtain appropriate construction permits or, in
the alternative, submit formal applications for funding the cost of
rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies providing such funding
within the initial six-month period shall be deemed clear evidence that
the owner has failed to take any action to further the rehabilitation of
the property.
D. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee or the Court to be the projected
cost of rehabilitation.
E. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
Court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
§ 262-47 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-47
253:468
§ 262-48. City rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
F. Where the Court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the City Business Administrator or
his or her designee to act as monitor of compliance and progress. If the
owner fails to carry out any step in the approved plan, then the City may
apply to the Court to have the posted bond forfeited, to transfer
possession of the building to the City to complete the rehabilitation
plan, and to grant authorization to use the bond proceeds for the
rehabilitation. The owner or other party in interest shall provide
bimonthly reports to the City Business Administrator or his or her
designee on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse
of the property.
G. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan
and posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. Their plan must be submitted within 60 days following the
Court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the
mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause
shown. If the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's
plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation.
H. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Court and the City Business Administrator or
his or her designee on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation
and reuse of the property. If the mortgage holder or lienholder fails to
carry out any material step in the approved plan, then the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee shall notify the Court, which may
order the posted bond forfeit, grant the City possession of the property,
and authorize the City to use the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation
of the property.
I. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including Court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement; or, in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
J. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the City may submit a plan to the Court which conforms
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall designate
whether the City or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall undertake the
rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-90.
§ 262-47 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-48
253:469
A. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may designate a qualified rehabilitation
entity for the purpose of exercising the City's rights, where that
designation will further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property
consistent with the City's plans and objectives.
B. Regardless of whether the City exercises its rights directly or the City
Business Administrator or his or her designee designates a qualified
rehabilitation entity pursuant to this section, while in possession of a
property, the City shall maintain, safeguard, and maintain insurance on
the property. Notwithstanding the City's possession of the property, the
owner of the property shall not be relieved of any civil or criminal
liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the
owner.
C. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the City of Long
Branch to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security
interests with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than
municipal liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court must find
as follows:
(1) The City sought to obtain the necessary financing from the senior
lienholder, which declined to provide such financing on reasonable
terms;
(2) The City sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior
lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
Court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Monmouth
County.
D. Where the City has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to act on
its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide bimonthly
reports to the City Business Administrator or his or her designee on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
The City or qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall
provide such reports to the Court as the Court determines to be
necessary. If the Court finds that the City or its designee has failed to
take diligent action toward rehabilitation of the property within one
year from the grant of possession, then the Court may request the City
to designate another qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights
or, if the City fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession and
return possession and control of the property to its owner.
E. The City of Long Branch shall file a notice of completion with the Court,
and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage holder or
lienholder, at such time as the City has determined that no more than
six months remain to the anticipated date on which rehabilitation will
be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of the City Business
Administrator or his or her designee, attesting that the rehabilitation is
§ 262-48 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-48
253:470
§ 262-49. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
§ 262-50. Procedure for City to place liens, obtain title and sell
property.
anticipated to be completed within six months, and a statement setting
forth the actions as it plans to undertake consistent with the plan.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the Court's
removal of possession, but no later than 30 days after the City of Long
Branch has filed a notice of completion with the Court or, in the event
the notice of completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of
possession, within 30 days after the City has filed said notice.
B. The Court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the City or affect any of the terms or conditions
under which the City has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the City has filed a
notice of completion or, in any event, within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition, the Court
may grant the City title or authorize the City to sell the property, subject
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
A. The City Business Administrator or his or her designee, with the
approval of the Court, may place a lien on the property to cover any
costs of the City in connection with any proceeding under N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq., incurred prior to the grant by the Court of an order of
possession, which may include costs incurred to stabilize or secure the
property to ensure that it can be rehabilitated in a cost-effective
manner. Any such lien shall be considered a City lien for the purposes of
N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the rights and status of a City lien pursuant
thereto.
B. Where the City seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase the
property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall approve,
and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court.
C. The Court may authorize the City of Long Branch to sell the building
free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all
such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to the
proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, except that municipal
liens shall be paid at settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the
property shall be distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
§ 262-48 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-50
253:471
§ 262-51. Powers of Construction Code Official not affected.
No provision of this article shall be construed as restricting or otherwise
abrogating the enforcement and other powers of the City's Construction
Code Official under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, including,
without limitation, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.
(collectively, the "Code"). The provisions of this article shall be construed as
consistent with the enforcement and other powers of the City's Construction
Code Official under the Code.
§ 262-52. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable and if any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof for any reason be held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this article, but shall remaining in effect;
it being the legislative intent that this article shall stand notwithstanding
the invalidity of any part.
D. Upon approval by the Court, the City shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the Court shall approve, and may place the
proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying Court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et
seq., shall be available to the City with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the City has established an abandoned
property list and whether or not the property at issue has been included
on any such list.
§ 262-50 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-52
253:472
ARTICLE IV
Maintenance of Vacant and Abandoned Properties During
Foreclosure
[Adopted 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 25-18]
§ 262-53. Foreclosing creditor responsible for maintenance.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s, the creditor filing a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage on any
residential property shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of the exterior of the property, in the event the property
is vacated or abandoned by the title owner of the property during the
pendency of the foreclosure action.
§ 262-54. In-state representative required.
If any foreclosing creditor is located outside of the State of New Jersey,
such foreclosing creditor shall be responsible for appointing an in-state
representative or agent to act on behalf of the out-of-state foreclosing
creditor. Any out-of-state creditor shall include the full name and contact
information of the in-state representative or agent in the notice required to
be provided pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(a)(1).
§ 262-55. Compliance with regulations by foreclosing creditors.
All foreclosing creditors and, in the case of an out-of-state creditor, their
in-state representatives, shall be responsible for complying with the
requirements of all other rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by the
City relating to vacant and/or abandoned property in the same manner as
those rules, regulations and ordinances pertain to the title owners of such
vacant and/or abandoned property.
§ 262-56. Notice of violation.
A public officer appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3, et seq., or any
other authorized municipal official is hereby authorized to issue notices of
violation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(b) to any creditor filing a summons
and complaint in an action to foreclosure if the public officer or municipal
official determines that the creditor has violated this article by failing to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of
any property. The notice shall require the person or entity to correct the
violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt
of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to the public
health and safety. The issuance of a notice pursuant to this subsection shall
constitute proof that a property has been vacated and abandoned by its
owner for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
§ 262-57. Contents of notice.
The notice shall:
§ 262-53 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-57
253:473
§ 262-58. Recourse against creditor by City.
If the City expends funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct a violation
on a residential property in which the foreclosing creditor was given a
notice of violation but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation
as directed, the City shall have the same recourse against the creditor as
it would have against the title owner of the property, including, without
limitation, the recourse provided under N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
§ 262-59. Violations and penalties.
§ 262-60. Use of funds collected by City.
No less than 20% of the funds collected pursuant to this article shall be used
by the City for purposes relating to its municipal code enforcement actions.
§ 262-61. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this article and they shall remain in full
force and effect.
A. Describe the conditions that gave rise to the violation(s) committed;
B. Specify what must be done to correct the violation(s); and
C. Provide a period of time not less than 30 days to remedy the violations.
A. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article, found by the Municipal
Court of the City of Long Branch, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirements to appoint an in-state
representative or agent pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine
of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor
for the failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall
commence on the day after the conclusion of the ten-day period set
forth in N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(a)(1) for providing notice to the municipal
clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage has been served.
B. In the event that the municipal court of the City of Long Branch, or any
other court of competent jurisdiction, finds that a creditor, subject to
this article, has not complied with the notice of violation issued for
failure to provide for the care, maintenance, security, or upkeep of
property pursuant to the City's ordinances, such creditor shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
receipt of the notice of violation, except if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety, in which case any such
fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice of
violation.
§ 262-57 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-62
253:474
§ 262-62. Inconsistency of provisions.
In the event of any inconsistencies between the provisions of this article and
any prior ordinance of the City, the provisions hereof shall be determined to
govern. All other ordinances of the City are hereby ratified and confirmed,
except where inconsistent with the terms hereof.
§ 262-62 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-62
253:475

ARTICLE V
Registration of Vacant Properties
[Adopted 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 26-18]
§ 262-63. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as set forth
herein:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — The Business Administrator or such official within
that department as may be designated by the Director in writing.
OWNER — Includes any private title holder, any agent of a private title
holder having authority to act with respect to a vacant property (as defined
herein), any foreclosing entity that has filed a notice with the municipal
clerk pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, or any other entity
determined by the municipal officer of the City of Trenton to have authority
to act with respect to the vacant property. This article exempts any
municipal, county, state or federal government owner of a vacant property.
However, nothing contained in this article shall be construed as granting an
exemption from property maintenance or other obligations imposed by any
other statute, regulation or ordinance.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building or structure which is not at present
legally occupied or at which all lawful business or construction operations
or residential or other occupancy have substantially ceased, and which
is in such condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair
or rehabilitation, including, but not limited to, any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property pursuant to the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, et seq. However, a building shall not
be deemed vacant property for the purposes of this article if:
§ 262-64. Registration required; procedures.
A. The building is habitable and in which all building systems are in sound
working order, the building and grounds are maintained in good
condition, and which is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental; or
B. The building is scheduled for demolition within 30 days after the date
on which the initial registration fee or renewal fee is due.
A. Effective on January 1, 2015, the owner of any vacant property shall,
within 30 days after the building becomes vacant property or within 30
days after assuming ownership of vacant property, whichever is later, or
within 10 days of receipt of notice by the City that the vacant property
poses an imminent threat to the health and safety of the residents, file a
registration statement for such vacant property with the municipal
officer on forms provided for that purpose by the municipal officer
along with any fee required by this article. Failure to receive notice by
the City shall not constitute grounds for failing to register a vacant
property.
§ 262-63 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-64
253:477
B. Each vacant property having a separate tax block and lot number shall
be registered separately.
C. The registration shall include the information required under § 262-66
of this article, the insurance certificate required by § 262-69 of this
article, as well as any additional information that the municipal officer
may reasonably require.
D. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains a vacant property and shall pay
a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 262-67 for
each vacant property registered.
E. For purposes of efficient administration, the municipal officer may
establish a single date in each year upon which all registrations shall be
renewed, in which case the initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for
any property that has become a vacant property less than 10 months
prior to that date.
F. Rehabilitation and restoration of vacant property.
(1) Any owner of vacant property who submits: (i) plans to the
Department of Inspections demonstrating that the building or
structure will be completely rehabilitated and restored to
productive use and occupancy within the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial or renewal property registration; or
(ii) a notarized letter from a licensed contractor or architect stating
that the building or structure is capable of being completely
rehabilitated and restored to productive use and occupancy within
the twelve-month period following the date of the initial or renewal
property registration, and such owner undertakes the
rehabilitation of the vacant property, shall be exempt from payment
of the registration fee. The owner must still comply with all other
provisions of this article. In the event that an exemption is granted
as provided herein but the building or structure has not been
restored to productive use and occupancy at the end of the twelvemonth
period following the date of the initial or renewal property
registration, the owner shall be liable for any fee waived and shall
also be required to pay the renewal fee as identified in § 262-67 of
this article. The municipal officer may extend the waiver of the
registration fee for not more than one additional year in response
to a written request by the owner where the Municipal Officer finds
that compelling conditions outside the owner's control made it
impossible for the owner to restore the property within the initial
twelve-month period.
(2) Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the vacant property
is being held for a project of rehabilitation or redevelopment
consistent with municipal plans and ordinances, and where by
§ 262-64 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-64
253:478
§ 262-65. Inspections by City.
At any time after filing a registration statement or a renewal registration
statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the City
to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the building to determine
compliance with municipal codes, on reasonable notice to the owner or a
designated agent.
§ 262-66. Information required on registration statement;
designation of authorized agent.
virtue of financing, marketing or other conditions the project may
require more than one year for realization, the municipal officer
may extend the waiver of the registration fee on an annual basis
without limitation upon written request by the owner as long as
the municipal officer finds that the owner is making reasonable
progress toward completion of the project. The owner shall provide
the municipal officer with such documentation, which may include
plans, financing applications, applications for land use and other
governmental approvals or other evidence of progress.
G. The owner shall notify the municipal officer within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Municipal Officer for such
purpose.
H. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of vacant property.
I. The municipal officer is authorized to draft, implement and enforce
rules and regulations to effect the provisions and purposes of this
article. Such rules and regulations shall be made available on the City's
website and in the Department of Housing and Economic Development.
A. The registration statement shall include: (i) the name, street address, email
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age
or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code; and (ii) the name, street address, e-mail address and
telephone number of the firm or individual responsible for maintaining
the vacant property shall be available by telephone or in person on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities
may be the same or different persons.
B. An owner who is a natural person may designate him- or herself as
agent or as the individual responsible for maintaining the vacant
property.
§ 262-64 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-66
253:479
§ 262-67. Fees; use of funds collected by City.
§ 262-68. Maintenance of structures.
The owner of any structure that has become vacant property, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building that has become
vacant, within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant or 30 days of the
owner taking title to the vacant property shall:
C. By designating an authorized agent under this section, the owner
consents to receive any and all notices of code violations concerning the
registered vacant property and all process in any court proceeding and
administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the registered building by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an
authorized agent under this section shall be deemed to consent to the
continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section
until the owner notifies the municipal officer in writing of a change of
authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual registration
statement.
D. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under this article
shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at or on the
building, any and all notices of code violations and all process in an
administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.
A. The registration and renewal fee for each vacant property shall be as
follows:
Initial registration $250 or prorated amount per
§ 262-64E
First renewal $400
Second renewal $750
All subsequent renewals $1,000 or 5% of the assessed value,
whichever is greater
B. Not less than 20% of the funds collected pursuant to this article shall be
used for the sole purpose of carrying out municipal activities with
respect to vacant and abandoned properties, including, but not limited
to, code enforcement, abatement of nuisance conditions, stabilization,
rehabilitation, demolition, acquisition, and other activities designed to
minimize blight and/or promote further productive reuse of vacant
property.
A. Enclose and secure the structure as provided in the applicable
ordinances and Code of the City or as set forth in rules and regulations
implemented by the municipal officer pursuant to § 262-64I, herein.
§ 262-66 LONG BRANCH CODE § 262-68
253:480
§ 262-69. Insurance requirements.
§ 262-70. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of the
rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $250 and
not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this
article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien upon the
vacant property.
§ 262-71. Severability.
If any portion of this article is determined to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that determination shall have no effect upon the
remainder of this article, which shall remain valid and operable.
B. Ensure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well maintained and kept free from
trash or debris.
C. Post a sign affixed to the structure with the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent for
the purpose of service of process, and the name, address and telephone
number of the entity responsible for maintenance of the vacant
property, which may be the same as the authorized agent. The sign shall
be at least eight inches by 24 inches in dimension, shall include the
words "to report problems with this building, call. . . .", and shall be
placed in a location where it is clearly visible from the nearest public
street sidewalk; and
D. Maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure that the
sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
A. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for one- to four-unit residential use and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other building, including, but not limited to,
buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of or in the building.
B. Any insurance policy acquired or renewed after the building has
become vacant shall provide for written notice to the municipal officer
within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The
owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration
statement. Any registration statement submitted that does not include
such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid registration.
§ 262-68 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 262-71
253:481
Chapter 264
PUBLIC PAYPHONES
§ 264-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Long Branch.
ILLEGAL OR ILLICIT ACTIVITY — Activity which is prescribed by Title 2C
of N.J.S.A. or any city ordinance or any federal law or requisition.
PERMITTEE — Any person responsible for placing and maintaining a public
telephone on a sidewalk or street as hereinafter defined, and receiving a
permit therefor.
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or any other organization, group or entity.
PUBLIC TELEPHONE — Any self-service, coin- or credit-card-operated
telephone or bank of such telephones placed adjacent to each other located
in or over a public sidewalk or street.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway or street intended for the use of
pedestrians, between the curbline or the lateral line of a shoulder or, if
none, lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent right-of-way line.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall include, but not be limited to
roadways, parkways, alleys and highways.
§ 264-2. Permit required; fees; display of permit number; renewal.
A. No person may place or maintain any outdoor public telephone on or
above any public street or sidewalk without having first obtained a
permit as provided in this chapter. Permits shall be issued subject to the
approval of the location and means of installation of the telephone by
the city's Public Safety Director. Prior to installation, a plan or sketch of
the telephone shall be furnished in sufficient detail to describe the size,
location, equipment and means of installation and cabling.
B. The initial fee for a permit shall be $50 for each public telephone. The
annual renewal fee shall be $25 for each public telephone.
C. A copy of the permit number shall be affixed to the public telephone in
such a fashion so as to be secure from defacing or damage by the
elements.
D. Permits shall be renewable annually, with all applications for renewal to
be submitted to the city not later than the 15th day of January of each
year.
§ 262-71 LONG BRANCH CODE § 264-3
264:482
§ 264-3. Notification of removal or relocation.
The city's Public Safety Director shall be notified of the intent of any person
to remove or relocate a public telephone, which notification shall be in
writing and shall be given not later than 30 days before the intended date
of removal or relocation of said telephone. No telephone may be removed or
relocated without compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 264-4. Rejection or revocation of permit; removal of existing
public telephones.
The city's Public Safety Director may reject any application for a permit,
revoke a permit or require the removal of an existing outdoor public
telephone if it is determined that a public telephone has the potential to
or has illustrated a propensity to create or contribute to illegal or illicit
activities. A presumption of illegal or illicit activity will be created if during
the permit year five incidents of illegal or illicit activities are associated with
the location or the proposed location of the public telephone or it has been
previously used for emergency (911) calls and hang-ups.
§ 264-5. Exemption from permit fees.
The permit fees set forth herein shall not apply to any public telephone
installation subject to an agreement with the City of Long Branch providing
for the payment of any annual commission and a franchise tax to the City
of Long Branch, except that such public telephone installations shall be
subject to the following:
§ 264-6. Hearings.
In the event that the city's Public Safety Director declines to issue a permit,
the applicant may request a hearing before the City Administrator or a
designee as to said denial. Said request for a hearing must be made in
writing to the City Administrator within 10 days of receipt of notice of
denial.
A. Approval of the location of each public telephone by the city's Public
Safety Director.
B. The City of Long Branch may require any of the following: the removal
of an outdoor telephone, the revocation of a permit or the restriction or
limitation upon service to permit outgoing calls only, if a public
telephone has the potential to or has illustrated a propensity to create
or contribute to illegal or illicit activity. A presumption of illegal or illicit
activity will be created if during the permit year five incidents of illegal
or illicit activities are associated with the location or the proposed
location of the public telephone or it has been previously used for
emergency (911) calls and hang-ups.
§ 264-3 PUBLIC PAYPHONES § 264-7
264:483
§ 264-7. Requirements for permit application.
Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
§ 264-8. Standards for installation and maintenance.
Any public telephone installation subject to this chapter shall comply with
the following standards:
A. Execute an indemnification agreement by which the applicant agrees to
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Long Branch against
liability for all claims for damage to property, or injury to or death of
persons, arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance, ownership or use of each public telephone,
including the applicant's public telephone and equipment.
B. File with the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Long Branch a
general liability insurance policy of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and
$50,000 for property damage, naming the City of Long Branch as an
additional insured, insuring against injury, loss or damage that may
result from placing or maintaining the telephone on or above the
sidewalk, said policy to name the City of Long Branch and its officers
and employees as additional insureds.
A. No booth surrounding a public telephone shall exceed eight feet in
height, four feet in width or four feet in thickness.
B. Each public telephone shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism
to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund if
the call cannot be placed. The coin mechanism shall be maintained in
proper working order.
C. Each public telephone shall have affixed to it in a place visible to
everyone using the telephone the name and address of the distributor
and the telephone number of a working telephone service to report a
malfunction, secure a refund or give the notices provided for in this
chapter.
D. Public telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
in good repair at all times. Public telephones shall be serviced and
maintained according to standards including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Public telephones shall be reasonably free of chipped, faded,
peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) Public telephones shall be reasonably free of rust and corrosion in
the visible metal areas thereon.
(3) Any clear plastic or glass parts of public telephones shall be
unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes
and discoloration.
§ 264-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 264-8
264:484
§ 264-9. Information and emergency requirements.
§ 264-10. Location and placement of public telephones.
(4) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts of public telephones shall
be reasonably free of tears, pealing or fading.
(5) The structural parts of public telephones shall not be broken or
unduly misshapen.
(6) Public telephone receivers shall be attached to the telephones.
E. Any person who fails to maintain a public telephone in proper working
condition shall be given a ten-day notice to repair the telephone by the
City of Long Branch. Failure to timely comply with said notice shall be
grounds for revocation of the permit for said telephone.
F. Each public telephone shall, upon the written request of the Public
Safety Director, be capable of restricted or limited service allowing
outgoing calls only, within 10 days of the request.
A. All public telephones shall possess "911" emergency number access.
B. Public telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without
charge:
(1) Calls to the "911" emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments.
C. Current public telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted on
the public telephone or on the public telephone booth.
D. Toll rates quotations must be available for the operator upon request.
A. No public telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any
public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles,
or is intended to be installed in such a fashion so as to permit,
intentionally or otherwise, its use by occupants of vehicles parked
or stopped upon any sidewalk;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or
mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
§ 264-8 PUBLIC PAYPHONES § 264-10
264:485
§ 264-11. Suspension or revocation of license; hearings.
§ 264-12. Applicability to existing public telephones; fee for
removal.
B. Public telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent
their being blown down onto or around the public street or sidewalk,
but shall not be affixed or otherwise secured to any traffic or street
signs or signals.
A. In addition to any other penalties for violations of this chapter, the City
Administrator may, after notice and hearing, and for just cause,
suspend, revoke or not renew any permit issued hereunder for the
following:
(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Failure to comply with any federal or state laws and/or regulations
or any city ordinance pertaining to the operation of public
telephones.
(3) Any cause which would have been cause for rejection of the
application in the first instance.
(4) A material and known misstatement or omission of information
required on the application pursuant to this chapter. The question
of whether a misstatement or omission is material and knowing
shall be a question of fact for the fact finder.
(5) A finding upon receipt of a complaint by any citizen or upon request
of the Public Safety Director of the City of Long Branch or his
designee that the location and/or use of a public telephone
constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of this city.
B. Any hearing authorized under this chapter shall be conducted before
the City Administrator or a designee and shall require written notice to
the permittee, which notice shall be given not less than 10 days prior to
the date scheduled for said hearing. If the City Administrator finds the
permittee in violation of any provisions of this section, the City
Administrator may also require that service from said public telephone
be restricted to outgoing calls only.
A. The owners of existing public telephones shall apply for the permit
acquired hereunder within 30 days from the date this chapter becomes
final. The City of Long Branch reserves the right to reject any and all
locations submitted for approval based upon their existing
nonconformance to this chapter.
B. If a permit is not obtained within the time specified herein, or if the City
Public Safety Director rejects any application for a permit, the owner
shall forthwith remove said public telephone and all ancillary
§ 264-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 264-12
264:486
§ 264-13. Violations and penalties.101
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. Each noncomplying public telephone violation
will constitute a separate violation. Each day of said violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 265
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 265-1. Construction or placement of barriers or obstacles.
No owner, occupant or tenant of any premises abutting or bordering on any
publicly owned open space, public property, public beach, public seawall,
public bulkhead or any other type of Shore Protection Structure shall
construct, install, maintain or allow the construction, installation or
maintenance of any structure, including but not limited to fences or barriers
of any type, on, across or over any public open space, public easement,
public seawall, public beach, public bulkhead or any other type of Shore
Protection Structure or public property of any type within the City of Long
Branch.
§ 265-2. Written report of violations; notice to remove structure;
reinspection.
After an investigation initiated by any complaint of a resident, officer,
employee of the city or any other person, relative to a violation of this
chapter, or upon its own motion, a written report of the conditions
complained of shall be made to the City Business Administrator. If the
reported conditions are found to exist, the owner, tenant or person in
possession of the lands complained of shall be notified, in writing, either
personally or by certified mail, to remove such structure within 10 days
after receipt of the notice. The city shall arrange for a reinspection of the
lands in question after the ten-day period expires, and the person making
equipment. If the owner fails or refuses to remove said public telephone
within 10 days from notification by the City Public Safety Director,
the City Engineer or a designee may cause the public telephone to
be removed. Public telephone equipment removed by the city shall be
released to the lawful owner thereof upon payment of a fee of $250 to
the City of Long Branch.
C. If no person makes a claim for return of a public telephone and/or
ancillary equipment removed by the city under this section within six
months from the date of removal, it may be disposed of pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-12 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 265-2
265:487
such inspection shall report, in writing, to the Business Administrator as to
whether the condition complained of has been abated or remedied.
§ 265-3. Violations and penalties.
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question shall
fail to abate the condition complained of within the ten-day period provided
in § 265-2 hereinabove, the city shall institute appropriate proceedings in
the Municipal Court of the City of Long Branch and/or the Superior Court of
New Jersey, seeking appropriate penalties for violation of this chapter and
affirmative action in having the violating structure removed.
§ 265-4. Intent.
This chapter does not apply to private beaches or to private property
bordering them, nor is it intended to usurp riparian rights or to grant access
over private property to public lands, unless otherwise required by law.
Chapter 269
REDEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Urban Enterprise Zone — See Ch. 94. Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 265-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 265-4
265:488
ARTICLE I
Broadway Redevelopment Plan
[Adopted 10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 47-02]
§ 269-1. Adoption of redevelopment plan.
§ 269-2. Designation as Broadway Redevelopment Zone.
The above-referenced redevelopment plan shall constitute an overlay zone
for the area contained in the plan. The Zone Map of the City of Long Branch,
§ 345-5 of the Code of the City of Long Branch, is hereby amended to
designate the area set forth in this plan as the "Broadway Redevelopment
Zone."
§ 269-3. Uses; supersession of other ordinances.
Uses in the redevelopment area shall be limited to those permitted in
the redevelopment plan. Further, the requirements set forth in the
redevelopment plan shall supersede Chapter 345, Zoning; Chapter 300,
Subdivision; and Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures, of the City of Long
Branch in the redevelopment area covered by the plan, as provided in
Section 17 the redevelopment plan and to the extent anything set forth
in those chapters is inconsistent with the provisions of the Redevelopment
Plan. In the case of any inconsistency between this chapter and any prior
ordinance with respect to a redevelopment plan adopted by the City of Long
Branch, the provisions of this chapter, and the plan referenced herein shall
prevail, except as to lots or parcels of land on which redevelopment has
actually taken place and structures or improvements built or installed under
such prior ordinance and redevelopment plan.
§ 269-4. On file.
The above-referenced redevelopment plan will be on file in the office of the
City Clerk during normal business hours.102
A. The redevelopment plan entitled "City of Long Branch, Broadway
Redevelopment Plan," dated October, 2002, as attached hereto is
hereby adopted as an ordinance.
B. It is hereby found that the above-referenced redevelopment plan meets
the criteria for adoption of a redevelopment plan as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-7, and as further specified in the plan itself.
C. It is hereby found and determined that the above-referenced
redevelopment plan is consistent with the Master Plan of the City of
Long Branch.
102. Editor's Note: Said plan is included as Appendix A at the end of this chapter.
§ 269-1 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 269-4
265:489

ARTICLE II
Lower Broadway Corridor Sector
[Adopted 8-14-2012 by Ord. No. 14-12]
§ 269-5. Applicable provisions. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
28-16]
§ 269-6. Authorization of City limited.
A. The Lower Broadway Corridor Sector of the Redevelopment Zone, as
described and defined herein, which includes all of the properties listed
in Exhibit B,103 attached hereto and incorporated herein, shall be
subject to the provisions of the Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment
Plan, Design Guidelines Book 1, Design Guidelines Book 7 and Design
Guidelines Handbook 8.
B. The Lower Broadway Corridor Sector shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of Long Branch City Zoning Ordinance104 implementing the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan and Design Guidelines,
including but not limited to, Chapter 269, except for Section 8
(Acquisition Plan), Section 9, (Relocation Plan), and Section 11
(Developer Selection).
A. The City shall not be authorized under N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-8 to exercise
the power of eminent domain to acquire any private property in the
Lower Broadway Corridor Sector of the Redevelopment Zone.
B. The City shall not be authorized under N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., to
grant long-term tax exemptions in the Lower Broadway Corridor Sector
of the Redevelopment Zone.
103. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 269-5 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 269-6
265:491
Chapter 271
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Health — See Ch. 5, § 5-14.
Landlord-Tenant Review Board — See Ch. 66.
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 123.
Housing standards — See Ch. 200.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 238.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 262.
§ 269-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 269-6
271:492
ARTICLE I
Duties of Health Officer
[Adopted 9-22-1983 by Ord. No. 1120 (Sec. 14-6 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 271-1. Purpose.
§ 271-2. Health Officer to act as agent of landlord. [Amended
10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1134]
The City Health Officer is hereby authorized to act as the agent for any
landlord of any premises located within the City of Long Branch consisting
of five or more dwelling units in the engaging of repairmen and the ordering
of any parts necessary to restore to operating condition the furnace, boiler
or other equipment essential to the proper heating of any such residential
unit rented by said landlord; provided, however, that at least 24 hours
have elapsed since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal
officer or agency, prior to which a bona fide attempt has been made by
the tenant to notify the landlord of the failure of the heating equipment,
and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action, and the outside
air temperature is less than 55° F. Any person who supplies material or
services in accordance with this article shall bill the landlord directly and,
by filing a notice approved by the local Board of Health with the County
Clerk, shall have a lien on the premises where the materials were used as
services supplied. In the alternative, the City of Long Branch, pursuant to its
authority under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f, may expend municipal funds for such
purposes as noted herein and charge the same against the premises, and
the amount thereof as determined by resolution of the City Council shall be
a lien against the premises and collectible as provided by law.
§ 271-3. Fuel oil deliveries.
A. N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 prescribes the establishment of a local Board of Health
and authorizes the exercise of certain powers by the same and further
provides that those respected functions may be exercised by other
municipal officers according to law as established under a specific form
of government; and the City of Long Branch, pursuant to Chapter 5,
Administration of Government, § 5-14 of this Code, has a Department of
Health, the head of which is the Director of Health, also known as the
"City Health Officer," and from time to time emergency situations arise
regarding the lack of heat or proper equipment to furnish appropriate
heat to tenants of premises in the City of Long Branch.
B. The City is desirous of providing the Health Department with the
powers authorized under enabling legislation in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(p) and
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.5 et seq. and its general authority under N.J.S.A.
40:48-2 to act as agent for various landlords in the providing of fuel oil
and engaging repairmen and ordering parts necessary to restore
proper heating facilities.
§ 271-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 271-3
271:493
§ 271-4. Liability of landlord or agent.
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action pursuant to this article shall be liable to a civil penalty
of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the residential
property. Such penalty shall be recoverable by the City of Long Branch in a
civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any such action to collect or enforce such penalty
shall be brought in Superior Court, County District Court or Municipal
Court. The amount of such penalty shall be paid to the municipality to be
used for general municipal purposes.
A. The City Health Officer is hereby authorized whenever necessary to
protect the health and safety of residential tenants to act as agent for
any landlord owning property within the City consisting of five or more
dwelling units in engaging a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a
reasonable price per gallon and to re-fire the burner to restore the
proper heating of any aforesaid residential property rented by said
landlord; provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed, if the
outside air temperature is between 33° F. and 55° F., inclusive, or at
least four hours have elapsed, if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or
less, since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal office
or agency, prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made
by the tenant or his representative to notify the landlord of the lack of
heat, and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action. "Lack of
heat" shall mean maintaining less heat than required by N.J.S.A.
26:3-31(m).
B. Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or re-fires the burner in
accordance with this article may bill the landlord directly, or the City of
Long Branch may issue a voucher to the fuel oil dealer who delivered
the fuel oil for the money amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the
service charge for re-firing the burner, if any. All such vouchers shall be
paid in the manner provided for the approval and payment of claims
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 271-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 271-4
271:494
ARTICLE II
Seasonal Rentals
[Adopted 11-12-1997 by Ord. No. 35-97]
§ 271-5. Legislative findings.
§ 271-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following meanings shall apply:
HEARING OFFICER — A licensed attorney of the State of New Jersey
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City
Council. The hearing officer shall not own or lease any real property within
the city, nor hold any interest in the assets of or profits arising from the
ownership or lease of such property.[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own or purport to own any
building that is rented or offered for rent or housing space for living or
dwelling under either a written or oral lease, including but not limited to
A. The Council of the City of Long Branch finds, determines and declares
that N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12(n) et seq. was enacted by the legislature of the
State of New Jersey to enable certain communities to take effective
action to assure that excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated
and that landlords offering seasonal rentals be held to sufficient
standards of responsibility.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12 et seq. addresses primarily resort communities that
have an increased population during the summer months which results
in year-round citizens experiencing disturbances, damage and public
expense resulting from carelessly granted and inadequately supervised
seasonal rentals to irresponsible vacationers and others by inept or
indifferent landlords.
C. The Council of the City of Long Branch finds that the City has a similar
problem with short tenancies, usually less than one year, throughout
the city.
D. The Council of the City of Long Branch enacts this article to preserve
the peace and tranquillity of their community for its permanent
residents and to maintain the City as a viable area for persons and
families availing themselves of and living in the community.
E. The enactment of this article is necessary and desirable to provide a
means to curb and discourage those occasional excesses arising from
irresponsible actions of short-term tenancies.
F. The Council of the City of Long Branch had, prior to the enactment of
this article, input from the Business Administrator of the City of Long
Branch and the Public Safety Director of the City of Long Branch and
has the input of the public's participation with respect to this article.
§ 271-5 RENTAL PROPERTY § 271-6
271:495
any building subject to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967, c.
76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and owner-occupied two-unit premises.
SEASONAL RENTAL — Any rental of residential accommodations for a term
of less than one year and including any part of the period extending from
May 15 to September 15.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — An act of disorderly, indecent,
tumultuous or riotous conduct, including, by way of example, but not limited
to simple assault, assault, terroristic threats, harassment, urinating in
public, lewdness, criminal mischief, excessive noise or underage possession
or consumption of alcoholic beverages, upon or in proximity to any seasonal
rental premises, and attributable to the acts or incitement of any of the
tenants of those premises which have been substantiated by prosecution
and conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include
prosecution and conviction for a City ordinance or a higher level
offense.105[Amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 34-03]
§ 271-7. Proceedings against violators; service of notice; hearing;
posting bond.
A. If in any twelve-month period two substantiated complaints, as defined
in § 271-6 hereof, or separate occasions of disorderly, indecent,
tumultuous or riotous conduct, including, by way of example, but not
limited to simple assault, assault, terroristic threats, harassment,
lewdness, urinating in public, criminal mischief or excessive noise,
upon or in the proximity to any seasonal rental premises and
attributable to the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of those
premises, have been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any
court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council or any officer or
employee of the City of Long Branch so designated by the City Council
for this purpose may institute proceedings to require the landlord of the
seasonal rental premises to post a bond against the consequences of
future incidents of the same character. [Amended 12-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 41-03; 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
B. The City Council or any officer or employee of the municipality
designated by the City Council shall cause to be served upon the
landlord, in person or by registered mail, to the address appearing on
the tax records of the municipality, notice advising the institution of
such proceedings, together with particulars of the substantiated
complaint upon which those proceedings are based, and the time and
place at which the hearing will be held in the matter, which shall be in
the Municipal Building, Municipal Court or such other public place as
designated by the City Council and which shall be no sooner than 30
days from the date upon which the notice is served or mailed.
C. At the hearing convened pursuant to Subsection B above, the hearing
officer shall receive full evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the
105. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 253, Peace and Good Order.
§ 271-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 271-7
271:496
§ 271-8. Bond forfeiture and extension.
landlord, if present or represented or offering such evidence, may
present. At the conclusion of the hearing, the officer shall determine
whether the landlord shall be required to post a bond in accordance
with the terms of this article.
D. Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the hearing officer, in light of the nature and extent of the
offenses indicted in the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based, to be adequate in the case of subsequent
offenses to make reparation for:
(1) Damages likely to be caused to public or private property and
damages consequent upon disruption of affected residents' rights
of fair use and quiet enjoyment of their premises;
(2) Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for
such offenses; and
(3) Compensating the municipality for the costs of representing and
prosecuting such incidents of disorderly behavior; provided,
however, no such bond shall be in an amount less than $500 nor
more than $5,000. [Amended 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 7-05]
E. Any bond or other security deposited in compliance with Subsection D
above shall remain in force for a period of four years. Upon the lapse of
the four-year period, the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge of
the bond, unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a
forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have
been had under § 271-8, in which case the security shall have been
renewed in an amount and for a period that shall be specified by the
hearing officer. A transfer of ownership or control of the property shall
not void a requirement of security imposed under this article. The
person or persons to whom ownership or control is transferred shall
maintain that security and shall be subject to injunctive proceedings as
authorized by Subsection D above, in the same manner as the landlord
upon which the requirement was originally imposed; provided,
however, the City Council may, by resolution, shorten the period for
which security is required to not less than one year from the date of the
transfer of ownership or control, if during that year no substantiated
complaints are recorded with respect to the property in question.
F. The municipality may enforce a bond thus required by action in the
Superior Court and shall be entitled to an injunction prohibiting a
landlord from making or renewing any lease of the affected premises
for residential purposes until that bond or equivalent security, in
satisfactory form and amount, has been deposited with the municipality.
[Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 7-05]
§ 271-7 RENTAL PROPERTY § 271-8
271:497
§ 271-9. Hearing officer; qualifications. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
See the definition of "hearing officer" in § 271-6.
A. If during the period for which a landlord is required to give security
pursuant to § 271-7 a substantiated complaint is recorded against the
property in question, the City Council or its designee may institute
proceedings against the landlord for the forfeiture or partial forfeiture
of the security for an extension as provided in § 271-7E of the period for
which the security is required or for increase in the amount of security
required or for any or all of those purposes.
B. Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by
the hearing officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed
necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in
§ 271-7D. Any decision by the hearing officer to increase the amount or
extend the period of the required security shall be determined in light
of the same factors set forth in § 271-7D and shall be taken only to the
extent that the nature of the substantiated complaint or complaints out
of which proceedings arise under this action indicated that
appropriateness of such change in order to effectually carry out the
purposes of this article. The decision of the hearing officer in such
circumstances shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided in
§ 271-7D.
§ 271-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 271-9
271:498
Chapter 276
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 230.
§ 271-9 SALES, SPECIAL § 271-9
276:499

ARTICLE I
Going Out of Business or Distress Sale
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 7-4 of the 1971 Code]
§ 276-1. License required.
A license shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell
any goods at a sale to be advertised and held as a going out of business sale,
removal of business sale or fire and other altered goods sale.
§ 276-2. License conditions.
§ 276-3. Application requirements.
In addition to the information required by Chapter 230, Mercantile
Licenses, applications shall disclose the following:
A. Established business requisite. No person who has not been the owner
of a business advertised or described in the application for a license for
a period of at least six months prior to the date of the proposed sale
shall be granted a license, provided that, upon the death of a person
doing business in the city, his heirs, devisees, legatees or
representatives shall have the right to apply at any time for a license.
B. Interval between sales. Any person who has held one of the sales
regulated in this article at the location stated in the application within
one year past from the date of the application shall not be granted a
license.
C. Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license operates
more than one place of business, the license shall apply only to the one
store or branch specified in the application, and no other store or
branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in
any way participating in the licensed sale; nor shall the store or branch
conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store
or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the
licensed sale.
D. Persons exempted. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or
affect persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction, persons acting in accordance with their powers
and duties as public officials, duly licensed auctioneers selling at
auction and any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other
publication who in good faith publishes any advertisement without
actual knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
without actual knowledge that the provisions of this article have not
been complied with.
A. The nature of the occupancy of the premises where the sale is to take
place, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of
termination of the occupancy.
§ 276-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 276-3
276:501
§ 276-4. Issuance of license; fees.
All applicants shall submit a fee of $25 to the Superintendent of Licenses
and Permits with the application for a license. Applicants for renewal of a
license shall submit a fee of $25 to the Superintendent with the application
B. A full and complete statement of the facts regarding the sale, including
the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods and the
manner in which the sale will be conducted.
C. The means to be employed in advertising the sale, together with the
proposed content of any advertisement.
D. A complete and detailed inventory of goods to be sold at the sale as
disclosed by the applicant's records.
(1) The inventory shall contain:
(a) A clear description of each item to be sold, with the brand
name, if any.
(b) The total number of each item to be sold and the date each
item was purchased, with invoice numbers for each item.
(c) The name of the person from whom purchased, and if not
purchased, the manner of acquisition.
(2) The inventory shall be attached to and become a part of the
application. The inventory shall be signed by the person applying
for the license or by an authorized agent, and the agent shall swear
or affirm by affidavit that the information given is known by the
affiant to be full, complete and true.
(3) No goods other than those listed in the inventory shall be
advertised or sold at any sale for which a license is required. No
person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, advertise or list on the
inventory any goods which are not the regular stock at the store,
the goods of which are to be closed out or disposed of through the
sale, or to supplement or make any replenishments or additions
from any manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler, warehouse, storage
building or from any other premises or from any source
whatsoever, and during the time thereof to advertise or represent
the sale as being of the character for which a license is required.
(4) All goods included in the inventory shall have been purchased by
the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation
privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
The inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of
or for the purpose of conducting any sale regulated hereunder. Any
unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the applicant
made within 60 days before filing an application shall be deemed to
be of such character.
§ 276-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 276-4
276:502
for renewal. No license shall be issued until all taxes and assessments, fees
and charges due the city have been paid.
§ 276-5. Effect of license.
§ 276-6. Duties of licensee.
A. License period and renewal procedure. The license shall authorize the
sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. The
Superintendent may renew a license for one additional period of 30
days only, Sundays and holidays excepted, when he finds that facts exist
justifying renewal, and then only if the licensee has filed a written
application for renewal and submitted with the application for renewal
a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory
remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original
application and inventory. Any application for a license covering goods
previously inventoried shall be deemed to be an application for
renewal, whether presented by the original applicant or another
person.
B. Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
C. Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license for a going
out of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the Superintendent
all other business licenses he may hold at that time which are
applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a
going out of business license, without rebate of any portion of the fees
for any license.
D. Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable.
A. All licensees shall:
(1) Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed
sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the
application for license.
(2) Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising, and any advertisement by handbills, circulars,
placards, signs, notices, newspapers or publications or other
advertising shall include the number and date of the license.
(3) Conduct the sale in strict conformity with any advertising or other
representations made in connection therewith.
(4) Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate of the inventory
submitted with the application and present the same to inspecting
officials upon request.
§ 276-4 SALES, SPECIAL § 276-6
276:503
§ 276-7. Violations and penalties. 106
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
(5) Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods for sale
and make such distinction clear to the public.
B. The licensee of a going out of business sale shall not continue the
business beyond the date specified for the sale in the license and shall
not, upon conclusion of the sale, continue the business under the same
name or under a different name in the same location or elsewhere in the
city.
106. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 276-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 276-7
276:504
Chapter 279
SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 100. Rapid-entry system — See Ch. 173.
§ 276-7 SALES, SPECIAL § 276-7
276:505

ARTICLE I
Senior Citizen Apartment Buildings
[Adopted 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 96-89 (Sec. 14-15 of the 1971
Code)]
§ 279-1. Security guard service required.
The owner of any senior citizen apartment building within the City of
Long Branch shall be required to provide security guard services upon the
premises in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
§ 279-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth herein:
HOLIDAY — Any day that the on-site management office is closed or not
manned.[Added 1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 1-17]
SENIOR CITIZEN APARTMENT BUILDING — A structure consisting of
25 units or more containing self-contained groups of rooms which are
designed, constructed and used as dwelling units; each of which is set apart
from other units or a portion of said structure by way of a separate entrance
and where at least one or more resident in at least 10 of the units is 55 years
of age or more.
§ 279-3. Security requirements. [Amended 1-24-2017 by Ord. No.
1-17]
A minimum of one uniformed security guard is to be on duty in the lobby
area of each senior citizen apartment building subject to this article
between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. seven days a week and
also between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday
and holidays. During the hours aforesaid, each guard on duty shall make
periodic patrol and inspection of the premises and shall undertake all
actions necessary to assume the personal safety, privacy and protection of
the person and property of the residents of each such building and their
guests.
§ 279-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 279-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 279-4
276:507
Chapter 284
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zone-of-quiet signs — See Ch. 235,
§ 235-2A(11)(b).
Massage establishment signs — See Ch. 227,
§ 227-7.
Sign permit fee — See Ch. 147, § 147-3F.
Traffic and parking signs — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — Ch. 345.
§ 279-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 279-4
276:508
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 284-1. Purpose. [Amended 7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110]
The purpose of this chapter is to afford police power to administer the
erection and maintenance of all types of signs for the welfare of the general
public. In order to preserve the basically residential character of this
community and to facilitate the improvements of its business and industrial
areas in a safe and orderly manner, commercial advertising billboard signs
shall not be permitted except as set forth in § 284-14, and all other signs
which are not expressly validated elsewhere in this chapter shall not be
permitted, and all such signs as well as all other signs which do not conform
to the specific requirements and standards set forth in this chapter are
specifically prohibited.
§ 284-2. Definitions.
A. General. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any rigid or semirigid material with
or without a sign displayed thereon situated upon or attached to real
property outdoors for the purpose of furnishing a background, base or
support on which a sign may be posted or displayed.
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING BILLBOARD SIGN — An advertising
sign, structure or symbol erected and maintained by an individual
or corporation engaged in the sale or rental of space thereon to a
clientele of manufacturing service or commercial enterprises, upon
which space there is displayed by means of painting, posting or other
method advertising copy described in a wide variety of products or
services which are not made, produced, assembled, stored or sold
from the lot or premises upon which the advertisement is
displayed.[Amended 7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110]
SIGN — The outdoor display of any writing, printing, picture, painting,
emblem, drawing or similar device intended to invite or draw the
attention of the public to any goods, merchandise, property, business,
services, entertainment, amusement or industrial activity or
establishment.
B. Functional sign types. Functional sign types shall include the following:
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign or device intended to direct or point
toward a place or which gives verbal directions.
DIRECTORY OF OCCUPANTS SIGN — A sign or plate attached to the
facade of a building listing the tenants or occupants thereof and their
respective professions or business activities.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign, symbol, trademark structure or
similar device used to identify the occupant of any structure, the
product made or the activity being pursued by an individual business,
§ 284-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-2
276:509
service, commercial or industrial activity which is displayed upon the
lot or premises occupied by the person or entity for the purpose of
apprising the public of the location of such enterprise and the type
of activity in which it is engaged.[Amended 7-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1110]
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign, symbol or device erected and maintained
by the federal government, the State of New Jersey and the County of
Monmouth of the City of Long Branch for the purpose of informing or
guiding the public or for the protection and promotion of health, safety,
convenience and general welfare.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign displayed for a limited period of time
for the purpose of advertising the construction of residential, business
or industrial activities, or decorative displays for holidays or public
information.
C. Physical sign types. The above functional sign types may be erected in
the following physical forms or arrangements:
GROUND SIGN — A self-supporting sign connected to the ground and
independent of any structure of any other than an advertising structure,
including pylon, pedestal or individual post-type supports.
ILLUMINATED SIGNS — Any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous
tubes as a part of the sign proper.
PROJECTING SIGNS — A sign attached at right angles to the building
wall which neither extends more than 60 inches from the wall nor
projects nearer the curbline than two feet nor projects nearer the
sidewalk surface than eight feet nor projects above the roofline or
storefront facade line nor extends beyond the ends of the facade or
building.
WALL SIGN — A flat sign attached to a building wall which extends not
more than 12 inches from the face of the wall and is not extended above
the top or beyond the ends of the facade.
§ 284-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-2
276:510
ARTICLE II
Sign Specifications; Exceptions
§ 284-3. General regulations.
A. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, altered, located,
relocated or maintained within the City of Long Branch except in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No sign or advertising structure exceeding six square feet in area shall
be erected or created until a permit has been secured as provided for in
§ 284-15.
C. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, placed, maintained,
lighted or of such a color so that it impedes, interferes with or distracts
from the operation of any traffic control light or sign, official traffic
directional sign or other traffic safety or control device or general
traffic safety.
D. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, maintained or lighted
in a manner to interfere with traffic upon any public right-of-way or the
peaceful and quiet enjoyment of any adjacent property.
E. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in other
than a safe condition or be maintained in a state of disrepair.
F. No sign or advertising structure shall include any flashing, blinking or
series lights or any rotating or moving parts.
G. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or used upon the top
or roof of any building, and no sign or advertising structure attached to
a building shall project higher than the roofline of that building.
H. No sign shall be painted directly on the wall of any building without the
use of an advertising structure.
I. No sign shall be placed or maintained on a utility pole.
J. No sign in the City of Long Branch regulated under the provisions of
this chapter shall exceed a height of 30 feet, measured from the ground
to the top of the sign structure.
K. No sign shall restrict vision other than by structural supports within the
area between two feet above the ground and six feet above the ground
when such sign is within 30 feet of any street line or public right-of-way.
L. A sign shall be measured at the outer edges of the sign structure. In the
case of a wall sign not mounted on a single sign structure or of a sign of
irregular shape, the area of the smallest regular rectangle
encompassing all component parts of the sign shall be the area of the
sign.
§ 284-3 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-3
276:511
§ 284-3.1. Commercial facade regulations. [Added 3-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 7-98; amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 24-98]
M. On corner lots any combination of signs permitted may be erected on
each side of a building or in yard area fronting on a public street.
N. All signs shall be designed according to the best accepted engineering
practice. If attached to a building, the loads shall be distributed to the
structure so that no members thereof shall be overstressed.
O. All supports and brackets for signs suspended from or supported upon a
building shall be constructed of metal not less than one-fourth-inch
thick if not galvanized and not less than three-sixteenths-inch thick if all
members, including bolts and rivets, are galvanized.
P. All signs shall be securely attached to the building by means of metal
anchors, bolts or expansion screws, provided that signs exceeding 50
pounds in weight shall be secured at both the top and bottom with
metal shelf anchors.
Q. No signs or illustrations or symbols shall be placed so as to interfere
with the opening of an exit door of any building or to obstruct any
window opening of a room in a dwelling or to interfere with the use of
any fire escape or to create a hazard to pedestrians.
R. All signs must be so installed and of such materials as to withstand a
wind resistance of not less than 30 pounds per square foot.
S. No person shall interfere with any City official or employee entering
upon any premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for the
purpose of examining any sign or advertising structure.
T. Public access signs. [Added 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 16-17]
(1) Definition. "Public access sign" shall be a posted sign indicating the
public access point to, from and along tidal waterways and their
shores within the City of Long Branch. Public Access signs shall list
the location of the access point as well as any restrictions.
(2) Location. All public access signs shall be installed at the entrance
of the designated access points as outlined in the Municipal Public
Access Plan.
(3) Maintenance. All public access signs shall be maintained by the
City of Long Branch Department of Public Works.
A. The designs, concepts and regulations contained in the Commercial
Facade Design Kit107 shall pertain to facades and signage in
applications before the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
of the City of Long Branch for new structures as well as renovations of
old structures in an area east of the railroad tracks in the C-1 Zone of
107. Editor's Note: The kit is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 284-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-3.1
276:512
§ 284-4. Permitted exceptions.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
the City of Long Branch as defined in § 345-5 of Chapter 345 of Chapter
345, Zoning, and Zone Map which is also made a part of § 345-5.
B. This section shall be read in conjunction with § 345-19.
C. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Long
Branch shall consider the guidelines, concepts, regulations and
information contained in the Commercial Facade Design Kit as to
facades and signage for applications for new buildings as well as
renovations of existing structures in an area east of the railroad tracks
in the C-1 Zone of the City of Long Branch.
A. Temporary window signs located and displayed inside business or
industrial buildings, provided that they do not occupy or cover more
than 25% of the window area of that wall.
B. Official signs.
C. Theater bills and changeable copy signs. The changing of bills of acts
and features of theaters on established frames at such theaters and
changing the copy of any authorized changeable copy sign, the wording
of which does not conflict with these regulations.
D. Billboard advertising. Changing of matter advertised on authorized
billboards and poster panels.
E. Signs within a building. A sign located within a building, not attached
directly to or painted on a window and not located within 18 inches of a
window or entrance.
F. Show cards. No more than two show cards not to exceed 28 inches by
22 inches, advertising matters of current public interest, may be placed
or displayed in show windows of occupied business establishments for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
G. Political signs; subject, however, to the following restrictions:
[Amended 7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110; 3-11-1986 by Ord. No.
1267]
(1) Only one sign per candidate or public issue shall be allowed on
each property. The one sign permitted may be two-sided. When one
or more candidates run on a ticket, and have campaign signs
printed jointly, that sign listing the names of the candidates on the
ticket shall be considered the one sign permissible for the ticket.
(2) No political sign may be erected more than 45 days prior to an
election and must be removed no later than 10 days after an
election.
§ 284-3.1 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-4
276:513
(3) No political signs may be placed on or attached to any public
property, utility pole, traffic sign or street corner marker.
(4) No person shall place or attach any political signs on or to any
occupied private property without first obtaining the permission of
the property owner of that property.
(5) No person shall place or attach any political sign on or to any
vacant property or unoccupied or abandoned buildings or
structures without first obtaining the written permission of the
owner of that property, building or structure.
H. Vacated property. On vacated property, one sign not to exceed six
square feet in area, giving the name, business and new address of the
former occupant, may be displayed for not more than 60 days.
I. Marquee signs or any other signs, banners or devices for which special
permission may be granted by resolution of the City Council in each
instance.
J. Church bulletins which do not exceed 20 square feet in area for each
church.
K. For the purpose of advertising matters of a public, semipublic or
charitable character, temporary permits may be granted at the
discretion of the City.
L. Banners, streamers and advertising flags to advertise openings and sale
days, provided that such devices shall not be displayed on any one
property for more than 30 days in any calendar year.
§ 284-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-4
276:514
ARTICLE III
Zoning District Regulations
§ 284-5. Signs permitted in all zoning districts.
§ 284-6. Signs permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-7
Zoning Districts.
A. One nonilluminated, temporary, ground sign pertaining to the lease,
rental or sale of the same lot or building upon which it is placed and not
exceeding nine square feet in area on any one side, provided that such
sign is erected or displayed not less than five feet inside of the property
line and shall not be mounted on or attached to trees. This sign must be
removed from the premises within seven days after the property is sold
or leased. Not more than one sign shall be permitted for each street
contiguous to the premises. Such signs shall be exempt from all other
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 5-12-1983 as Ord. No. 1100;
7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110]
B. One nonilluminated, temporary, ground, directional sign indicating the
location of and direction to the premises available for lease, rent or sale
and in the process of development, having inscribed thereon the name
of the owner, developer, builder or agent, may be erected and
maintained, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet and not
in excess of four feet in length; and
(2) Not more than three such signs shall be erected for any one
development.
(3) They are removed within 30 days after the level of occupancy
reaches 80% of the total number of units available.
C. Parking lot markers, permanent directional signs, traffic control signs
and entrance or exit signs may be erected on the same premises as the
use to which they apply, provided that each such sign does not exceed
three square feet in area and the number and location of such signs are
approved by the Planning Board. In making such approval, the Planning
Board shall be guided by the degree to which such signs contribute to
public safety as opposed to their advertising value.
A. One- and two-family dwelling structures may erect one illuminated wall
or ground identification sign per dwelling unit, provided that the sign
does not exceed 10 inches by 18 inches and that any such ground sign is
not more than two feet in height above ground level; or one illuminated
wall or ground identification sign indicating a home professional office
in the residential zones in which they are permitted, provided that the
sign does not exceed three square feet in area on either side and that
any such ground sign is not more than two feet in height above the
ground level.
§ 284-5 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-6
276:515
§ 284-7. Signs permitted in the R-8 Zoning District.
§ 284-8. Signs permitted in the C-1 Zoning District.
Two of the following signs may be permitted on each building, provided that
there shall be not more than one wall or one projecting sign on any one
structure:
B. For churches, one ecclesiastical changeable letter ground sign may be
erected referring to service and events to be held on the premises,
provided that the sign is not more than 10 square feet in area. The sign
may be illuminated, but it may not be closer than 10 feet to any
property line and not closer than 30 feet to any street line or public
right-of-way.
C. One nonilluminated identification ground sign may be erected for a
cemetery, beach club, schools, colleges, boardinghouses, hospitals,
philanthropic or eleemosynary, and nursing home uses in the residence
zones in which they are permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet in area on either side nor a height of 12 feet.
D. Multiple-family dwelling structures may erect one illuminated wall
identification sign not exceeding 10 square feet in area or may erect
one illuminated ground identification sign not exceeding 25 square feet
in area on either side nor a height of 12 feet.
A. The following two signs may be permitted on each lot:
(1) One identification ground sign which does not exceed a total of 25
square feet in area on either side and does not exceed a height of
12 feet above ground level. The sign may be illuminated but shall
not be located closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(2) One illuminated directory-of-occupants wall sign which does not
exceed six square feet in area.
B. For churches, one ecclesiastical changeable letter ground sign may be
erected referring to services and events to be held on the premises,
provided that the sign is not more than 10 square feet in area. The sign
may be illuminated, but it may not be closer than 10 feet to any
property line and not closer than 30 feet to any street line or public
right-of-way.
A. One identification wall sign may be erected on one facade of a building,
provided that the sign shall not exceed an area equal to 15% of the area
of the facade upon which it is erected. In the case of a commercial use
located on the ground floor of a multistory building, only the first floor
facade area shall be used for the purpose of calculating the permissible
sign area. The sign may be illuminated.
§ 284-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-8
276:516
§ 284-9. Signs permitted in the C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-7 Zoning
Districts. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
Any three of the following signs may be permitted on each lot, provided that
there shall be not more than one wall, projecting or ground sign on any one
lot:
§ 284-10. Signs permitted in the S-1 Zoning District.
B. One identification projecting sign which does not exceed a total of 12
square feet in area on either side and does not project more than five
feet from the wall to which it is attached. The sign may be illuminated.
C. One illuminated directory-of-occupants sign not exceeding eight square
feet in area. Such sign may be erected as a wall or projecting sign.
A. One identification wall sign may be erected on one facade of a building,
provided that the sign shall not exceed an area equal to 15% of the area
of the facade upon which it is erected. In the case of a commercial use
located on the ground floor of a multistory building, only the first floor
facade area shall be used for the purpose of calculating the permissible
sign area. The sign may be illuminated.
B. One identification projecting sign which does not exceed a total of eight
square feet in area on either side and does not project more than five
feet from the wall to which it is attached. The sign may be illuminated.
C. One identification ground sign which does not exceed a total of 50
square feet in area on either side nor exceed a height of 15 feet. The
sign may be illuminated but shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
any property line.
D. One illuminated directory-of-occupants sign not exceeding eight square
feet in area. Such sign may be erected as a wall, projecting or ground
sign.
A. One-family dwelling structures may erect one illuminated identification
wall or ground sign, provided that the sign does not exceed in area
dimensions 10 inches by eighteen inches and that any such ground sign
is not more than two feet in height above ground level; or one
illuminated wall or ground identification sign indicating a home
professional office or home occupation, provided that the sign does not
exceed three square feet in area on either side and that any such
ground sign is not more than two feet in height above the ground level.
B. Professional offices may erect one identification ground sign which
does not exceed a total of 12 square feet in area on either side and does
not exceed a height of 10 feet above ground level and one illuminated
directory-of-occupants wall sign which does not exceed six square feet
in area.
§ 284-8 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-11
276:517
§ 284-11. Signs permitted in the S-2 Zoning District.
One of the following signs may be erected on each public facility:
§ 284-12. Signs permitted in the Industrial Zoning District.
Two of the following signs may be permitted on each lot:
§ 284-13. Additional regulations; gasoline service stations.
The following signs shall be permitted for gasoline service stations where
they are permitted by special permit:
A. One identification wall sign, provided that the sign does not exceed an
area equal to 15% of the area of the facade upon which it is erected; or
B. One projecting identification sign, provided that the sign does not
exceed a total of eight square feet in area on either side and does not
project more than five feet from the wall to which it is attached.
A. One identification wall sign may be erected on one facade of a building,
provided that the sign shall not exceed an area equal to 15% of the area
of the facade upon which it is erected. In the case of an industrial use
located on the ground floor of a multistory building, only the first floor
facade area shall be used for the purpose of calculating the permissible
sign area. The sign may be illuminated.
B. One identification projecting sign which does not exceed a total of 12
square feet in area on either side and does not project more than five
feet from the wall to which it is attached. The sign may be illuminated.
C. One identification ground sign which does not exceed a total of 50
square feet in area on either side nor exceed a height of 15 feet. The
sign may be illuminated but shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
any property line.
A. One identification ground sign which does not exceed 45 square feet on
any one side nor 20 feet in height. Such signs may be illuminated, but
illumination shall be from within and be nonflashing. Such signs may be
located in the front yard area but shall not be closer than 10 feet to a
street line.
B. Two signs may be mounted on the front facade of the building, provided
that the total area of such signs does not exceed 20% of the area of the
front facade, including window and door area.
C. Temporary signs advertising sales, premiums and other such temporary
activities may be mounted on the window or door surfaces of the
structure, provided that the total area of such signs at any one time
does not exceed 50% of the total window area on the same side of the
building.
§ 284-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-14
276:518
§ 284-14. Commercial advertising billboard signs. [Amended
7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110]
A. The further erection or construction of signs known as "commercial
advertising billboard signs," except as hereinafter provided, is
prohibited.
B. Existing billboard signs or structures may be replaced or relocated on
the same lot.
C. Relocation of existing billboard signs or structures. [Amended
5-12-1983 by Ord. No. 1100]
(1) Existing billboard signs or structures may be relocated to a
different lot upon the approval of the City Council. The City Council
may approve the relocation of an existing billboard sign or
structure, provided that:
(a) No more than one such sign or structure shall be permitted on
any lot.
(b) The sign or structure when relocated will comply with all other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
(c) The sign or structure will not obstruct, impair or diminish the
visibility of any business or commercial enterprise from the
roadway on which it is located.
(d) The aesthetic and environmental effects caused by the
placement of the sign or structure in its new location will be
less adverse than those caused by the sign or structure in the
location from which it is to be removed.
(e) No billboard sign or structure may be relocated to any lot or
property adjacent to Ocean Avenue (formerly New Ocean
Avenue) or any portion of Ocean Boulevard. [Amended
10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1128]
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections or
subsections of this chapter, the provisions of this subsection shall
not be varied or waived or otherwise modified by action of the
Board of Adjustment or Planning Board of the City of Long Branch.
§ 284-14 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-14
276:519

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 284-15. Permits.
Permits shall be required for all signs greater than six square feet in area.
§ 284-16. Revocation of permit.
A. Permit required. Unless otherwise permitted herein, no person shall
erect, alter, locate or relocate or reconstruct or maintain or cause to be
erected, located or relocated or reconstructed or maintained within the
limits of the City of Long Branch any sign or signs greater than six
square feet in area without first having obtained and having in force
and effect a permit for the location of such sign or signs from the
Construction Code Official. [Amended 5-12-1983 by Ord. No. 1100;
7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1110]
B. Application information and contents. Any persons desiring to procure
a permit to maintain a sign in the City of Long Branch shall file with the
Construction Code Official a written application, which shall contain an
accurate description of the location or proposed location where such
sign is to be erected and a diagram of each sign that the applicant
desires to erect, alter, locate or relocate, use or maintain. Such
application shall be signed by the applicant, who shall also indicate his
post office address and supply any and all information that the
Construction Code Official may reasonably require in order to
determine properly whether the proposed location of the sign complies
with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Inspection of premises; issuance procedure. The Construction Code
Official upon receipt of an application shall examine the premises upon
which it is proposed to erect the sign, and if the proposed structure is in
compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws
and ordinances of the City of Long Branch, the Construction Code
Official shall then issue the permit. If the work authorized under a
permit has not been completed within four months after the date of
issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
A. Causes for revocation. A permit to erect or maintain a sign may be
revoked for any one or more of the following causes:
(1) Whenever the application used in obtaining a permit is knowingly
false or misleading.
(2) Whenever any of the provisions of this chapter are violated.
(3) Whenever a licensed structure is not being maintained in a safe,
sound and good condition.
B. Notice; hearing. No permit shall be revoked for any of the above causes
until a five-day notice has been given the permittee, which five-day
§ 284-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-16
276:521
§ 284-17. Fees.
The fees to be paid to the City for the erection of each sign and for each of
the conforming signs now erected in the City as of October 22, 1974, shall
be:
§ 284-18. Display of permit tag.
The Construction Code Official or other designated City official shall issue
a tag for each sign, which shall be permanently attached to or displayed on
each sign, billboard or structure so that it may be readily ascertained that a
permit has been issued for each use.
§ 284-19. Appeals.
If any person, firm or corporation claims a special hardship by reason of any
ruling which has been or may be imposed by the Construction Code Official,
an appeal may be made to the Board of Adjustment, and its determination
shall be final.
§ 284-20. Amendments.
Adoption of amendments to this chapter shall be in accordance with the
enabling legislation of the State of New Jersey.
notice shall be served either personally or by first-class mail. Any
permittee will be given a hearing thereon by the City, if promptly
requested, in writing, within a five-day period, addressed to the
Construction Code Official. (Should be specific determination of body to
hold hearing.)
C. Removal of sign, advertising structure, space or wall. When a permit for
a sign is revoked, the permittee shall remove the sign, advertising
structure or space within 10 days from the date of the revocation of the
permit.
(1) Failure to remove. Whenever a person fails to remove an
advertising structure or space after the expiration date of the
removal notice, legal proceedings may be instituted against said
person or the power of removal may be exercised.
(2) City removal, costs. Whenever the removal power is exercised for
the elimination of a violation, the cost and expense incurred may be
charged against the person responsible for it. A bill rendered for
the cost of the removal, unless paid on demand, shall bear legal
interest charges, and collection shall be made accordingly.
A. Signs not exceeding 10 square feet: $10 minimum fee.
B. Signs exceeding 10 square feet: $1 per square foot.
C. Relocation permit: $5.
§ 284-16 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-21
276:522
§ 284-21. Interpretation; conflict with other regulations.
The provisions of this chapter set forth minimum requirements for
promotion of the health, safety and public welfare, and whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive,
or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 284-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1110; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 284-21 SALES, SPECIAL § 284-22
276:523
Chapter 290
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Earth removal in parks — See Ch. 247.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Disturbing soil for building tennis
courts — See Ch. 312, § 312-4H.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 284-22 LONG BRANCH CODE § 284-22
290:524
ARTICLE I
Soil Removal Regulations
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 17-2 of the 1971 Code]
§ 290-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level
or otherwise alter or change the location or contour. This term shall not be
construed to include cultivation, plowing or spading or any other operation
with regard to the soil which is generally associated with the tilling thereof
for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
OWNER — Any person, including corporations, seized in fee simple of any
lot or subdivision or having any interest or estate which would permit
effective possession thereof or dominion thereover.
SOIL — Any earth, clay, loam, gravel, stone, sand, dirt or rock without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — In its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth and which
supports vegetation.
§ 290-2. Permit required. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No. 717]
No person shall move, or allow to be moved, soil for sale or for use other
than on the premises from which this soil shall be taken unless and until a
soil permit has been obtained from the Building Department. An exception
is made to the holder of a current building permit who must excavate on the
site as required for the proper construction of the projected building. In no
case will there be allowed the removal of topsoil from any land site within
the city limits.
§ 290-3. Map of premises. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No. 717]
The Building Department shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Construction Code Official an
application requesting a permit, together with a map of the premises
showing the present contour lines and the proposed contour grades which
would result from such movement of soil in relation to the topography of the
premises. The proposed contour lines and proposed contour grades shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the City Engineer and the Building
Department. No permit for soil movement shall be issued until the map
has been filed and until the proposed contour lines and grades have been
approved by the City Engineer and the Building Department.
§ 290-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 290-4
290:525
§ 290-4. Record of permits. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No. 717]
The form of the soil permit shall be prescribed by the Building Department,
and a record of all permits issued shall be kept by that office.
§ 290-5. Fee.
No soil permit shall be issued until a fee of $25 shall be paid by the owner
or applicant to the city, together with a charge of $.01 per cubic yard for
each cubic yard of soil to be removed from the land.
§ 290-6. Bond requirements. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No.
717]
No permit for soil removal shall be granted to an applicant or owner unless
the owner or applicant files with the city a bond with satisfactory surety,
the amount to be determined after report of the City Engineer and the
Building Department as to necessities and requirements in the undertaking,
which bond be conditioned that the work of soil removal shall comply with
the regulations on the subject and shall be done in accordance with the
grades and contour lines approved by the City Engineer and the Building
Department. The top layer of arable soil to a depth of 11 inches shall be set
aside and retained, to be thereafter respread over the area when the rest of
the removal has been completed, and repairs at the expense of the owner
or applicant shall be made to any street or streets used in transportation of
soil if the Building Department or Construction Code Official shall consider
repairs are necessary because of such use of the streets. The work shall be
done properly without detriment to adjoining property or detriment to the
city without leaving any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and streets
shall be leveled off properly and cleared of debris; the owner or applicant
will pay the cost of inspection and supervision incurred by the City Engineer
and the Building Department in examination and inspection during the
progress of the soil removal.
§ 290-7. Regulations. [Amended 12-26-1973 by Ord. No. 717]
A. When permission has been granted for the removal of soil, the owner or
person in charge of removal shall conduct the operation so that there
shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner
that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded
to conform with the contour lines and grades approved by the City
Engineer and the Building Department.
B. The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil
when permission has been duly granted shall not take away the top
layer of arable soil to a depth of 11 inches, but such top layer of arable
soil to a depth of 11 inches shall be set aside for retention on the
premises and shall be respread over the premises when the rest of the
soil has been removed, pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by
the City Engineer and the Building Department.
§ 290-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 290-7
290:526
§ 290-8. Violations and penalties.108
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
C. To promote and preserve the health and welfare of the people of the
city, it is ordained that all the work described in this article be
performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any
working day.
108. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 290-8
290:527

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 697 (Sec. 17-3 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 290-9. Permit required.
No person or party, nor any agent or representative, shall make ground
excavations or change land levels or contours or deposit or spread ground
or soil fills or build up the levels thereof upon his land and premises, or
lands and premises of another, without first making written application for
the same to and obtaining a permit from the City Engineer.
§ 290-10. Refusal to grant permit.
Such permit shall not be granted when the doing of such works would,
or may have the tendency to, cause the flow, collection, accumulation or
increase the flow, collection or accumulation of rain or surface waters upon
the adjoining lands or premises of another or others or create stagnant
pools or moisture areas thereon or increase the same; provided, however,
where proper and adequate drains or safeguards to prevent the same are,
in the opinion of the City Engineer, provided for in connection with the
work, such permit shall be granted. Any person or party may have a hearing
before the City Council, from an adverse determination of the City Engineer.
§ 290-11. Fee.
To compensate for the reasonable expense of administering this article, a
fee of $10 shall be payable upon application for a permit.
§ 290-12. Regulations.
§ 290-13. Violations and penalties.109
The performance or permitting of any matter prohibited by this article is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Each violation of this article, or
any provision thereof, shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. Each
day work performed in violation thereof is done or is completed or remains
shall constitute a separate violation. Each violation of this article shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. No person shall permit the accumulation, collection or deposit of rain
surface waters on his grounds to form stagnant water pools or ponds,
but shall properly drain off the same.
B. No leaders or drains shall be constructed, installed or maintained in
such manner as to cast rainwater upon the adjoining property of others.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 290-13
290:529
Chapter 293
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Solid Waste Handling — See Ch. 5,
§ 5-12D.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 125.
Littering — See Ch. 215.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 262.
§ 290-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 290-13
290:530
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 293-1. Purpose.
It is hereby determined and declared to be in the best interests of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents, citizens and taxpayers of the
City of Long Branch for the City to provide for the collection and disposal
of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials within the City. The
purpose of this chapter is to establish the terms and conditions under which
such services shall be provided. It is also the intention of this chapter
to comply with the requirements of the P.L. 1989, c. 299, as amended
and supplemented, relating to the provision of services to qualified private
communities, as well as to comply with the requirements of P.L. 2001, c.
25, as amended and supplemented, relating to the provision of services to
multifamily dwellings, as promulgated by the New Jersey State Legislature.
§ 293-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as
follows:
ALUMINUM — Only disposable items made of aluminum, including
aluminum containers used for soda, beer or other beverages. Excluded are
foil, wrappers, containers for food, construction siding, screen frames and
lawn furniture.
ANIMAL and FOOD PROCESSING WASTES — Processing waste materials
generated in canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants or similar
industries, including animal manure when intended for disposal and not
reuse. Also included are dead animals. Animal manure, when intended for
reuse or composting, is to be managed in accordance with the criteria
and standards developed by the Department of Agriculture as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 4:9-38.
ASHES — The solid matter remaining after the combustion of wood, coal,
coke and any and all combustible materials used for heating purposes.
BRUSH — Waste materials, branches, stumps, limbs and clippings,
measuring not more than six inches in diameter, from trees, shrubs, hedges
and other garden or yard plantings. Brush does not include grass clippings
and stumps exceeding six inches in diameter.[Amended 1-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-18]
BULK WASTE — Large items of waste material such as appliances,
furniture, glass (window and door), carpets and padding and cable.
Discarded automobile and cycle tires collected from residential properties
are also included in this category. Bulk waste does not include construction
and demolition waste, discarded truck tires, discarded trailer tires or
discarded tires of any type from nonresidential properties. [See § 293M(12)
for acceptable and excluded items.][Amended 1-9-2019 by Ord. No.
30-18]
§ 293-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-2
290:531
CABLE — Discarded wire cable or wire rope, whether spooled or loose.
CHIPBOARD and PAPERBOARD — Single-ply paper packaging, such as
cereal boxes and gift boxes.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest in the corporation or association is
entitled to possess and occupy, for dwelling purposes, a house, apartment
or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association, or to
purchase a unit of housing, constructed or erected by the corporation or
association.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of real property ownership provided for under
the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:88-1 et seq.).
CONSTRUCTION and DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste building material and
rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and/or demolition
operations on houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other
structures. The following materials may be found in construction and
demolition waste: treated and untreated wood scrap, including wood
shingles; concrete, asphalt, bricks, blocks and other masonry; plaster,
Sheetrock and wallboard; roofing materials; nonasbestos building
insulation; and other miscellaneous materials; but shall not include other
solid waste types or dirt.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — The brown, heavy cardboard usually found
in boxes used for packing materials (two layers with a waffle layer in
between), including brown kraft grocery bags.
DRY INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Waste materials resulting from manufacturing,
industrial and research and development processes and operations, and
which are not hazardous in accordance with the standards and procedures
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:26G. Also included are nonhazardous oil spill cleanup
waste, dry nonhazardous pesticides, dry nonhazardous chemical waste and
residue from the operations of a scrap metal shredding facility.
ELECTRONIC RECYCLING — [Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 20-11]
COMPUTER — An electric, magnetic, optical, electrochemical, or other
high-speed data processing device performing logical, arithmetic, or
storage function, and may include both a computer central processing
unit and a monitor.
A.
COVERED ELECTRONIC DEVICE — A desktop or personal computer,
computer monitor, portable computer, or television sold to a consumer.
B.
MONITOR — A separate video display component of a computer,
whether sold separately or together with a computer central processing
unit and computer box, and includes a cathode ray tube, liquid crystal
display, gas plasma, digital light processing, or other image projection
technology, greater than four inches measured diagonally, and its case,
interior wires and circuitry, cable to the central processing unit, and
power cord.
C.
§ 293-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-2
290:532
FEE SIMPLE COMMUNITY — A private community which consists of
individually owned lots or units and provides for common or shared
elements or interests in real property.
FOOD WASTE — Consists of putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable
waste incidental to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GARBAGE — Nonputrescible solid waste, contaminated paper, food waste,
nonrecyclable plastics, ceramics, blue and fiat glass and other similar
materials, excluding building materials and household hazardous waste.
GLASS — Products made from silica or sand, soda, ash and limestone, the
product being transparent and translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling of various matters, including food, beverages and medicine. Does
not include light bulbs, glassware, ceramics or blue or flat glass, commonly
known as "window glass."
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE and COMPUTER PAPER — This paper includes white
letterhead, copy paper and computer paper.
ORPHAN DEVICE — A covered electronic device for which no
manufacturer can be identified, or for which the original manufacturer
no longer exists.
D.
TELEVISION — A stand-alone display system containing a cathode
ray tube or any other type of display primarily intended to receive
video programming via broadcast, having a viewable area greater than
four inches measured diagonally, able to adhere to standard consumer
video formats and having the capability of selecting different broadcast
channels and support sound capability.
E.
VIDEO DISPLAY — An output surface having viewable area greater
than four inches when measured diagonally that displays moving
graphical images or a visual representation of image sequences or
pictures, showing a number of quickly changing images on a screen in
fast succession to create the illusion of motion, including, if applicable,
a device that is an integral part of the display and cannot be easily
removed from the display by the consumer that produces the moving
image on the screen. A video display typically uses a cathode ray tube,
liquid crystal display, gas plasma, digital light processing, or other
image projection technology.
F.
Items accepted include answering machines, compact disc players,
fax machines, scanners, hard drives, laptops, mobile phones, modems,
microwave ovens, pagers, personal computers (CPU, monitors,
keyboards, mouse, and peripherals), printers, printed circuit boards,
radios, remote controls, stereos, tape players, telephones/telephone
equipment and VCRs.
G.
Residents are responsible for removal of any personal data contained
on electronic devices and computer hard drives.
H.
§ 293-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-2
290:533
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — The form of real property ownership
provided for under the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq.).
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Includes wet paint, lawn and garden
chemicals, household cleaners, gasoline, motor oil, antifreeze, mercury
thermostat switches, wet or dry batteries and other toxins.
METAL — All products made of metal, to include appliances such as
washing machines, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot-water heaters and
scrap metal, including construction siding, screen frames and lawn
furniture. [See § 293 M(13) for acceptable and excluded items.][Amended
1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 30-18]
MIXED PAPER — Includes unwanted mail, greeting cards, gift wrap,
magazines, books (with hard covers removed), phone books and other scrap
paper.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which five or more dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes except hotels,
motels or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined under Subsection (j) of section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Nonrecyclable waste originating in the
community from private residences, commercial establishments (including
but not limited to restaurants, stores, markets, theaters, hotels and
warehouses), institutional establishments (including but not limited to
schools, hospitals, research institutions and public buildings) and industrial
establishments. Municipal solid waste shall include animal and
foodprocessing wastes, ashes, chipboard and paperboard, food waste,
garbage and trash. The following materials are not included as part of
municipal solid waste: recyclable materials, construction and demolition
waste, household hazardous waste, dry industrial waste, laboratory,
infectious and/or medical wastes, grass clippings, dirt, bulk waste, tires,
brush and any other matter not specifically permitted.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES — The collection and
disposal of municipal solid waste by the City of Long Branch.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded, however, are all magazines
or other periodicals as well as all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative, fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
§ 293-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-2
290:534
related to its construction, comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is provided for by a not-for-profit entity consisting
exclusively of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or
garden apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives
monthly rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be
considered a qualified private community. No "proprietary campground
facility," as defined in section 1 of P.L. 1993, c. 258 (N.J.S.A. 45:22A-49 et
al.), shall be considered to be a qualified private community.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items which must be source separated
from other solid wastes for recycling and eventual reuse. As used in this
chapter, the term "recyclable materials" shall refer to newspaper, mixed
paper, glass, tin and steel food and beverage containers, aluminum food and
beverage containers, stumps and large tree parts, grass, leaves, concrete
and asphalt, hazardous and liquid waste, tires, appliances containing Freon
(e.g., refrigerators, air conditioners and dehumidifiers), metal products,
white goods (large metal appliances such as washers and dryers), and
batteries (household and automotive). In addition to the items specified
herein, high-grade office and computer paper and corrugated cardboard are
considered to be recyclable materials from commercial, institutional and
industrial establishments. The term "recyclable materials" also includes any
other matter or items which is/are banned from disposal at the Monmouth
County Reclamation Center Landfill.
SOLID WASTE — The term "solid waste" is a universal term which refers
to all nonrecyclable waste produced by private residences, commercial,
institutional and industrial establishments and any other properties located
within the City. This item includes all materials, whether or not they are
collectible under the municipal solid waste collection services program.
TRASH — Ashes, plastic materials, ceramics, blue and flat glass,
nonputrescible solid waste, contaminated paper and other similar materials,
excepting building materials and construction and demolition waste.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Waste materials from farms, nurseries and
greenhouses that are produced from the raising of plants. This waste
includes such crop residues as plant stalks, hulls, leaves and tree wastes
processed through a wood chipper.
§ 293-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-2
290:535

ARTICLE II
Municipal Solid Waste, Bulk Waste and Brush
§ 293-3. General requirements.
A. The City of Long Branch shall provide municipal solid waste collection
services to all real properties located within the City, subject to the
terms, conditions and limitations contained in this chapter. Such
services shall include pickup of the items included in the definition of
"municipal solid waste," which may be commingled.
B. The City of Long Branch shall also provide for the collection and
disposal of bulk waste and brush from residential properties located
within the City in accordance with the terms and conditions contained
in this chapter.
C. The services referenced in Subsections A and B above shall be provided
curbside along public roads and streets that have been dedicated to and
accepted by the City. Employees or agents of the City shall not be
required to enter upon private property in order to remove municipal
solid waste, bulk waste or brush, and such services shall be limited to
curbside collection, except as specifically provided in subsequent
sections of this chapter.
D. The date(s) and frequency of collection by the City or the City's
authorized agents shall be in accordance with a schedule to be
established by the Department of Public Works. Any changes or
deviation in the schedule of collections will be announced and made
public by the City.
E. The municipal solid waste collection services provided by the City or
the City's authorized agents shall not include pickup of the following
items, and such items must be disposed of through private arrangement
of the property owner, lessee or occupant, at their own expense:
(1) Construction and demolition waste.
(2) Household hazardous waste.
(3) Dry industrial waste.
(4) Laboratory, infectious and/or medical wastes.
(5) Grass clippings.
(6) Dirt.
(7) Any other matter not specifically permitted.
F. Under no circumstances shall any of the materials referenced in
Subsection E above be collected by the City or the City's authorized
agents, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any property owner,
lessee or occupant to place such materials (either separately or
§ 293-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-3
290:537
commingled with other materials) for collection by the City. However,
a property owner, lessee 5 or occupant may arrange for the disposal of
construction and demolition waste by the City or the City's authorized
agents through the temporary use of a City-owned dumpster, as set
forth in more detail in § 293-5 of this chapter.
G. All municipal solid waste that is intended to be disposed of through the
City's municipal solid waste collection services shall be thoroughly and
completely drained of all liquids.
H. All municipal solid waste that is intended to be disposed of through the
City's municipal solid waste collection services shall be placed in a
container(s) made of galvanized iron or heavy-duty plastic, or in a
heavy-duty plastic bag(s), for pickup. All containers and bags shall be
covered or closed, as applicable, at all times. The term "container" shall
include a receptacle, can or barrel. Containers shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) All containers shall have a capacity of not more than 32 gallons and
shall not exceed 50 pounds when filled.
(2) All containers shall be water tight.
(3) All containers shall be provided with suitable handles and a tightfitting
cover that will prevent access of flies and other insects to the
contents.
(4) All containers shall at no time be filled any higher than three inches
below the top, shall be kept covered and in an upright position and
shall be regularly disinfected.
I. All municipal solid waste that is intended to be disposed of through the
City's municipal solid waste collection services shall not be mixed or
commingled with any matter not specifically permitted.
J. Each property or individual dwelling unit or individual commercial,
institutional, industrial or other type of unit, as applicable, shall be
limited to a total of four containers or four heavy-duty plastic bags of
municipal solid waste per unit per pickup day. Containers or bags of
leaves shall not be included in the computation of the number of
containers or bags of municipal solid waste.
K. Property owners, lessees or occupants may agree to forgo the
municipal solid waste collection services provided by the City and
provide for their own collection and disposal services through private
arrangement at their own expense. if so, then such property owners,
lessees or occupants must advise the Director of the Department of
Public Works of such arrangement and provide the name, address and
telephone number of their hauler to the Director, along with such other
information as the Director of the Department of Public Works may
require.
§ 293-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-3
290:538
L. If any property or individual dwelling unit or individual commercial,
institutional, industrial or other type of unit produces a quantity of
municipal solid waste that regularly exceeds the limitations established
by this chapter, then the Department of Public Works may require that
the property or unit provide a dumpster for its solid waste collection
and disposal. All dumpsters shall comply with the requirements of
§ 293-5 of this chapter.
M. Bulk waste.
(1) Bulk waste shall be collected by the City or the City s authorized
agents from residential properties only.
(2) Bulk waste shall not include any materials other than those which
are specifically included in the definition of "bulk waste" as set
forth in this chapter.
(3) Bulk waste shall be collected by the City or the City's authorized
agents separately from municipal solid waste; no bulk waste shall
be accepted by the City or the City's authorized agents through the
City's municipal solid waste collection service program. Residents
may bring bulk items to the Recycling Yard for disposal with
identification showing them to be a resident. [Amended 1-9-2019
by Ord. No. 30-18]
(4) Bulk waste shall be collected every Wednesday, the first week and
third week of the month for those living south of Broadway and on
Wednesday, the second week and fourth week of the month for
those living north of Broadway, except when notice has been posted
of a "no collection" for a particular pickup date. Posting to be on the
City website and social media platforms. [Amended 1-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 30-18]
(5) All bulk waste shall be placed at curbside for pickup. Prior to
removal from the building and placement at the curb for pickup, all
mattresses and box springs shall be completely enclosed in durable
plastic sheeting or bags and sealed. [Amended 9-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 20-17]
(6) No more than eight items of bulk waste, including containers and/
or bags, may be left for collection on each appropriate Wednesday
designated for pickup. Residents are prohibited from combining
their bulk waste with their neighbor's bulk waste. [Amended
1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 30-18]
(7) Refrigerator doors shall be removed from all refrigerators prior to
being collected by the City as part of bulk waste pickup.
(8) Discarded automobile and cycle tires, from residential properties
only, are collectible as part of bulk waste pickup. Discarded truck
tires, discarded trailer tires or tires of any type from nonresidential
properties are not collectible as part of bulk waste pickup.
§ 293-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-3
290:539
(9) The Department of Public Works may refuse to pick up any item(s)
of bulk waste which may, in the discretion of the Director of the
Department, cause damage to the City's collection vehicle(s).
(10) Bulk waste which is not properly placed for collection in
conformance with the requirements set forth herein shall not be
collected by the City.
(11) It shall be a violation of this chapter for bulk waste to be left for
collection in any manner other than as specified by this chapter.
(12) Acceptable items collected shall include household items such as:
[Added 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 30-18]
BULK WASTE ACCEPTABLE
Furniture to include sofas, chairs, tables, wooden bed frames,
couches, mirrors, breakfronts.
Rugs, carpeting, padding; cut to four foot lengths, rolled up and
tied no more than 18 inches rolled.
Plastic lawn furniture and toys.
Mattresses and box springs shall be completely enclosed in
durable plastic sheeting or bags and sealed. [See Subsection
M(5) above.]
Wood pallets.
All containers and drums must have one end removed to ensure
that no liquid, chemical or hazardous materials are present.
Separate metal from other debris.
Wood swing sets must be disassembled and concrete footings
removed for pickup.
Resident or homeowner construction debris: The City offers a
dumpster service (§ 293-5K) to residents. All material from
construction, demolition, home repair or alterations performed by
the homeowner or resident. (See bulk waste excluded items
section below for construction debris by contractors.)
BULK WASTE EXCLUDED ITEMS.
Car batteries and battery packs found with power tools, laptops,
etc.; regular household A, AA, AAA, C, D, and nine-volt batteries
can be thrown in the trash.
Bricks, concrete blocks, pavers.
Car parts.
Closed barrels or drums.
Concrete or concrete-filled items.
Electronics (televisions, computers, printers, laptops) must be
brought to the Recycling Center, no curbside pickup by the City.
Dirt.
§ 293-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-3
290:540
Hazardous materials.
Liquids of any type.
Paint in cans.
Propane tanks.
Rocks, stones or slate.
Tires. [See Subsection M(8) above].
Vegetative waste (grass, leaves, brush, branches, logs, tree
stumps, etc.).
Construction debris by contractor: Generated material from
excavation, construction, demolition, home repair or alterations is
prohibited from municipal collection. Contact your contractor for
removal of these items. This would include the following items;
kitchen cabinets, sheetrock, wood studs and framing, wood
flooring, toilets, bath tubs, lathe, plaster, tiles, cement, bricks,
concrete, sod, dirt.
METAL ACCEPTABLE
Dishwashers.
Metal lawn furniture.
Shelving units.
Refrigerators (door must be removed).
Window air conditioners.
Washers.
Dryers.
Ovens.
Bikes.
BBO grills (no tanks).
All metal swing sets and basketball hoop stands must be
disassembled and concrete footings removed for pickup.
Lawn mowers drained of gas and oil.
N. Brush.
(1) Brush shall be collected by the City or the City's authorized agents
from residential properties only.
(2) Brush shall be collected by the City or the City's authorized agents
separately from municipal solid waste. No brush shall be accepted
by the City or the City's authorized agents through the City's
municipal solid waste collection service program.
(3) Brush shall be separated from all other items and shall be placed
and piled at the curb for collection no more than seven days prior to
a scheduled and announced collection. Brush will be collected from
§ 293-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-3
290:541
March 15 through June 1 and September 15 through December 31.
Residents may bring brush to the Atlantic Avenue Recycling Center,
with proof of residency in the City, at any time during the year.
Residents doing work on their property between the dates of June
2 through September 14 and January 1 through March 14 must call
DPW for a brush pickup. This applies to residents doing the actual
work. See Subsection N(8) hereof for maximum volume size and if
the work exceeds those limits. When a contractor or landscaper is
doing the work during the above-referenced dates, the contractor
or landscaper is responsible for the removal to a permitted facility.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 7-07; 1-9-2019 by Ord. No.
31-18]
(4) Brush shall not be tied in bundles or bound in any other manner.
(5) Brush shalt not be placed in a loose or haphazard manner such that
the same may be dispersed by wind, forces of nature, passersby or
traffic.
(6) Brush shall not be placed within 10 feet of any storm drain, culvert
or fire hydrant.
(7) Brush piles shall not block or impede the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic and shall not exceed more than three feet into the
street from the curb.
(8) The total amount placed for any single collection shall be as
follows: [Amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 20-17; 1-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-18]
(a) Maximum volume size shall be four feet by three feet by eight
feet.
(b) When the volume of brush exceeds the single collection
amount and would continue to exceed the single collection
amount from work to clear a property, a redesign of the
property, landscape or property maintenance, it will require
the homeowner, contractor or landscaper to retain a dumpster
from a private service for removal or by their own means.
(c) Vehicles with commercial license plates are not permitted to
dump brush at the City Recycling Yard.
(9) Individual branches and other items of brush shall not exceed six
inches in diameter nor four feet in length and shall not exceed 50
pounds to permit handling by one person.
(10) Grass clippings and stumps exceeding six inches in diameter are
not considered brush and shall not be collected. [Amended
1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 31-18]
§ 293-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-3
290:542
(11) Brush which is not properly piled at the edge of the street or placed
for collection in conformance with the requirements set forth
herein shall not be collected by the City.
(12) Residents shall not include lumber, plywood, fence posts, railroad
ties, furniture or other manufactured wood products as part of the
curbside collection of brush, leaves and tree cuttings. [Amended
1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 31-18]
(13) Residents may choose to dispose of brush, leaves and tree cuttings
by reuse and/or composting on their own properties. Brush, leaves
and tree cuttings may be stored within side or rear yards. However,
no brush or tree cuttings may be stored within the required front
yard or street side yard except for curbside collection in
accordance with the standards of this section. [Added 1-9-2019
by Ord. No. 31-18]
(14) Residents who generate more than three cubic yards' worth of
brush waste and who choose not to store the materials on their
property will be required to individually arrange for the pickup and
disposal of the materials by their own means. [Added 1-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-18]
(15)No brush, leaves or tree cuttings shall be placed, stored or
otherwise disposed of on any adjoining private property without
permission of said adjoining property owner. [Added 1-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-18]
(16)No brush, leaves or tree cuttings shall be placed, stored or
otherwise disposed of on any public property. [Added 1-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-18]
(17)No brush or tree cuttings shall be placed, stored or otherwise
disposed of on any common open space area without approval of
the entity controlling said common open space. [Added 1-9-2019
by Ord. No. 31-18]
(18)No brush or tree cuttings shall be placed, stored or otherwise
disposed of within ponds, lakes, streams, swamps, marshes,
wetlands, wetland buffers, conservation easements, nontidal
floodways or similar watercourses. [Added 1-9-2019 by Ord. No.
31-18]
(19) It shall be a violation of this chapter for brush to be left for
collection in any manner other than as specified in this chapter.
[Added 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 31-18]
O. All municipal solid waste, bulk waste and brush shall be stored, prior to
collection, in such a manner as not to become a nuisance or fire hazard
to the occupants of any adjacent unit or property.
§ 293-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-3
290:543
P. No municipal solid waste, bulk waste and brush shall be permitted to
present a nuisance in terms of accessibility by rodents, insects or other
vermin.
Q. All municipal solid waste, bulk waste and brush shall be placed for
pickup at the nearest curb in front of the building or property from
which the municipal solid waste, bulk waste or brush was generated.
Municipal solid waste, bulk waste and/or brush shall not be collected by
the City or the City's authorized agents if the same is placed in front of
adjacent or other properties, i.e., if placed in front of a property other
than that from which it was generated.
R. Municipal solid waste and bulk waste shall not be placed at the curb for
collection earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of
collection. No person shall allow or permit any empty container to
remain on the curb or on any part of the street, sidewalk or adjacent
property for more than 12 hours after the contents thereof have been
collected.
S. When placed curbside, municipal solid waste and bulk waste shall not
block or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and shall not
exceed more than three feet into the street from the curb. Additionally,
municipal solid waste and bulk waste shall not be placed in a loose or
haphazard manner such that the same may be dispersed by wind, forces
of nature, passersby or traffic.
T. No municipal solid waste, bulk waste or brush collection services will
be provided on New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. No
collection will be made in substitution for those dates.
U. The City reserves the right to suspend municipal solid waste, bulk
waste or brush collection services due to weather conditions when the
depth of snow exceeds three inches or more or public or private roads
are not reasonably passable due to inadequate plowing.
V. The City reserves the right to suspend or terminate the provision of
municipal solid waste, bulk waste or brush collection services from any
property if, in the discretion of the Director of the Department of Public
Works, such collection presents a hazard to the City's employees or
authorized agents, or to the general public.
W. No person shall throw, lay, deposit or leave in any vacant lot or open
space, yard, street, avenue, alley, highway, sidewalk, parking space or
lot any item of solid waste, bulk waste, brush, grass clippings,
substances of a like nature or any other debris in a manner other than
as specifically permitted by this chapter.
X. No person shall burn any solid waste, dead matter or any other type of
refuse.
§ 293-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-3
290:544
§ 293-4. Qualified private communities and multifamily dwellings.
Y. It shall be a violation of this chapter to transport or import into the City
any solid waste for the purpose of dumping the same, or placing the
same for municipal collection, within the City of Long Branch.
Z. Leaves. Leaves shall be separated from all other brush and placed only
in recyclable paper bags, except during the months of April 1 through
May 31 and November 1 through December 31. All such recyclable
paper bags shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight when filled. During the
months of April 1 through May 31 and November 1 through December
31, when the volume of leaves makes it impractical to place them in
bags, leaves shall be placed in piles at the edge of the street for
collection by the City. Piles of leaves shall not block or impede the flow
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall not exceed more than three
feet into the street from the curb. Any leaves which are not properly
contained or piled at the edge of the street shall not be collected by the
City. [Added 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 31-18]
A. All of the requirements set forth in § 293-3 above shall apply to qualified
private communities and multifamily dwellings located within the City.
B. The City of Long Branch shall provide for the collection and disposal of
municipal solid waste, bulk waste and brush from all qualified private
communities and multifamily dwellings located within the City, under
the same terms and conditions set forth above, except as modified
hereunder.
C. As an alternative to providing such services to qualified private
communities and multifamily dwellings, the City may determine to
provide a reimbursement payment on an annual basis to a qualified
private community or multifamily dwelling for the actual cost of
providing such services. Under no circumstances, however, shall this
reimbursement payment be higher than the amount that the City would
have expended on the services if the City had provided the services
directly to the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling,
calculated as if the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling
was located a long the public roads and streets of the City and the
services provided curbside.
D. If the City determines that it wishes to provide a reimbursement
payment to a qualified private community or multifamily dwelling for
the actual cost of providing such services, then the terms and
conditions governing such payment shall be set forth in a written
agreement to be entered into between the City and the qualified private
community or multifamily dwelling. Such agreement shall be in the
form required by N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.1 et seq or N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.4 et seq.,
as applicable.
E. Should the City opt to provide the above-referenced reimbursement
payment to a multifamily dwelling, then such payments shall be phased
§ 293-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-4
290:545
in over a five year period in accordance with the percentage
requirements set forth in Section 4, P.L. 2001, c. 25 (N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.5).
F. If the City determines to provide such services directly to the qualified
private community or multifamily dwelling, then the City shall provide
the services in the same fashion as the City provides on the public roads
and streets to other properties within the City, in accordance with the
schedule to be determined by the Department of Public Works.
G. Unless the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling makes
arrangements with the City for the services to be provided from a
dumpster, pursuant to § 293-5 of this chapter, then the containers or
heavy-duty plastic bags shall be left at the nearest curb of the
building(s) to be serviced.
H. Nothing contained herein shall require the City to enter upon private
property to provide the services enumerated in this section or to
operate any City owned or leased vehicles or any other equipment or to
provide any of the services referenced herein upon, along or in relation
to any road or street in any qualified private community or multi-family
dwelling which either:
(1) Is not accepted for dedication to public use; or
(2) Does not meet all municipal standards and specifications for such
dedication, except for width.
I. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Subsection H above, the
City may determine to enter upon private property or to operate City
owned or leased vehicles or other equipment and to provide the
services referenced herein upon, along or in relation to any road or
street which does not qualify under the requirements of Subsection H,
so long as:
(1) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling enters into
a written indemnity and hold harmless agreement with the City, in
a form to be approved by the City Attorney; and
(2) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling presents
proof satisfactory to the City Attorney that the City has been listed
as an additional insured on the liability insurance policies covering
the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling; and
(3) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling pays the
cost of any insurance rider(s) required by the City to enable
municipal vehicles to operate on private roads and streets within
the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling; and
(4) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling performs
such other matters as are required by the City which shall be set
forth in the written agreement referenced above.
§ 293-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-4
290:546
§ 293-5. Dumpsters.
J. In order to be eligible for municipal solid waste collection services from
the City or the City's authorized agents, a qualified private community
or multifamily dwelling shall be required to comply with all recycling
requirements generally applicable to all other residential properties
within the City.
A. Any owner, lessee or occupant of real property within the City may wish
to utilize dumpster(s) for the collection and disposal of its municipal
solid waste. Additionally, pursuant to § 293-3, if the Department of
Public Works has determined that a property produces a quantity of
municipal solid waste that regularly exceeds the limitations permitted
for collection on pickup day(s), then such property shall be required to
utilize a dumpster(s). The City shall provide municipal dumpster pickup
service to all residential properties within the City under the terms and
conditions contained in this section. Effective with the adoption of this
chapter, however, the City shall no longer provide municipal dumpster
pickup service to nonresidential properties, and the owners, lessees or
occupants of such properties must arrange for and fund the disposal of
solid waste from their dumpster(s) through private means at their own
expense.
B. For all properties that are eligible for municipal dumpster pickup
service, such service shall be provided by the City on the same day(s) as
scheduled by the Department of Public Works for the pickup of regular
municipal solid waste.
C. For all properties that are eligible for municipal dumpster pickup
service, dumpsters shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) All dumpsters shall be provided by the property owner, lessee or
occupant, as applicable, at their own expense.
(2) All dumpsters shall be approved by the Department of Public Works
and the Department of Buildings and Development prior to use.
Said approval shall pertain to size, location and design. A zoning
permit shall be required for all dumpsters.
(3) All dumpsters shall be rear loading and shall be equipped with an
operational and/or functional lid.
(4) All dumpsters shall be sized to accept one to eight cubic yards of
refuse and shall be able to adequately accommodate the volume of
refuse generated at any given time from the particular user.
(5) All dumpsters shall be kept clean and in good repair and shall not
present a nuisance in terms of accessibility by rodents, insects or
other vermin.
(6) All dumpsters shall be placed in an area accessible for pickup.
§ 293-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-5
290:547
(7) All recipients of dumpster service from the City will be required to
provide a road for ingress and egress, which must be hard-surfaced
and of a design to support the City's vehicles used for pickup
services. Any road which, in the City's opinion, is hazardous may be
cause for termination of this service or, if a condition occurs during
the provision of service, may result in a discontinuance of the
service until the road hazard is eliminated. Additionally, a hard and
level surface must be provided by the recipient of service for the
placement of the dumpster container. This area must be kept free
from parked vehicles at all times, be adequately drained and,
during inclement weather, be kept free from snow.
D. The City reserves the right to mandate the size of the dumpster(s) and
frequency of pickups required based upon the volume of municipal solid
waste generated from a particular use.
E. If additional service is necessary to pick up municipal solid waste from
dumpsters, i.e., more than the number of collections regularly provided
by the City on a weekly basis, then additional service shall be provided
by the City for an additional fee of $1.25 per dwelling unit per pickup.
F. The City reserves the right to forego dumpster collections under any of
the following circumstances:
(1) If the dumpster contains noncollectible refuse (such as
construction and demolition waste or household hazardous waste,
etc.) that is commingled with municipal solid waste.
(2) If the dumpster contains recyclable materials that are commingled
with municipal solid waste.
(3) If the dumpster contains any material(s) that is not specifically
permitted to be accepted under the City's municipal solid waste
collection service program.
(4) If dogs or other animals are permitted to roam unsupervised in or
near the dumpster area, which may pose a potential hazard to the
City's employees.
(5) If, in the discretion of the Department of Public Works, there exists
any hazard to the City's employees, vehicles or equipment.
(6) If, in the discretion of the Department of Public Works, construction
and demolition debris or other dangerous items are so situated in
or near the dumpster area as to constitute a hazard to the City's
employees or equipment.
(7) Upon the failure of the recipient of services to comply with
required repairs or replacements of the dumpster as mandated by
the Department of Public Works.
§ 293-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-5
290:548
(8) If, after receiving a warning from the City, the recipient of services
continues to dispose of matters that are not permitted to be
disposed of with municipal solid waste.
G. The City shall not be required to enter onto private property in order to
service dumpsters except as provided in Subsection H below.
H. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Subsection G above, the
City may determine to enter onto private property in order to service
dumpsters, so long as:
(1) The recipient of the services enters into a written indemnity and
hold harmless agreement with the City, in a form to be approved by
the City Attorney; and
(2) The recipient of the services presents proof satisfactory to the City
Attorney that the City has been listed as an additional insured on
the liability insurance policies covering the subject property; and
(3) The recipient of the services pays the cost of any insurance rider(s)
required by the City to enable municipal vehicles to operate on
private roads and streets, as applicable, to service the dumpster(s);
and
(4) The recipient of the services performs such other matters as are
required by the City, which shall be set forth in the written
agreement referenced above.
I. It shall he a requirement for all recipients of municipal dumpster
services to comply with the City's recyclable requirements as a
condition to the continued provision of dumpster services from the City.
J. All City-owned properties shall receive municipal dumpster pickup
service from the City at no cost.
K. Use of City-owned dumpsters.
(1) Upon request, and subject to payment of the fee set forth below, the
City shall provide City-owned dumpsters for short-term use by
owners, lessees or occupants of property for the disposal of
municipal solid waste, bulk waste or construction and demolition
waste. The City shall provide for the collection and disposal of such
items.
(2) The fee for short-term use of City-owned dumpsters shall be $350
per collection, which shall be payable in advance at the Department
of Public Works. [Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
§ 293-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-5
290:549

ARTICLE III
Recycling
§ 293-6. General requirements.
A. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees or occupants of real
property within the City of Long Branch to separate recyclable
materials from all other matter. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any property owner, lessee or occupant to commingle recyclable
materials with any other nonrecyclable matter and place the same for
collection by the City.
B. The City shall provide for the collection and disposal of certain
recyclable materials, as specified below, from all properties located
within the City in accordance with the terms and conditions contained
in this chapter. The City may elect to use municipal personnel to
perform the service or may enter into agreement(s) with qualified
person(s) authorizing them to collect recyclable materials.
C. The City's recyclable service shall be provided curbside along public
roads and streets that have been dedicated to and accepted by the City.
Employees or agents of the City shall not be required to enter upon
private property in order to remove recyclable materials except as
specifically provided in this chapter.
D. The date(s) and frequency of collection by the City or the City's
authorized agent(s) shall be in accordance with a schedule to be
established by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Any
changes or deviation in the schedule of collections will be announced
and made public by the City.
E. The following recyclable materials shall be collected as part of the
City's curbside recyclable collection service:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Mixed paper products.
(3) Glass.
(4) Tin and steel food and beverage containers.
(5) Aluminum food and beverage containers.
(6) Recyclable plastics.
F. All other recyclable materials, as defined earlier in this chapter, shall be
disposed of by the owner, lessee or occupant in the following manner:
(1) Through the City's bulk waste or brush pickup service, if permitted,
depending upon the type of material; or
(2) Through disposal at the City's recyclable dropoff center (location as
determined by the Department of Public Works) or at another
§ 293-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-6
290:551
approved facility. If such disposal is required, then the same shall
be performed by the owner, lessee or occupant through private
means at their own expense.
G. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within the
City shall be required to recycle high-grade office and computer paper
and corrugated cardboard in addition to all of the other items listed in
the definition of recyclable materials in this chapter.
H. All service stations, oil retailers and motor vehicle inspection or
reinspection stations with used oil holding tanks shall accept up to five
gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil from
cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles and shall post a sign informing the
public that they are a "Used Oil Collection Site."
I. Recyclable materials shall not be mixed with any matter not specifically
permitted.
J. All recyclable materials shall be stored, prior to disposal or placement
for collection, in such a manner as not to become a nuisance to the
occupants of any adjacent property.
K. All recyclable materials that are intended to be collected as part of the
City's curbside recyclable collection service, except for newspaper and
mixed paper products, may be commingled and shall he placed for
disposal in a reusable metal or heavy-duty plastic container which is
supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant. All containers must have
handles and shall accommodate a capacity of not more than 32 gallons
and shall not exceed 50 pounds when filled, Recyclable materials shall
not be collected in plastic bags.
L. Each property or individual dwelling unit or individual commercial,
institutional, industrial or other type of unit, as applicable, shall be
limited to a total of four containers of recyclable materials per unit per
pickup day. If any property or individual dwelling unit or individual
commercial, institutional, industrial or other type of unit produces a
quantity of recyclable materials that regularly exceeds the limitations
established by this chapter, then the Department of Public Works may
require that the disposal of recyclable materials from that property be
arranged through private means at the expense of the property owner,
lessee or occupant, as applicable.
M. Newspaper, mixed paper products and corrugated cardboard products
shall be compacted and tied securely in separate bundles with a rope or
cord sufficient in strength to facilitate handling and in a manner to
prevent scattering. Newspaper, mixed paper products and corrugated
cardboard products shall not be commingled but shall be tied and
bound separately. The bundles or packages shall be of a size and weight
to permit ease of handling by one person and shall not exceed 50
pounds in weight. No more than eight separately tied bundles of
corrugated cardboard products shall be collected per unit per pickup.
§ 293-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-6
290:552
No newspaper or mixed paper products shall be collected in plastic
bags.
N. No recyclable containers or bundles of newspaper or mixed paper
products shall be placed at the curb earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the day of collection. No person shall allow or permit any
empty containers to remain on the curb or any part of the street,
sidewalk or adjacent property for more than 12 hours after the contents
thereof have been collected.
O. No person shall throw, lay, deposit or leave in any vacant lot or open
space, yard, street, avenue, alley, highway, sidewalk, parking space or
lot any item of recyclable material in any manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
P. Recyclable materials shall be the property of the City of Long Branch
once placed at the curbside or brought to the City's recyclable dropoff
center. It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized
by the City to pick up or cause to be picked up recyclable materials
after they are placed at the curbside or brought to a dropoff center.
Each such collection and violation hereof shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
Q. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection P above, any owner,
lessee or occupant of any property within the City may donate or sell its
recyclable materials to any person, whether or not operating for profit.
Said person shall not, however, pick up such recyclable materials at
curbside or at any dropoff center.
R. Any private haulers collecting recyclable materials from any property
not serviced by the City's recyclable collection program shall register
with the Recycling Coordinator, providing the name, address and phone
number of their company and the name and address of the property or
establishment from which they are collecting recyclable materials.
S. All owners, lessees or occupants, as applicable, of property not serviced
by the City's recycling collection program shall register with the
Recycling Coordinator the name and address of the private hauler with
whom such person has contracted to provide recycling collection
services.
T. It shall be mandatory for all haulers of recyclable materials from
residential or nonresidential properties not serviced by the municipal
recycling program to provide a record to the City's Recycling
Coordinator of the types and quantities of materials recycled. Weight
receipts and/or letters on official company stationary should clearly
describe the quantity and disposition of each material.
U. It shall be a violation of this chapter to transport or import into the City
any recyclable materials for the purpose of dumping the same, or
placing the same for municipal collection, within the City of Long
Branch. It shall also be a violation of this chapter to deposit at the City's
§ 293-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-6
290:553
§ 293-7. Qualified private communities and multifamily dwellings.
recyclable dropoff center any recyclable materials that were not
utilized within the City.
A. All of the requirements set forth in § 293-6 above shall apply to qualified
private communities and multifamily dwellings located within the City.
B. The City of Long Branch shall provide for the collection and disposal of
certain recyclable materials, as designated in this chapter, from all
qualified private communities and multifamily dwellings located within
the City, under the same terms and conditions set forth in § 293-6,
except as modified hereunder.
C. As an alternative to providing recyclable collection services to qualified
private communities and multifamily dwellings, the City may determine
to provide a reimbursement payment on an annual basis to a qualified
private community or multifamily dwelling for the actual cost of
providing such services. Under no circumstances, however, shall this
reimbursement payment be higher than the amount that the City would
have expended on the services if the City had provided the services
directly to the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling,
calculated as if the dwelling units were located along roads and streets
and the service provided curbside.
D. If the City determines that it wishes to provide a reimbursement
payment to the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling for
the actual cost of providing such services, then the terms and
conditions governing such payment shall be set forth in a written
agreement to be entered into between the City and the qualified private
community or multifamily dwelling. Such agreement shall be in the
form required by N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 40:661.4 et seq.,
as applicable.
E. Should the City opt to provide the above-referenced reimbursement
payment to a multifamily dwelling, then such payments shall be phased
in over a five-year period in accordance with the percentage
requirements set forth in Section 4, P.L. 2001, c. 25 (N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.5).
F. If the City determines to provide such services directly to the qualified
private community or multifamily dwelling, then the City shall provide
the services in the same fashion as the City provides on the public roads
and streets to other properties within the City, in accordance with the
schedule to be determined by the Department of Public Works.
G. Nothing contained herein shall require the City to enter upon private
property to provide the services enumerated in this Section, or to
operate any City owned or leased vehicles or any other equipment, or to
provide any of the services referenced herein upon along or in relation
to any road or street in any qualified private community or multifamily
dwelling which either:
§ 293-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-7
290:554
§ 293-8. Recycling coordinator.
The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
within the Division of Solid Waste. The Recycling Coordinator shall perform
such duties and responsibilities as are required to facilitate the orderly
process of collection and disposal of recyclable materials within the City,
under the supervision and direction of the Director of the Department
of Public Works. The Recycling Coordinator shall make recommendations
to the Director of the Department of Public Works concerning the
promulgation of reasonable rules and regulations for recycling, the days
and times for collection of recyclable materials, the sorting, transportation,
sale and/or marketing of recyclable materials, and shall perform such other
duties as required by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
(1) Is not accepted for dedication to public use; or
(2) Does not meet all municipal standards and specifications for such
dedication, except for width.
H. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Subsection G above, the
City may determine to enter upon private property or to operate City
owned or leased vehicles or other equipment and to provide the
services referenced herein upon, along or in relation to any road or
street which does not qualify under the requirements of Subsection H,
so long as:
(1) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling enters into
a written indemnity and hold harmless agreement with the City, in
a form to be approved by the City Attorney; and
(2) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling presents
proof satisfactory to the City Attorney that the City has been listed
as an additional insured on the liability insurance policies covering
the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling; and
(3) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling pays the
cost of any insurance rider(s) required by the City to enable
municipal vehicles to operate on private roads and streets within
the qualified private community or multifamily dwelling; and
(4) The qualified private community or multifamily dwelling performs
such other matters as are required by the City which shall be set
forth in the written agreement referenced above.
§ 293-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-8
290:555

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 293-9. Enforcement authority.
The terms and conditions of this chapter shall be enforced by the
Department of Public Works, the Fire Official, the Fire Prevention Bureau,
the Recycling Coordinator and/or the Police Department of the City of Long
Branch.
§ 293-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of the City of Long
Branch of a violation of the terms or conditions of this chapter, shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of
the Code of the City of Long Branch. In addition to said penalty, the City
shall be permitted to recover any actual costs associated with disposal
of solid waste or recyclable materials in violation of this chapter, and
any other incidental costs occasioned by the City in performing
remedial activities related thereto. As an alternate penalty to any
violation of this chapter, a convicted person may be ordered to perform
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days.
B. Each day that such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
C. Notwithstanding any other penalty contained herein, if the Director of
the Department of Public Works or the Recycling Coordinator
determines that a qualified private community or multifamily dwelling
is in violation of the City's recyclable requirements, then the City or the
City's authorized agents may refuse pickup on the occasion of the
violation, and the City may issue a summons for violation of this
chapter. The City may also seek reimbursement of costs, if applicable.
The City may also provide a warning that subsequent violations shall be
cause for the permanent discontinuance of municipal solid waste and
recycling collection services under this chapter, in accordance with the
provisions set forth below. As an alternative, the City may reduce its
reimbursement payments, if applicable, by an amount equal to the
landfill or disposal costs that would be saved if the recyclable materials
were separated from the other solid waste, bulk waste or brush. No
services shall be permanently terminated nor shall any reimbursement
amount be reduced pursuant to this section, however, unless the
qualified private community or multifamily dwelling has been given 30
day's advance written notice of the proposed termination or
reimbursement amount reduction, During those 30 days, if the qualified
private community or multifamily dwelling is brought into compliance
with the City's recycling requirements, and said compliance is certified
by the Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Recycling
§ 293-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-10
290:557
Coordinator, then the City may continue the regular provision of
services,
D. Notwithstanding any other penalty contained herein, if the Director of
the Department of Public Works or the Recycling Coordinator
determines that any recipient of municipal solid waste collection
services or dumpster pickup services from the City or the City's
authorized agents has disposed of matters that are not permitted to be
disposed of with municipal solid waste, then the City may refuse pickup
on the occasion of the violation, issue a summons for violation of this
chapter and seek reimbursement of costs, if applicable. The City may
also provide a warning that future dumpster collection services (if
applicable) will be in jeopardy if violations continue. If such violations
continue after two written warnings are issued, then the City may
permanently cease the provision of dumpster pickup services (if
applicable) from that particular property.
§ 293-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 293-10
290:558
Chapter 296
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177. Littering — See Ch. 215.
§ 293-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 293-10
290:559

ARTICLE I
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 8-07]
§ 296-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Long Branch, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 296-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Long
Branch, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Long Branch or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
§ 296-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 296-2
290:561
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes but is not limited to leachate
and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
§ 296-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the City of Long Branch any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 296-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Long Branch Police Department
and/or other municipal officials of the City of Long Branch.
§ 296-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
§ 296-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 296-5
290:562
ARTICLE II
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 21-12]
§ 296-6. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are not in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate stormwater system(s)
operated by the City of Long Branch so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 296-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basin, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Long Branch or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMDRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 296-8. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either.
§ 296-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 296-8
290:563
§ 296-9. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 296-8 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
material" means sediment, debris, trash, and floating, suspended, or settled
solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 296-9 below prior to
the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 296-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 296-9
290:564
§ 296-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Long Branch Police Department
and/or other municipal official of the City of Long Branch.
§ 296-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 (as stated in § 1-16 of the
Code of the City of Long Branch) for each storm drain inlet that is not
retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 296-12. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 296-13. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 296-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 296-13
290:565
Chapter 297
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 69.
Soil removal — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land - See Ch. 300.
Trees — See Ch. 319.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 322.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 296-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 296-13
290:566
ARTICLE I
Obstructions
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 16-1 of the 1971 Code]
§ 297-1. Obstruction of or damage to streets.
No person shall obstruct or damage any street or public road in the city by
depositing, placing, dumping, dropping, throwing or spilling stones, earth,
dirt, debris or other materials or things thereon.
§ 297-2. Discharge of liquids.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged waters or other liquids
or semiliquids used for or incidental to commercial or business purposes,
directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, into or upon any public
street or road in the city. The foregoing shall not, however, apply to natural
drainage water or waters, liquids or semiliquids used for the purposes of
cleaning buildings or paved land surfaces that may flow or pass upon a
public street or road.
§ 297-3. Exceptions to prohibitions.
§ 297-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. No structure, equipment or materials of any kind may be placed or
stored upon any street or public road in the city at any time or for any
purpose, unless expressly permitted by law or ordinance and placed in
such manner as not to impede or divert the natural flow of drainage
waters upon or along any street or public road and the gutters or
drainage ditches thereof.
B. The obstruction of any gutter or drainage ditch or any portion thereof
serving the street or public road by filling, otherwise depositing stones,
dirt, debris or other materials or things therein or by any other means
shall be unlawful, but this shall not apply to such materials as may be
carried or deposited therein by natural drainage of surface waters or by
other natural causes.
§ 297-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-4
290:567

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Removal
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 16-2 of the 1971 Code]
§ 297-5. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove or cause to be
constructed or removed any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter or any
part thereof within any public right-of-way in the city without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the Director of Public Works.
§ 297-6. Application information.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Director of
Public Works by the owner of the premises or his agent upon forms provided
by the city and shall contain the following information:
§ 297-7. Fees.
A fee of $5 shall be charged for each permit, and in addition thereto, the
applicant shall pay the cost of all tests which the Director of Public Works
deems necessary. The fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed,
and the cost of all proposed tests shall be paid prior to the issuance of any
permit.
§ 297-8. Specifications.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Director of Public Works deems
necessary in order to determine whether the work will comply with this
article.
A. All materials and work shall be in accordance with city specifications on
file in the office of the Department of Public Works.
§ 297-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-8
290:569
§ 297-9. Notice required.
The applicant shall notify the Department of Public Works at least 24 hours
prior to the time of pouring or laying any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb
or gutter so that the Department may arrange for adequate inspection and
testing.
§ 297-10. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 297-11. Duty to construct or repair. [Amended 12-28-1971 by Ord.
No. 623; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 35-98]
It shall be the duty of any property owner abutting upon a public street or
public sidewalk in the city to construct, repair, alter or relay any sidewalk
or curb, or section thereof.
B. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with city specifications.
C. No concrete sidewalk shall be replaced or covered with blacktop.
D. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and
replaced. The breaking and recapping of curbing is specifically
prohibited.
A. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway apron, curbs or gutters in
a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guaranties required by the Planning Board.
B. The repair or replacement of less than eight linear feet of an existing
sidewalk.
A. In case the owner or occupant of such land shall not comply with the
requirements of this section, it shall be lawful for the Street
Department of the city, upon notice, via service or publication, to the
homeowner, to cause the required work to be done and paid for out of
the moneys of the city available for that purpose.
B. The cost of such work shall be certified by the department or person
having charge thereof to the department or person having charge of the
collection of assessments in the city.
C. Upon filing the certificate, the amount of the cost of such work shall be
and become a lien upon the abutting lands in front of which such work
was done to the same extent that assessments for local improvements
are liens in the city under its charter or the general law and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other
assessments and shall bear interest at the same rate.
§ 297-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-11
290:570
§ 297-12. Violations and penalties.110
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
D. In addition thereto, the city may have an action to recover the amount
against the owner of the lands in any court having competent
jurisdiction thereof. A certified copy of the aforesaid certificate shall in
such action be prima facie evidence of the existence of a debt due from
the owner to the city.
E. All moneys recovered or paid to the city under the provisions of the last
preceding subsection shall be credited to the account out of which the
cost of such work was paid.
110. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 297-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-12
290:571

ARTICLE III
Street Excavations
[Adopted 8-27-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91 (Sec. 16-3 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 297-13. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation
Ordinance of the City of Long Branch."
§ 297-14. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Director
of the Department of Public Works for an excavation permit hereunder.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger or hazard
to person or property.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation, removal, replacement, repair,
construction or other disturbance of any portion of the public
improvements within a public street or drainage right-of-way. These
public improvements include, but are not limited to, curbs, sidewalks,
driveways and driveway aprons, drainage structures and conduits,
pavements, base courses, gutters, retaining walls, channels and
headwalls existing within the public right-of-way. For the purposes
of this article, that work which is being performed outside of the
public right-of-way but which requires the storage of materials or the
operation of equipment within the public right-of-way in such a manner
as may cause damage will also be deemed excavation work. The term
"excavation work" shall also include the construction, addition,
installation or other provision of the whole or portions of the
improvements within a public street, drainage right-of-way or other
public way or public grounds by persons other than those exempted
from the provisions of this article, including privately sponsored
construction of curbing, sidewalks, pavement extensions, aprons,
drainage or any other portions of the public improvements.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this article and who is obligated to fill all
the terms of this article.
PERSONS — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or public or private organization of any kind.
STREET — Any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, public easement,
public right-of-way or public grounds accepted or maintained by the
city and any state or county road over which the city may have acquired
jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 297-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-14
290:573
§ 297-15. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 297-16. Applications for permit.
B. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation work, as
defined herein, or to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in
any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any
excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to
place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the
street or dig up, break, excavate or undermine or in any way affect any
other public improvement within a public right-of-way, unless such
persons shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the City Council
of the City of Long Branch as herein provided.
B. This section shall not apply to corporations having, by their charters or
under the laws of this state, authority to excavate or open the surface of
streets or roads without the consent of the municipal or local
authorities, so far as concerns the uses and purposes to which such
authority extends, but shall in other respects apply to such corporations
in full force.
A. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for
the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Director of
Public Works on the form provided by the City of Long Branch and
signed by the applicant performing the work. The form must be
completed in such a fashion as to contain a clear and definite
description of the name, address and telephone number of the
applicant; the nature, scope, location and purpose of the excavation,
together with the approximate size of the opening to be made in a
sketch which clearly shows the location and dimensions of the proposed
opening; the proposed dates of commencement and completion of the
excavation, which date shall be the expiration date of any permit issued
pursuant to the application; and such other data as may be reasonably
required by the Department of Public Works, including complete plan,
profile and details of any proposed curb, sidewalk, pavement or other
proposed improvement or structure being installed. Upon receipt of the
application, the Director of Public Works may refer the same to the
office of the City Engineer for comments within five business days of
receipt of a completed application. All comments shall be made and the
application returned to the Director of Public Works with a
recommendation of approval or disapproval (and the reasons therefor)
within seven days of the receipt of the application by the City Engineer.
The Director of Public Works shall issue all approved permits within
§ 297-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-16
290:574
§ 297-17. Permit fees.
§ 297-18. Excavation placard.
three days of receipt of the comments by the City Engineer or the
expiration of the seven-day comment period, whichever occurs first.
B. Work on any opening to be made under the permit provided for herein
shall commence within 30 days from the date of the permit and
prosecuted with diligence until its completion. If for any reason the
work is not started within this period, the permit shall be void, and any
portion of the application fee in excess of the twenty-five-dollar
minimum shall be refunded to the applicant, together with any unused
portion of its cash repair deposit or performance bond.
A. Application for permit.
(1) Application for a permit shall be made on written forms provided by
the Director of Public Works with:
(a) A twenty-five dollar application fee.
(b) A permit fee shall be based on the following number of square
feet to be excavated in any avenue, street or other public place:
[Amended 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
[1] From one to 100 square feet: $125.
[2] From 101 to 250 square feet: $175.
[3] From 251 to 500 square feet: $225.
[4] More than 500 square feet: $275.
(2) A permit will be issued by the Director of Public Works, or his duly
designated representative, provided that all local regulations are
complied with.
B. Deposit. Each applicant prior to the receipt of a permit shall provide the
city with an acceptable performance bond in the sum of $5,000 or more,
at least 10% of which shall be paid in cash, at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works, to guarantee faithful performance of the work
authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this chapter.
A. The Director of Public Works shall provide each permittee at the time a
permit is issued hereunder a suitable placard plainly written or printed
in English letters at least two inches high with the following notice:
"City of Long Branch, Permit No. _____________, expires ______________,"
and in the first blank space there shall be inserted the number of said
permit and after the word "expires" shall be stated the date when said
permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep
the placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation
work. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at or
§ 297-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-18
290:575
§ 297-19. Routing of traffic.
about any excavation not covered by such permit or to misrepresent the
number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit.
B. In lieu of a performance bond per job, any utility regulated by the BPU
or any contractor expecting to request multiple permits per year may
post a blanket performance guaranty in the minimum sum of $5,000
with the city on an annual basis. In the event that the City Engineer
determines that the cost of proper restoration of the area disturbed and
pavement surface will exceed the amount of the blanket bond, an
additional bond for that particular job, in an amount to be determined
by the City Engineer, shall be posted by the permittee prior to the
issuance of any permit(s).
A. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during
the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions shall be
maintained as nearly normal as practicable at all times so as to cause as
little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting
property and to the general public, provided that the Department of
Public Works, with the approval of the Traffic Safety Officer, may permit
the closing or partial closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed as necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic,
including its own vehicles, as directed by the City Police Department.
The following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or
restricted to traffic:
(1) The permittee must receive the approval of the Police Department
therefor.
(2) The permittee must notify, in writing, the City Fire Commissioner,
first aid squad, and Board of Education, prior to any detouring or
restricting of traffic.
(3) Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify, in
writing, the City Police Department, fire company, first aid squad,
and Board of Education before traffic is moved back to its normal
flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made.
(4) The permittee shall provide traffic directors and/or police officers
and related equipment (i.e., signs, cones, etc.) for traffic control
and direction of traffic at the street excavation site during the
course of the excavation. The permittee shall pay all costs
associated with the use of any private traffic directors or the use of
Long Branch police personnel, if they are required during the
course of the excavation, and any work performed in connection
therewith and during cleanup operations. The City Council may
relax or modify the requirements of this section in its discretion,
upon application by the permittee.
§ 297-18 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-19
290:576
§ 297-20. Clearance for fire equipment.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of piles
of material or other obstructions.
§ 297-21. Protection of traffic.
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to confine to a
minimum the encroachment of earth from trenches or other excavations
upon highways. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and
safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement
to accommodate vehicular pedestrian traffic at all street intersections.
Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers,
steel sheet and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic
safety. Decking, if timber, shall be not less than four inches thick and
shall be securely fastened together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian
crossings shall consist of planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide and
of adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not
less than three feet in width and shall be provided with a railing on both
sides.
§ 297-22. Removal and protection of utilities.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the utility company or person owning the utility. If it
becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its
owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work shall be borne by the permittee.
The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the owner of the utility.
The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected
by the excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain
and protect them under, over, along or across said work in accordance
with the applicable statutory provisions. In case any said pipes, conduits,
poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the
agency or owner, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the
B. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if
possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the Director
of Public Safety, the City Traffic Officer, or his designee, will designate
detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing roadways
designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case
there are no existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours
at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the City
Engineer. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage caused to
any roadways by the operation of its equipment.
§ 297-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-22
290:577
permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be
responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason
of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other
utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself
as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the
same against damage.
§ 297-23. Protection of adjoining property.
The permittee shall, at all times and at his or its own expense, preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property, providing property foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where, in the
protection of such property, it is necessary to enter private property for
the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall
obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such
purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to
public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly
to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for
the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully
cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required
in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a
manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and
in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such
work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees
or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private
property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the
property owner or, in the case of public property, the appropriate city
department or city official having control of such property.
§ 297-24. Sidewalk excavations.
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided
with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line
of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely
railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times.
This requirement may be waived by the Department of Public Works if found
unnecessary or unreasonable because of the nature of the excavation or
conditions affecting the same.
§ 297-25. Protective measures.
A. The permittee shall erect and maintain, approaching and throughout
the site of the excavation work, such signs, lights, barricades and other
protective devices as are required. In the absence of specific written
direction by the Police Department, all signs shall be provided as
required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices section
concerning construction signing, as published by the United States
Department of Commerce.
§ 297-22 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-25
290:578
§ 297-26. Attractive nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment
or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to
attract children and to be hazardous to their safety or health.
§ 297-27. Care of excavated material.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in
any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and so
that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
B. Should the City Police Department at any time determine that the
permittee has failed to provide all required signs and protective devices
in accordance with the directions of the Police Department and/or the
requirements of the previously mentioned Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, the city may provide and erect or cause the provision
and erection of such required signs, barricades and traffic control
devices, and the cost thereof may be deducted from the cash repair
deposit provided by the applicant or may be billed directly to the
applicant by the city. If such billing is made and not paid by the
applicant within 15 working days after such billing, the amount may be
deemed due and recoverable from the applicant's cash deposit or
surety.
C. The city shall normally provide the applicant with 24 hours' notice of its
intention to provide any such required signs, barricades and traffic
control devices and its intention to bill the applicant the cost thereof, to
deduct the cost thereof from the applicant's cash repair deposit or to
recover the cost thereof from the applicant's surety, except that in case
of immediate emergency or hazard to the public health or safety, the
city may cause the provision and erection of such devices without
notice.
D. The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site
of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the
street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained
until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight
there shall be placed and maintained upon such place of excavation and
upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to
streets suitable and sufficient lights as approved by the Director of
Public Works and/or the City Police Department, which shall be kept
burning throughout the night during the existence of such obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or
railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the
protection of the public at twilight. Excavations of any traveled portion
of the roadway shall be backfilled so as to allow vehicular traffic to
proceed on the roadway unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
§ 297-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-27
290:579
adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such
as might be the case in a narrow alley, the city shall have the authority to
require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and
then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and to make
all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
§ 297-28. Damage to existing improvements.
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such
repairs shall conform with the requirements of any applicable code or
ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the
necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the Department of Public
Works shall require said labor and materials to be furnished, and the cost
shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable on his or its bond therefor.
§ 297-29. Property lines and easements.
Property lines and limits or assessment shall be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit, and
it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within
these limits.
§ 297-30. Cleanup.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works. From
time to time as may be ordered by the Department of Public Works and, in
any event, immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at
his or its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials
of any land resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24
hours after having been notified to do so by the city, said work may be done
by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee
shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the cash repair deposit and/or
surety bond provided hereunder.
§ 297-31. Protection of watercourses.
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same
in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provisions for them
as the Department of Public Works may direct. The permittee shall provide
for environmental protection for streams and watercourses. The permittee
shall not obstruct any drainage facility on any street, but shall use all proper
§ 297-27 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-31
290:580
measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee
shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, sticking
or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other
operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure
to so provide.
§ 297-32. Breaking through pavement.
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation
purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or more in depth, the
base pavement shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the outer
limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement,
and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material shall be provided in each
side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall
be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so
as to permit removal of concrete pavement or base without ragged edges.
Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line prior to
removal. No pile driver or mechanical hammer may be used in breaking up
pavement.
§ 297-33. Tunnels.
Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of
the Department of Public Works. If permitted, tunnels shall be adequately
supported by timbering and backfilling under the direction of the City
Engineer.
§ 297-34. Excavation and backfilling requirements.
A. Prior to excavation, all trench openings shall be neatly saw cut. Unless
specifically allowed, in writing, by the Department of Public Works
under unusual circumstances, no excavation work area shall remain
open overnight. In the event that any excavation work area is permitted
to remain open overnight, the permittee shall be responsible for taking
appropriate steps to properly block off the excavation work area and
give adequate warning to anyone approaching the same on foot or any
vehicle of any type, including but not limited to the use of lighting,
reflective materials and barricades. All safety devices provided shall be
inspected and approved prior to their installation by the Director of
Public Works and/or Police Department.
B. Unless otherwise provided by the Department of Public Works, the
contractor shall backfill all trenches at the end of each working day
with suitable materials from the trench excavation or with granular
borrow material. Rocks larger than six inches may not be included in
backfill. If the Department of Public Works determines the existing
material is unsuitable, select off-site granular material shall be
provided. Backfill material shall be deposited in layers and
mechanically compacted to a minimum 90% Modified Proctor Density.
The densities shall be based upon the latest Standard Test Methods for
§ 297-31 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-34
290:581
§ 297-35. Restoration of the surface.
Moisture-Density Relations of Soils and Soil Aggregate Mixtures using
ten-pound Rammer and eighteen-inch Drop, ASTM Designation D-1557.
In lieu of mechanical compaction in lifts, compaction by water-jetting
or puddling may be used with written permission from the Department
of Public Works. If the use of either of these methods is proposed,
the contractor shall submit full details of the methods he intends to
employ for approval. Consolidation will not be acceptable as a method
to achieve the soil densities specified.
C. The backfilling, replacement of subbase and installation of base course
shall be completed within 24 hours after commencement of work.
Exceptions to the above time limits may be permitted by the
Department of Public Works if it is impractical to complete the work
within this time or safety dictates a shorter completion period.
A. Restoration procedure. [Amended 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 16-93]
(1) Once the excavation work area has been properly saw cut and the
backfill tamped and compacted, the permittee shall install no less
than six inches of bituminous stabilized base course to the trench
surface. If the distance from the edge of the excavation work area
to the existing curb is less than two feet, the permittee shall be
required to excavate to the curb and evenly install six inches of
bituminous stabilized base course in the entire area.
(2) The partially restored pavement shall be allowed to settle for no
less than 90 and no more than 180 days. If at any time during the
settlement period the trench becomes unacceptable as determined
by the Director of Public Works, the permittee shall be notified of
the condition requiring repair, and such repair shall be performed
within 24 hours of such notification by the Director of Public Works.
If the repair is not made in the time specified, the city may make
the repair, and any cost thereof will be charged against the
permittee's cash repair deposit and/or maintenance bond. At the
end of the period of time of settlement required by the Department
of Public Works, an inspection shall be performed by the
Department.
(3) At this time, the permittee shall be required to mill the excavation
work area surface as specified in § 297-35A(4) below and install no
less than two inches of FABC surface course. The permittee shall
also be required to provide a tack coat on all existing bituminous
and concrete surfaces and a hot-poured, rubber asphalt joint sealer
(per section 908 of DOT Standard Specifications for Roads and
Bridges). [Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 31-98]
(4) Unless authorized by the Department of Public Works, all
excavations shall require milling and restoration of the excavation
work area extending from the curb to the center line of the road or
§ 297-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-35
290:582
a minimum of one foot beyond the outer edges of the excavation,
whichever is greater. If the excavation work area will be within 200
feet or more of a previous excavation made within one year (by
the same permittee along the same side of the road), the permittee
shall be required to mill and restore between the outermost
excavation from the center line of the roadway to the curb.
[Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 31-98]
(5) The permittee shall be required to replace any facilities, including
but not limited to curb, pavement, sidewalk, line striping, etc., that
are affected by the excavation and restoration work, at the
permittee's expense. Such work shall be performed according to
city standards.
(6) With Department of Public Works approval, the center line of road
milling and restoration may be offset by the distance necessary to
avoid disturbing the existing line striping or markers. [Amended
8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 31-95]
B. Maintenance procedures.
(1) When final pavement restoration is approved, as required in
Subsection A above, the Department of Public Works shall notify
the City Clerk, in writing, that he may release the cash repair
deposit or performance guaranty posted by the permittee at the
onset of the project, subject to the retainage requested
hereinbelow. Such release shall be subject to the permittee
agreeing to maintain the restored excavation work area for a
period of two years from the date of final approval of the work and
posting a maintenance bond to guarantee the same. The permittee
shall also agree to repair any adjacent structures, including but not
limited to curb, pavement and sidewalk, that are damaged as a
result of any excavation work area settlement during this period of
time. In furtherance of these agreements, the City Clerk shall
retain as a cash retainage 50% of the cash repair deposit and/or
performance guaranty during the two-year maintenance period.
(2) If an inspection reveals that the restored excavation work area
becomes unacceptable, the Department of Public Works shall notify
the permittee that he must repair the area in accordance with the
aforementioned procedure within 30 days from the date of
notification or sooner if safety on public conveyances is involved. If
the permittee fails to repair the trench within this time, the
Department of Public Works shall notify the City Clerk, and he shall
allow the city to utilize the permittee's cash retainage and
maintenance bond to pay for the cost of repairing the excavation
work area. If the restoration costs exceed the maintenance bond,
the permittee shall be liable for said additional costs.
§ 297-35 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-35
290:583
§ 297-36. City's right to restore surfaces or eliminate violations.
(3) Upon the termination of the two-year maintenance period, any
remaining portion of said maintenance bond that has not been
expended shall be returned to the permittee without interest.
C. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over
openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the permanent
replacement pavement is to be replaced before the opening of the cut to
traffic, the fill above the bottom of the existing pavement shall be
tamped into place, properly graded and topped with a minimum of two
inches of bituminous patch material which is suitable to maintain the
opening in good condition until permanent restoration can be made.
The crown of the temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch above
the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise special care in
making such temporary restorations and must maintain such
restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent
restorations are made. If, in the judgment of the City Engineer, it is not
expedient to replace the pavement over any cut or excavation made in
the street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by
reason of the looseness of the earth or weather conditions or any other
reason, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement of
steel plate or other suitable material designated by him over such cut or
excavation, to remain until such time as the repair of the original
pavement may be properly made.
D. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the Department of
Public Works or the City Engineer shall not prevent the city from
asserting a claim against the permittee and his or its surety under the
surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if
discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation
work. The presence of a representative of the Department of Public
Works or the City Engineer during the performance of any excavation
work shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.
E. All finished paving installed less than five years earlier shall be restored
utilizing infrared pavement repair technology approved by a
representative of the Department of Public Works or the City Engineer.
[Added 2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
A. If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to
its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by
such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit or shall fail to adhere to other
requirements of this article, the city shall have the right to do all work
necessary to restore the street, to eliminate violations and to complete
the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost
thereof and 25% of such cost in addition, for general overhead and
administrative expenses. The city shall have a cause of action for all
fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work and shall
apply, in payment of the amount due it, any funds of the permittee
§ 297-35 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-36
290:584
§ 297-37. Trenches in pipe laying.
Except by special permission from the City Engineer, no trench shall be
excavated more than 150 feet in advance of pipe laying or left unfilled more
than 150 feet where pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that may
be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe
and the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be
put in place during that single working day. Trenches shall be braced and
sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction
work and/or as prescribed by the City Engineer. Except with the written
permission of the City Engineer, no timber bracing, lagging, sheathing or
other lumber shall be left in any trench.
§ 297-38. Prompt completion of work.
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation
work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such
work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be,
as soon as practicable and, in any event, not later than the date specified in
the excavation permit therefor.
§ 297-39. Urgent work.
If traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the
public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the Department of Public Works shall have full power to order, at the
time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee 24 hours a day, to the end that such excavation
work may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 297-40. Emergency action.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks or bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the owner or operator of such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without
first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall
immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
deposited as herein provided; and the city shall also enforce its rights
under any surety bond provided pursuant to this article. The city will
normally give the permittee 24 hours' notice of its intent to act, under
the terms of this subsection, to eliminate violations of this article or
to restore the surface, except that in the case of immediate danger to
public health or safety, certified to by the appropriate officials, no such
notice will be provided.
B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for one year after restoring it to its original condition.
§ 297-36 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-40
290:585
individuals. However, such owner or operator shall apply for an excavation
permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the
Department of Public Works is open for business and shall not proceed with
permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.
§ 297-41. Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in
the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris,
and during the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with
the express written permission of the Department of Public Works, or in
case of any emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance
or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or
repose of occupants of the neighboring property. Dust shall be controlled by
means of maintaining the work area in a clean condition, cleaning and/or
sweeping pavement areas and applying calcium chloride.
§ 297-42. Preservation of monuments.
The permittee shall not disturb any survey monuments, hubs or pipes found
on the line of excavation work until and unless ordered to do so by the City
Engineer.
§ 297-43. Notice and inspections.
§ 297-44. Maintenance of drawings.
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground
structures, including abandoned installations. Two copies of as-built
drawings shall be filed with the City Engineer within 60 days after new
installations, changes or replacements are made.
A. Forty-eight hours prior to the commencement of the work, the
permittee shall notify the Department of Public Works and request that
an inspector be present to supervise the excavation and restoration.
The permittee shall also notify all utility companies within such time as
they prescribe according to their rules and regulations, prior to
commencement of any work, in order to obtain appropriate utility
underground location information. No pavement surface restoration
shall be performed until the backfill operation is complete and
approved by the Department of Public Works.
B. The Department of Public Works shall make any and all inspections as
are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article.
§ 297-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-45
290:586
§ 297-45. City work exempt.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation
work by employees of the city or by any contractor of the city or agency
or department of the city performing work, for and in behalf of the city,
necessitating openings of excavations in streets. This section shall not be
construed as exempting the Housing Authority or the Sewerage Authority.
§ 297-46. Insurance.
§ 297-47. Liability of city.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official
or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured
by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit
is issued hereunder; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason
of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the
approval of any excavation work.
§ 297-48. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
For the violation of the provisions herein contained, the Director of Public
Works may revoke the permit, and the excavation or opening and pavements
A. A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish to the City Clerk satisfactory certificates of insurance
indicating that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force,
during the performance of the excavation work and the period of the
excavation permit, public liability insurance of not less than $300,000
for any one person and $1,000,000 for any one accident, and property
damage insurance of not less than $500,000, duly issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in this state. The city
shall be named as an additional insured on the permittee's insurance
policy. In cases where the character or nature of the proposed
excavation work are such as to present an unusual hazard or a higher
than normal risk of damage or injury, the City Council may require the
provision of increased amounts of liability and property damage
insurance. Any permits which occasion such increased hazard or
liability shall be referred, by the Department of Public Works, for the
consideration of the Council prior to the issuance of a permit.
B. By the making of an application for a permit, the permittee agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the City of Long Branch and its offices,
agents and servants from and against any loss, injury or damage
(including the costs of providing a defense) resulting from any
negligence or the fault of the permittee in the case of work covered by
the permit. The permittee shall also indemnify and save harmless the
City of Long Branch (including the costs of providing a defense) against
any damage done to other utilities as the result of a road opening.
§ 297-45 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-48
290:587
may be restored by the City of Long Branch at the expense of the permittee.
In addition, any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal
Court of the City of Long Branch of a violation of the terms of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 297-49. Engineering inspection and construction administration
escrow fees. [Added 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 16-93]
§ 297-49.1. Opening newly paved streets restricted. [Added
9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 31-98]
No permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works of the City of
Long Branch which would allow an excavation or opening of a paved or
improved street surface less than five years old unless the applicant can
clearly demonstrate that public health or safety requires that the proposed
work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
§ 297-49.2. Penalty charge for opening newly paved streets. [Added
9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 31-98]
If by special permission of the Director of the Department of Public Works
a permit is issued to open any paved or improved street surface less than
five years old, a penalty charge shall be made for the opening, except that
the penalty shall be waived in the event that the work is of an emergency
nature. The penalty charge shall be equal to the sum of $300 for the first
two years and $150 for years three through five.
§ 297-49.3. Annual corrected map. [Added 9-23-1998 by Ord. No.
31-98]
Within 30 days after the first day of January each and every year, such
person shall file with the Engineer a corrected map or set of maps showing
such installations, including all those made during the previous year, to and
including the last day of such year. However, such person may at his own
option elect to provide corrected atlas sheets throughout the year as they
are available rather than proceed as noted above.
A. If requested by the Department of Public Works, the permittees shall
establish an engineering inspection escrow account with the City
Finance Officer. The account shall be for 5% of the estimated cost of the
project or $500, whichever is greater. The escrow shall be used by the
city to reimburse engineering fees associated with the permittee's
project. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 31-95]
B. In the event that charges deplete the escrow account by more than 50%
of the original submission, the permittee shall be notified and requested
to submit additional escrow sums in sufficient amount to restore the
escrow account to not less than 75% of the original escrow deposit.
§ 297-48 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-49.4
290:588
§ 297-49.4. Affidavit of maps required. [Added 9-23-1998 by Ord.
No. 31-98]
Each map herein shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed thereon to
the effect that the same correctly exhibits the details required to be shown
by this article.
§ 297-49.4 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-49.4
290:589

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 590 as Sec. 6-5 of the 1971 Code]
§ 297-50. Duty to remove.
§ 297-51. Depositing snow and ice from private property on public
streets.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the intent
and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting,
placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulates within the private
property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets of the city.
§ 297-52. Authority to remove.
In case snow or ice shall not be removed from the sidewalks or shall be cast,
deposited or placed on the sidewalks or the street by the owner, tenant or
occupant of any premises, the same shall be removed under the direction
of the Director of Public Works, and the cost of removal, as nearly as can
be ascertained, shall be certified by the Director of Public Works to the
collector. The City Council shall examine the certification and, if found to be
correct, shall cause the cost to be charged against the real estate abutting
or bordering upon such sidewalk. The amount so charged shall become a
lien and a tax in the way and manner as the taxes next to be levied and
assessed upon the premises and shall bear interest and be enforced and
collected by the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. The
imposition and collection of a fine or any other penalty for violation of any
of the provisions of this article shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the city to collect the cost, as certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the
manner herein authorized.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering on any
street in the city shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks of such street or the abutting right-of-way actually used by
the public or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or ashes within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall
or be formed thereon.
B. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises used by the public or
business invitees shall remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks,
streets, rights-of-way and parking areas used by the public in the
transaction of business thereat and, in the event of ice which may be so
frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand or ashes, within 12 hours of daylight after
the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 297-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 297-53
290:591
§ 297-53. Violations and penalties.111
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 297-53 LONG BRANCH CODE § 297-53
290:592
Chapter 298
STREET VACATION REQUESTS
§ 298-1. Request for street vacation.
Any person seeking the vacation of a street pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et
seq. shall make such request to the City Clerk, in writing. A consent from
all affected adjacent landowner(s) shall be submitted with said request. The
consent shall include the adjacent landowner(s) street address and block
and lot number.
§ 298-2. Agency review.
§ 298-3. Application fees.
The applicant shall pay a minimum fee of $500 to cover the initial costs
incurred by the municipality in processing the application. In addition,
the applicant shall reimburse the City for the legal and engineering costs
incurred by the City in preparation and review of the vacation ordinance.
Said sums due and owing shall be certified to the City Clerk by the City
Attorney and City Engineer. The City Clerk shall further certify the costs
of public advertising and recording fees. The total amount due and owing
for reimbursement for the legal, engineering, publication and recording
fees shall be paid by the applicant prior to the adoption of the vacation
ordinance.
A. Upon receipt of the request and consents, the City Clerk shall forward a
copy of the request and consents to the City Attorney for review. He/she
shall also forward a copy of the request to the following for
investigation and submission of reports:
(1) City Engineer;
(2) Public Works Director;
(3) Planning Board Chairman;
(4) Planning Department;
(5) Recreation Department;
(6) Utility companies, including but not limited to gas, electric, water,
cable and the Long Branch Sewerage Authority.
B. The Clerk shall request that each of the above agencies or departments
determine whether the roadway is needed for any future City land
development, municipal facilities such as storm drainage, or
recreational facilities; is under Green Acres jurisdiction or was ever
used for municipal recreational purposes in the past; or whether the
utility companies have need for the right-of-way.
§ 297-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 298-4
290:593
§ 298-4. Preparation and submission of documentation.
Prior to preparation of the vacation ordinance by the City Engineer, the
applicant shall prepare or have prepared on its behalf, the following:
§ 298-5. Adoption process.
Upon certification by the City Attorney and City Engineer that all necessary
documents are in order, the City Attorney shall prepare a vacation
ordinance for discussion and introduction by the City Council. The City
Council shall adhere to the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40: 67-1 et
seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:49-2 with regard to introduction, publication, public
hearing and adoption of said ordinance. In addition, the City Clerk, after
introduction of said ordinance, shall notify by certified mail, return receipt
A. Title search of the area to be vacated and the adjacent landowner's
properties for determination on the means in which the City acquired
its interest in the roadway. Said title searches shall be forwarded to the
City Attorney for his review.
B. Survey maps and metes and bounds descriptions of the area to be
vacated and the method of division of the vacated property subsequent
to adoption of the ordinance. The survey map shall indicate all existing
encumbrances, drainage facilities, utility locations and any other
topographical feature pertinent to the area to be vacated. The maps
shall depict the portions of the street or right-of-way to be conveyed to
each abutting property owner having interest in the title to the
centerline of the street to be vacated, unless the title searches disclose
that the interest in title is otherwise. In that event, it shall show to the
appropriate line required, based upon the chain of title, of the street to
be vacated. The description for all of the vacated streets shall be
prepared by metes and bounds for the vacation ordinance. All maps
shall be prepared in accordance with "Subchapter 5. Land Surveyors;
Preparation of Land Surveys - 13:40-5.1 and all amendments thereto
which was adopted May 5, 1977." This document was published in the
Roster of Licensed Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors,
September 30, 1978, Prepared by the State of New Jersey, Department
of Law and Public Safety. The ending statement of the vacation
description shall include the following wording:
"The above description is and is intended to be all of that portion of as
shown on the Official Tax Map of the City of Long Branch. It is further
intended that all rights of the public which may exist are to be vacated
within the portion of the right-of-way described, reserving thereout
and therefrom all rights and privileges now possessed by public and
private utilities to maintain, repair and replace their existing facilities
in, adjacent to, over or under the roadway being vacated, including but
not limited to, gas, water, cable, telephone, electric, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers and any appurtenances and rights of ingress and egress
relating thereto. The description has been prepared in accordance
with the map entitled ______________________________."
§ 298-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 298-5
290:594
requested, all adjacent and adjoining property owners within 200 feet of
the proposed road vacation area, of the introduction of the ordinance and
advise them of the date of public hearing at which they may attend and
make their comments known. Upon adoption of the ordinance, the City
Clerk shall record same with the County Clerk of the County of Monmouth
as required by law. Upon certification from the County Clerk that the
ordinance has been recorded, the necessary tax records shall be revised by
the City Assessor and the vacation indicated on the Tax Map of the City of
Long Branch.
§ 298-6. Additional provisions.
The obligation of the City with regard to the adopted vacation ordinance
shall cease with its recording of same with the County Clerk's office and
updating of its tax map. In the event that the applicant or the adjacent
property owners who may receive an interest in the vacated area wish to
have a deed prepared evidencing the property vacated, such deed shall be
the obligation of the owner acquiring title to said portion of the roadbed.
In the event that any such deed is prepared, it shall describe, by metes and
bounds, the original property, including within the description that portion
of the street being incorporated with the owner's original land holdings.
The deed shall contain a reference to the new tax lot number created and
assigned to the combined lot and the road vacation area as determined
by the City Assessor. It shall also include a reference to the survey map
upon which the deed description is based and a reference to the ordinance
number by which the portion of the street was vacated. The deed shall be
transferred by the owner to themselves.
Chapter 300
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee for certificate as to approval of
subdivisions — See Ch. 5, § 5-17A(2).
Land use procedures — See Ch. 69.
Design of buildings — See Ch. 128.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 130.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Maps — See Ch. 221.
Redevelopment Plan — See Ch. 269.
Soil removal — See Ch. 290.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Trees — See Ch. 319.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 298-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 298-6
290:595

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
§ 300-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Long Branch."
§ 300-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the City of Long Branch in order to
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
City. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and development,
the conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision
for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 300-3. Statutory authority. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Planning Board
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25, 40:55D-37, 40:55D-47 and
40:55D-48, with the supplements thereto.
§ 300-4. Definitions.
A. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in the
Municipal Land Use Law,112 such term is intended to have the meaning
set forth in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless a
contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage
in accordance with Chapter 1A of Title 58 of the Revised
Statutes.[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
county recording officer.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or
by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 300-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-4
290:597
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan of the City as adopted by the
Planning Board, including all amendments and supplements duly
adopted.
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS — A subdivision of land for the creation of a
number of lots, not to exceed three, provided that each subdivision does
not involve:
OPEN SPACE/RECREATION — (See Chapter 345, Zoning, §§ 345-11X
and 345-18.)
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before
the Planning Board or other approving body approves a plan, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map, indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision, which is submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board for Planning Board consideration and tentative
approval and meeting the requirements of § 300-10.
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown
topography, location of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way,
boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings and any other
information deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(1) A planned development;
(2) Any new street;
Any property which was formerly part of a tract for which
subdivision approval had been granted, provided that such
previous subdivision approval was less than three years prior to the
present application; or
(3)
The extension of any off-tract improvement the cost of which is to
be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(4)
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not determined to be a minor
site plan under Subsection (2).
(1)
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Any development plan for one or more lots
which is (are) subject to development which:
(a) Requires site plan approval;
(2)
§ 300-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-4
290:598
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of § 300-10.
In the opinion of the Board's Site Plan Committee, the
submitted project is of such a simplistic nature as to merit
consideration as a minor site plan;
(b)
Meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 345, Zoning,
Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, and contains the
information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the Board's requirements for
approval of a minor site plan have been met; and
(c)
Meets the following conditions:
The construction of drainage facilities is not required
either on- or off-site;
[1]
The proposed development conforms to the performance
standards set forth in Chapter 345, Zoning, § 345-48,
Environmental standards.
[2]
The proposed development does not involve planned
development;
[3]
The proposed development will not require the issuance of
a Coastal Area Facilities Review Act113 permit;
[4]
The proposed development does not involve any new
street or the extension of any existing street;
[5]
The proposed development does not involve the extension
or construction of any off-tract improvement;
[6]
The proposed development, if new construction, requires
10 parking spaces or less; or if a change of use of an
existing facility or addition to an existing facility and less
than five spaces are required; and
[7]
The proposed development consists of new construction
or an addition, either of which are less than 1,000 square
feet. If the proposed development was part of a parcel,
tract, lot or portion thereof for which minor site plan
approval had been granted within three years prior to
the present application, and the total accumulated square
footage of the prior minor site plan application or
applications equaled 1,000 square feet or more than the
present application, it shall be considered a major site
plan.
[8]
(d)
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.
§ 300-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-4
290:599
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a
plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such
Board of the power to review plats. A street shall be deemed to include
all the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking
areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION —
MAJOR STREETS — Shall be as shown on the Master Plan of the
City.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which connect minor and major
streets, provide access to community facilities and are primarily
intended for the use of neighborhood traffic. Such streets should be
as designated by the Planning Board in reviewing each subdivision
application.
(2)
MINOR STREET — That which is used primarily for access to
abutting land.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — One which parallels and is
contiguous to a major street and is designed to provide access to
abutting land.
(4)
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size.
(a)
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments or foreclosure.
(b)
(c) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
(d) Divisions of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons, and all of
(e)
(1)
§ 300-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-4
290:600
§ 300-5. Application procedure.
§ 300-6. Minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and such other duties relating to land subdivision which
may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to
conform to the requirements of the municipal development
regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots,
tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the City.
(2) The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
A. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975,114 as amended,
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant
shall file at least 31 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the
Board 14 black- or blue-on-white or white-on-blue prints of the plat of
the proposed subdivision, together with three completed application
forms, for classification and approval by the Subdivision Committee or
the Board.
B. At the time of filing the application, but in no event less than 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file 14 copies of
all plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision
of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Planning Board.
The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be
taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of the
Board.
C. No application for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board shall be acted upon unless and until it is determined to be
completed in every respect, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, including
but not limited to necessary supporting data, papers, certificates, plans
and fees and all other items set forth on the Long Branch development
application checklists dated February 1, 2006, incorporated herein by
reference.115 Any applicant for development shall be given a copy of the
aforesaid checklists upon request for a development application. He
may seek waiver of any of the aforesaid provisions pursuant to the
aforesaid statute. [Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-06]
A. Classification of sketch plat. If classified and approved as a minor
subdivision by unanimous action of the Subdivision Committee, a
114. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: The application checklist is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-6
290:601
notation to that effect will be made on the plat. In the event that
the same is not approved by unanimous action of the Subdivision
Committee, then it shall be referred to the full Planning Board. In the
event that the same is not approved by a majority vote of the Planning
Board, then, in that event, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall,
within three days of such action, notify the subdivider personally or by
certified mail of such disapproval and the reasons therefor.
B. Certification of sketch plat. After classification and approval as a minor
subdivision by either the Subdivision Committee or the full Planning
Board, the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall certify
the classification and approval to the plat, indicating the date upon
which the plat was classified and approved as a minor subdivision.
Before returning a signed copy to the subdivider, the Secretary of the
Planning Board shall forward one copy of such approved plat to the City
Clerk. Within one week following the date of classification and
approval, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall return one copy of
the plat to the subdivider, signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board and the City Clerk.
C. Distribution of sketch plat. Before returning a signed copy to the
subdivider, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall forward one copy
of such approved plat to each of the following:
(1) City Clerk.
(2) City Engineer.
(3) Construction Code Official.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board.
D. Filing of sketch plat. Either a deed description or a plat map drawn in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 90 days from the date of the return
of the approved sketch plat. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
E. Time.
(1) Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within 45
days of the date of submission of a complete application to the
Planning Board or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190
days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of
the Map Filing Law,116 or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the county
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 300-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-6
290:602
§ 300-7. Major subdivision.
recording officer, the City Engineer, the Construction Code Official
and the City Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be
accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
(2) Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording
officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
F. Bond and fees. Prior to the final approval of the application, the
subdivider, where required, shall post with the City Clerk a
performance guaranty as required by § 300-11 and shall post with the
Director of Finance a fee for engineering inspections equal to 7% of the
estimated cost of the improvements, as determined by the City
Engineer. This fee shall be in addition to the amount of the performance
guaranty and all application fees. Upon completion of the development
and all inspections, and at the request of the developer, the developer
shall receive an accounting of the expended funds, and any unspent
funds shall be returned to the subdivider with the exception of an
amount not to exceed 1% of the cost of the required improvements,
which shall be held and used for inspection during any applicable
maintenance period of said improvements. Any of these funds
remaining at the time of release of the maintenance bond shall be
returned to the developer. Should the initial deposit be insufficient to
cover inspection costs, the developer shall deposit additional sums
upon notice from the Director of Finance. Each additional deposit shall
be in amounts not to exceed 50% of the initial deposit. The City Clerk
and Finance Director shall provide the developer with a certificate
indicating compliance with the requirements for submission to the
Planning Board for attachment to the application.
A. Classification of sketch plat. Any owner or subdivider of land within the
City may, prior to subdividing or resubdividing land, as defined in this
chapter, submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board, 14 black- or
blue-on-white or white-on-blue prints of the sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision for purposes of classification, and if the plat is classified as
a major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat,
which will be returned to the subdivider for compliance with the
procedure in Subsection B below.
B. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision for preliminary
approval.
(1) At least 14 black- or blue-on-white prints or white-on-blue prints of
the preliminary plat, together with three completed application
§ 300-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-7
290:603
forms for approval of the preliminary plat, shall be submitted to
the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 31 days prior to a
regular meeting of the Planning Board. The application shall be
accompanied by a letter, in triplicate, on a form prescribed by the
Attorney, saving the City and its officers and engineer harmless for
any loss due to damages resulting from the grading, drainage or
development of the property.
(2) At the first meeting following the filing of a complete application,
the Planning Board shall set the time and place for a public hearing
on the application. The subdivider shall notify all property owners
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the subdivision(s) as in
Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures, § 69-31, Notice requirements for
hearing, in such manner as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(3) Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary
of the Planning Board to the following persons, upon receipt of the
same. They shall report, in writing, to the Planning Board any
comments they have within 21 days of receipt of such plans:
(a) Secretary of County Planning Board.
(b) City Engineer.
(c) Secretary of Board of Health.
(d) City Clerk and such other municipal, county or state officials as
directed by the Planning Board.
(e) Tax Assessor.
(f) Construction Code Official.
(g) Long Branch Sewerage Authority.
(h) Long Branch Traffic Safety Officer.
(i) Long Branch Fire Department.
(4) Upon submission of a complete application for subdivision of 10 or
fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than
10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for the subdivision. In no case shall the
Planning Board act before the expiration of the twenty-day period
within which the County Planning Board may submit a report on
the subdivision. In all cases the recommendations of the County
Board shall be given careful consideration in the final decision of
§ 300-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-7
290:604
§ 300-8. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
the local Planning Board. If the County Planning Board has
approval of the local authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, its
action shall be noted on the plat and returned with the plat, and
if disapproved, two copies of the reasons for disapproval shall
be returned with the plat. If either the Planning Board or the
County Planning Board disapproves a plat, the person submitting
the plat shall be notified, including a statement of the reasons for
disapproval, within 10 days of the action of the Planning Board.
If the approval is required by any other officer or public body,
the same procedure as applied to submission and approval by the
County Planning Board shall apply. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
(5) If the Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a
notation to that effect, signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board, shall be made on the plat, and the plat shall be
returned to the subdivider for compliance with final approval
requirements.
(6) Preliminary approval shall confer on the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions upon which the
preliminary approval was granted will not be changed.
(b) That the applicant may submit on or before the expiration date
the whole or part or parts of the plat for final approval.
(7) After the preliminary approval of the applications, the subdivider
shall post with the City Clerk a performance guaranty as required
by § 300-11 and shall post with the Director of Finance a fee for
engineering inspection equal to 5% of the estimated cost of the
improvements, as determined by the City Engineer. This fee shall
be in addition to the amount of the performance guaranty and all
application fees. Upon completion of the development and all
inspections, and at the request of the developer, the developer shall
receive an accounting of the expended funds, and any unspent
funds shall be returned to the developer. Should the initial deposit
be insufficient to cover inspection costs, the developer shall deposit
additional sums upon notice from the Director of Finance. Each
additional deposit shall be in amounts not to exceed 50% of the
initial deposit. The City Clerk and Finance Director shall provide
the subdivider with a certificate indicating compliance with the
requirements for submission to the Planning Board for attachment
to the application.
(8) Open space/recreation. (See Chapter 345, Zoning, §§ 345-11X and
345-18.)
§ 300-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-8
290:605
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for final approval within three years from the date of preliminary
approval, and the Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within 45
days after the date of submission of a complete application for final
approval to the Secretary of the Planning Board, or within such further
time as the applying party may agree to.
B. The original tracing, on translucent cloth copy, two cloth prints, 14
black- or blue-on-white prints or white-on-blue prints and three copies
of the application for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary
of the Planning Board at least 31 days prior to the date of a Board
meeting.
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the City Engineer
that he is in receipt of a map showing all required improvements in
exact location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed
and those to be installed. The City Engineer shall subsequently provide
the Planning Board with an estimate of the total cost of said
improvements.
D. All plats which require County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board for
its action prior to final approval by the Planning Board. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
E. If the Planning Board approves the final plat, such approval shall be
noted on each plat, and the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board shall affix their signatures thereto.
F. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the Secretary of the Planning Board shall issue a
certificate to that effect.
G. Appeals. (See Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures, § 69-36B). [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
H. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
Planning Board with the following:
(1) City Clerk.
(2) City Engineer.
(3) Construction Code Official.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board.
(6) Official issuing certificates for approved lots.
§ 300-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-9
290:606
§ 300-9. Filing of final plat.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of
signing of any plat unless within such period the final plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The Planning
Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an
additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
No plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer unless
it has been duly approved by the City Planning Board and signed by the
Chairman.
§ 300-10. Plat details.
A. Sketch plat. A sketch plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
not less than 100 feet to the inch and shall show or include the following
information:
(1) A key map showing the location of the tract being subdivided in
relation to the City street system.
(2) The present property lines of the entire tract being subdivided.
(3) All existing and proposed property lines, both within and
immediately adjoining the tract.
(4) All buildings or structures and wooded areas within the limits of
the area to be subdivided and on adjacent properties within 200
feet of all boundaries of the subject site.
(5) Sufficient elevations or contours to enable the Planning Board to
determine the natural slope and drainage of the land, but in no case
more than a five-foot contour interval.
(6) The right-of-way width on all streets adjoining the premises.
(7) The name of the owner and all property owners within 200 feet of
the tract as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(8) The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
B. Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn
or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
Preliminary plats shall be designed and drawn by a licensed
professional engineer or a licensed professional planner. The plat shall
be designed in compliance with the provisions of § 300-14 and shall
show or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(2) The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
§ 300-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-10
290:607
(a) Name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) Name and address of the subdivider.
(c) Name and address of the person who prepared the map.
(3) Acreage of the tract being subdivided to the nearest 1/10 of an
acre.
(4) Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope
and natural drainage of the land, and the high and low points and
tentative cross-sections and center line profiles showing existing
surface and proposed finished grades for all proposed new streets.
All elevations shown shall be related to the United States Coast and
Geodetic survey datum.
(5) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
easements, building lines, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes and any natural features, such as wooded
areas and rock formations.
(6) Detailed plans and profiles of proposed utility layouts (sewers,
storm drains, water, gas and electricity), showing feasible
connections to existing or any proposed utility systems. When an
individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system is proposed,
the plan of such system must be approved by the appropriate local,
county or state health agency. Any subdivision or part thereof
which does not meet with the established requirements of this
chapter or other applicable regulations shall not be approved. Any
remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be
approved by the appropriate local, county or state health agency.
(7) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
(8) All buildings and structures and wooded areas within the limits of
the area to be subdivided and on adjacent properties within 200
feet of all boundaries of the subject site.
C. Final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and in compliance with all the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9. The final plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines and right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other right-of-way land to be reserved or dedicated
to public use and all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate
§ 300-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-10
290:608
§ 300-11. Required improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have furnished
performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the following
improvements. All of the listed improvements shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the City Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer
at least five days prior to the start of construction. No underground
installation shall be covered until approved and inspected by the City
Engineer.
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
(3) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block and the lots within each block shall be numbered
consecutively in a manner stipulated by the City Engineer.
(5) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(6) Location and description of all monuments.
(7) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
(8) Certification by an engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the
details of the plat.
(9) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(10) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of any
other municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified
in writing on the plat.
(11) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to-date.
(12) Existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals for slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for land of
lesser slope, with appropriate notation distinguishing between
them.
(13) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(14) All buildings or structures and wooded areas within the limits of
the area to be subdivided and on adjacent properties within 200
feet of all boundaries of the subject site.
A. Topsoil protection. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed as to provide at least six inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting
and shall be governed by the ordinance of the City relative thereto.
§ 300-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-11
290:609
B. Monuments. Monuments are to be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9, and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.
[Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
C. Sewers. Sanitary sewers designed in accordance with the regulations of
the Sewage Authority shall be installed in a manner adequate to handle
all present and probable future development.
D. Sidewalks. All streets shall be provided with concrete sidewalks at least
four feet in width and four inches in thickness, except at driveways,
where the sidewalk shall be at least six inches in thickness. Where a
subdivision adjoins an existing street on one side only, the sidewalk
shall be constructed only on that side. Where existing sidewalks are in
disrepair, the applicant shall be required to repair, reconstruct or
replace the same as directed by the boards.
E. Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed on both sides of all streets, shall be
not less than 18 inches deep and six inches in width at the top and eight
inches in width at the bottom and shall be constructed of a minimum
concrete mixture of one part cement, two parts washed sand and three
parts washed gravel, or other suitable aggregate. The concrete shall
have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch after 28
days. The minimum length of blocks shall be 10 feet, with a preformed
bituminous expansion joint filler 1/2 inch thick installed every 40 feet.
The finish shall be a float finish with corners rounded. Where existing
curbs are in disrepair, the applicant shall be required to repair,
reconstruct or replace the same as directed by the boards.
F. Streets. All streets shall be improved with a two-and-one-half-inch twocourse-
type S.M. bituminous concrete pavement in accordance with
current New Jersey State Highway Department specifications on a fiveand-
one-half-inch thick, two-and-one-half-inch size broken stone base.
Where subbase conditions of the proposed street are wet, springy or of
such a nature in the opinion of the City Engineer that paving would be
inadvisable without first treating the subbase, the subbase shall be
prepared by the installation of suitable subsurface drainage or other
means as may be required to meet the special condition. The method
employed to stabilize the base must be approved by the City Engineer.
G. (Reserved)117
H. Water mains. All streets shall have water mains not less than six inches
in diameter installed therein for the entire length thereof if the
subdivision is located within the area served by a water company unless
the requirements hereof are expressly waived in whole or in part by the
Planning Board.
117. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Drainage, was deleted 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 36-07
and subsequently deleted 1-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2-08. See now Art. II, Stormwater
Management, of this chapter.
§ 300-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-11
290:610
§ 300-12. Performance guaranty; fees.
I. Street signs. At each street intersection there shall be erected or
constructed a street sign of a size and type prescribed by the City
Council.
J. Trees. Shade trees shall be planted in every subdivision at intervals of
40 feet and along both sides of all streets. All trees shall be located at a
point four feet inward of the property line. The trunk diameter of all
trees shall be at least two inches with a height of six feet above the
finished ground level.
K. Open space/recreation. (See Chapter 345, Zoning, §§ 345-11X and
345-18.)
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
subdivider shall have filed with the City Clerk the cost of all such
improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the City
Engineer and assuring the installation of such uncompleted
improvements on or before an agreed date. The performance guaranty
may be in the form of a performance bond, which shall be issued by a
bonding or surety company approved by the City Council; a certified
check, returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any other
type of surety approved by the City Attorney, insofar as a minimum of
10% of the sum of the total performance guaranty shall be in cash or
certified check, All such guaranties shall run to and be in favor of the
City.
B. In addition, the subdivider shall post with the Director of Finance a fee
for engineering inspections equal to 7% of the estimated costs of the
improvements, as determined by the City Engineer. This fee shall be in
addition to the amount of the performance guaranty and all application
fees. Upon completion of the development and all inspections, and at
the request of the developer, the developer shall receive an accounting
of the expended funds, and any unspent funds shall be returned to the
developer with the exception of an amount not to exceed 1% of the cost
of the required improvements, which shall be held and used for
inspection during any applicable maintenance period of said
improvements. Any of these funds remaining at the time of release of
the maintenance bond shall be returned to the developer. Should the
initial deposit be insufficient to cover inspection costs, the developer
shall deposit additional sums upon notice from the Director of Finance.
Each additional deposit shall be in amounts not to exceed 50% of the
initial deposit. The City Clerk and Finance Director shall provide the
developer with a certificate indicating compliance with the
requirements for submission to the Planning Board for attachment to
the application.
C. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the City Attorney as to
form, sufficiency and execution. The performance guaranty shall run for
§ 300-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-12
290:611
a period to be fixed by the Planning Board, but in no case for a term
more than three years.
D. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution, but such additional period shall not
exceed three years. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the
amount of any such extension or the amount of any performance
guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation as determined as
of the time of the passage of the resolution.
E. A developer, wishing to reduce the amount of performance guaranty
after portions of the required improvements have been installed, shall
make application by letter to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall direct the City Engineer to inspect the applicant's improvements.
If the Planning Board decides to recommend a release of all or part of
the performance guaranty, it shall advise the City Council and the
Mayor of its decision. The City Council may instruct the City Treasurer
by resolution to release all or part of the performance guaranty.
F. If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be liable to
the City for the reasonable cost of the improvements not installed, and
upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the City shall install such
improvements.
G. A maintenance bond shall be furnished by the subdivider upon
acceptance of the streets and public improvements by the City. The
maintenance bond, which shall be issued by a bonding or surety
company approved by the Council, shall be in an amount not to exceed
15% of the original estimated cost of construction of the required
improvements and shall run to and be in favor of the City for a period
not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvements. The
bond shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency and
execution.
H. Custody of documents and moneys.
(1) The City Clerk shall hold the instrument of performance guaranty.
Duplicate copies of that instrument shall be held by the Planning
Board, Treasurer and Division of City Planning.
(2) The comptroller shall hold all of the cash portions of performance
guaranties and deposit them in interest-bearing accounts.
I. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of the same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements of which such notice has been
given and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing
§ 300-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-12
290:612
§ 300-13. Off-tract/off-site contributions.
Before final approval of an application, the approving authority may require
the pavement of the developer's pro rata share of the following off-site
body, indicating their approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
J. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Municipal Engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
such report and the action of the approving authority with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of improvements. Where partial approval is
granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure provision of the improvements not yet approved, provided that
30% of the amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained
to ensure completion of all improvements. Failure of the governing
body to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days
shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to
such performance guaranty for such improvements.
K. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
L. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Municipal Engineer.
M. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable fees paid
to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing inspection improvements,
provided that the municipality shall require of the developer a deposit
for all of the reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the Municipal
Engineer for such inspection.
N. In the event that the inspection fees required to be posted pursuant to
the provisions set forth herein are not sufficient to cover the reasonable
inspection fees paid to the City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, the developer shall be required to deposit additional
funds with the Finance Director to cover the fees paid to the City
Engineer for such inspection.
O. This section shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, as
amended, and any portion of this section that is inconsistent with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, as amended, be and in the same is hereby revoked.
[Added 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 4-18]
§ 300-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-13
290:613
and off-tract improvements: street improvements, water system, sewerage,
drainage facilities and easements therefor.
A. Essential off-site and off-tract improvements may be required to be
installed or a performance guaranty furnished in lieu thereof, with the
total cost borne by the developer.
(1) Where a development has no direct access to an improved street or
public or private central water supply or central sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for individual sewage disposal systems, the
approving authority may nevertheless grant final approval if the
developer shall acquire and improve such street between the
development and an existing improved street and, in the case of
water/sewer system(s), if the developer shall acquire and improve
such water and sanitary sewer connections between the
development and existing facilities.
(2) Where a development creates a demand for water supply and/or
sewerage treatment beyond the capacity of the present facilities
and causes the need for a new or expanded well, pump or storage
tank for water supply and/or a new or expanded sewage treatment
plant and ancillary equipment, the approving authority may
nevertheless grant final plat approval if the developer shall acquire
land for, improve and dedicate such water and sewer facilities, all
as approved by the approving authority, governing body and
serving utility company. Where such new or expanded facilities will
have a capacity beyond the needs of the development, the cost to
the developer shall be determined in accordance with Subsection B
below.
(3) Where drainage waters are diverted from the development into
other drainage systems or onto other lands or streets and they are
not adequate to accommodate the additional waters, the approving
authority may grant final approval if the developer shall acquire,
improve and dedicate to the City such enlarged, additional or new
drainage facilities.
(4) In lieu of the developer's performing such off-site and off-tract
work, the developer may request and the governing body may enter
into an agreement for such work to be performed by the City or its
contractors at the cost of the developer.
(5) Where the approving authority determines that off-site and off-tract
improvements are essential to the development and the developer
does not consent to the improvements, the application shall be
denied, without prejudice, to a future application at such time as
the conditions no longer apply.
B. Advisable off-site and off-tract improvements. Where the approving
authority finds that off-site and off-tract improvements would be
advisable, although not essential, and the improvements would promote
the objectives of this section and can be most appropriately
§ 300-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-13
290:614
accomplished in connection with the development and particularly
where the off-site and off-tract improvements could be required to be
made as a local improvement by the City, with the cost thereof to be
assessed against all properties specifically benefited thereby, including
the property of the developer, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) During the processing of the application the approving authority
shall refer its recommendations for off-site and off-tract
improvements to the governing body.
(2) If the governing body concurs, the City Engineer or other authority
retained by the City shall determine the nature of the off-site and
off-tract improvements, including the needs created by the
applicant's proposed development and the then existing needs in
the area, notwithstanding any work of the applicant.
(3) The City Engineer or other authority shall estimate the costs of
such work, including costs to be assigned to the developer and
those to be assessed to others, including a possible local
improvement ordinance, and including costs for construction,
engineering, any easements or right-of-way acquisition, legal work,
advertising contingencies, bonding and assessments.
(4) The Planning Board shall then proceed in the following manner:
(a) Based on the information received from the City Engineer, the
Planning Board shall determine the anticipated amount that
the lands of the applicants would be expected to be assessed.
(b) The amount determined by the Planning Board shall then be
deposited by the applicant with the City Finance Director prior
to final approval.
(c) Such a deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the City concerning the uses of the
deposit, which shall include the following stipulations: that
said funds shall be used by the City solely for the expenses of
such off-site and off-tract improvements; that such deposit may
be appropriated by the City, with other funds of the City, and
may be commingled with other appropriated funds and
expended by the City in connection with such purposes; that, if
such deposit is not used by the City within a specified time
agreed upon by the applicant, said funds shall be distributed in
accordance with the terms of said agreement; that, upon
completion of the work by the City or its contractors, the
properties specially benefited by such improvement shall be
assessed as provided by law, including the property of the
applicant; that the applicant's deposit shall be credited against
the assessment made upon the applicant's property, whether or
not the applicant is then the owner thereof; and that, if such
deposit was less than the amount ultimately assessed against
such property, then the owner(s) of said property shall pay the
§ 300-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-13
290:615
§ 300-14. Design standards.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
difference between the deposit and such assessment; or, if the
deposit exceeded the amount assessed, the excess shall be
refunded to the applicant, without interest.
(d) Where said off-site and off-tract improvements are found by the
approving authority to be advisable and important to the sound
development of the site, but the developer is unwilling to make
such deposit as specified above, then there shall be no final
approval. However, final approval may be granted if the funds
are deposited under protest pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
A. General. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that
will encourage sound development patterns within the City. The
subdivision shall conform to all proposals and conditions shown on the
Master Plan of the City. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites,
public parks and playgrounds shown on the Master Plan shall be
considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where specific proposals
are not included in the Master Plan, all streets and drainage rights-ofway
shall be on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38
through 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44 and will be of such design as will, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, lend themselves to the harmonious
development of the City and enhance the public welfare in accordance
with the following design standards. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98]
B. Streets. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan shall
be as determined by the Planning Board to meet the following criteria:
(1) Where appropriate, existing streets abutting the subdivision shall
be extended and incorporated into the design of the tract.
(2) Minor and marginal access streets shall be designed as to
discourage through traffic.
C. Required widths.
(1) Right-of-way widths (shall be measured from lot line to lot line),
graded widths and paving widths shall be not less than the
following unless otherwise indicated on the Master Plan:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Grading
Width
Major highway Standards of the State Highway Department
Major 80 56 full
§ 300-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-14
290:616
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Grading
Width
Collector 60 36 full
Minor
To residences 50 30 full
To all other
uses
60 36 full
Marginal access 40 24 full
(2) The widths of internal streets in a multifamily, business or
industrial development designed as a whole in accordance with a
comprehensive site plan shall be determined by the Planning Board
in each case in light of the circumstances in the particular situation
and with a view to assuring the maximum safety and convenience
of access for traffic and firefighting equipment, circulation and
parking, including provisions for the loading and unloading of
goods.
D. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the Council under conditions approved
by the Planning Board.
E. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to width as shown on the Master Plan or the street width requirements
of this chapter shall dedicate sufficient additional width along either
one or both sides of the road to comply with such requirements.
F. The longitudinal grade of proposed streets shall not be less than 0.5%
and shall not exceed 4% in the case of major and collector streets and
10% in all other cases. All streets shall have a crown of not less than six
inches.
G. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
H. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
I. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by
more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with the radius of the street line of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets. Any
horizontal curve or change in direction of a minor street from 45° to
180°, other than an intersection, shall have a minimum radius of the
§ 300-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-14
290:617
§ 300-15. Blocks.
§ 300-16. Lots.
§ 300-17. Public use and service areas.
street line of 150 feet. Collector and arterial streets in this case shall
have a minimum radius of 300 feet.
J. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
K. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet on the property line and a minimum of a thirty-six-foot cartway
radius and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a
dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made of future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
L. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by Chapter
345, Zoning and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkways
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 345, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front on an approved street which meets the
requirements of this chapter.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formation, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
§ 300-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-17
290:618
§ 300-18. Additional drainage criteria.118
The applicant, in addition to the requirements of § 300-11G, shall observe
the following requirements and principles when designing the drainage
facilities for the proposed subdivision:
A. Where appropriate, easements along rear property lines or elsewhere
for utility installation may be required; such easements shall be of a
width deemed appropriate by the City Engineer and located in
consultation with the companies and/or municipal departments
concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. General. All areas of the City of Long Branch shall be classified into
three drainage categories as shown on the attached map incorporated
herein:119 Coastal Areas, Ocean Boulevard Areas and Upland Areas. The
following guidelines shall apply to all of the foregoing categories:
(1) Evaluation of downstream system. A physical evaluation of the
condition of existing systems shall be provided by the subdivider
for a distance of at least 300 feet downstream. The evaluation shall
include, as a minimum: size, evaluations, siltation and structural
conditions of the downstream area and systems.
(2) Compliance with Phase I, Master Drainage Plan of the City of Long
Branch. All applicants will be required to comply with the
requirements of Phase I of the Master Drainage Plan of the City of
Long Branch, dated February 1985, prepared by T & M Associates,
City Engineers.120
(3) Detention requirements. All basins shall be designed for a twentyfive-
year storm capacity and be able to maintain existing flows for
the two-, five- and ten-year storms. Basins shall be designed using
the Modified Rationale for sites 15 acres or less and TR 55 for those
over 15 acres. Existing conditions will be calculated assuming the
site is unpaved. Emergency overflows shall be provided. The site
grading shall be such that the site floods before the public road
system.
118. Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Stormwater Management, of this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: The drainage map referred to herein is available at the Zoning Office.
120. Editor's Note: The complete copy of Phase I of the Master Drainage Plan can be found on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 300-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-18
290:619
(4) The one-hundred-year flood elevation must be established on the
subdivision map submitted.
(5) The applicant shall, to the extent practical, minimize impervious
areas and use porous pavement and porous landscaping.
(6) Major trunk lines shall be designed for at least a fifty-year storm.
B. Special provisions for coastal areas. Drainage systems shall be analyzed
for a ten-year storm against a one-year tide. If the applicant plans to
connect the proposed drainage system to an existing system, the
existing system shall also be evaluated for the same combination of
events for the drainage area to it and the proposed system designed
accordingly.
(1) The one-year tides shall be as follows:
(a) Ocean equals 6.0 NGUD 1929.
(b) Branchport Creek equals 5.1 NGUD 1929.
(c) Manahassett Creek equals 5.1 NGUD 1929.
(2) If the site conditions indicate an analysis of the frequencies set
forth in Subsection B(1) above impractical, the applicant shall have
the burden of demonstrating the effect of this storm and why the
required design cannot be accomplished.
(3) Residential areas draining to Branchport Creek and Manahassett
Creek should be designed to handle a two-year storm combined
with a one-year tide and evaluated with a ten-year storm against a
one-year tide.
(4) Requiring of detention basins by the City Engineer will be
determined by the capacity of the downstream system to handle the
flows. Outfalls directly to tidal area will not require detention.
C. Special provisions for Ocean Boulevard areas.
(1) Drainage systems in the Ocean Boulevard areas shall comply with
the same requirements as coastal areas except:
(a) Detention shall be required for all developments in the Ocean
Boulevard area.
(b) Backwater elevations will be provided to the applicant for the
basin nearest the site (along Ocean Boulevard) for use in
backwater analysis. Basins shall be designed in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Subsection A(3) herein.
D. Special provisions for upland areas. The applicant shall provide the
calculations showing the capacity of the downstream system to
adequately handle the additional flow. Detention requirements will be
required on a project-to-project basis upon the recommendation of the
§ 300-18 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-18
290:620
§ 300-19. Recyclable materials storage area.
Materials designated in Chapter 293, Solid Waste, for mandatory recycling
shall be separated from other solid waste by the generator, and a storage
area of recyclable material shall be provided as follows:
§ 300-20. Violations and penalties.
City Engineer, based on the capacity calculations. The site shall be
designed to handle a twenty-five-year storm.
A. For all subdivision applications for single-family units, the applicant
shall provide a storage area of at least 12 square feet in each dwelling
unit to accommodate a four-week accumulation of mandated
recyclables (including but not limited to newspapers, glass bottles,
aluminum cans and tin and bimetal cans). The storage area may be
located in the laundry room, garage, basement or kitchen.
B. For all multifamily subdivision applications, the applicant shall provide
a storage area of at least three square feet within each dwelling unit to
accommodate a one-week accumulation of mandated recyclables
(including but not limited to newspapers, glass bottles, aluminum cans
and tin and bimetal cans). The storage area may be located in the
laundry room, garage or kitchen. Unless recyclables are collected on a
weekly basis from each dwelling unit, one or more common storage
areas must be provided at convenient locations within the development.
A. Failure to obtain approval. If, before favorable referral and final
approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells or agrees to
sell as owner or agent any land which forms a part of a subdivision on
which, by ordinance, the Planning Board and the Council are required
to act, such person shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
B. Civil action.
(1) In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section Three of the
Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953), the City may institute
and maintain a civil action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract or sale if the certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of
the Laws of 1953.121
121. Editor's Note: Said Section 24 was repealed by L. 1975, c. 291. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 300-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-20
290:621
§ 300-21. Certificates of approval.
§ 300-22. Administration; conflict with other regulations.
(2) In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid and also a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of the
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or which
formed part of a subdivision three years preceding the effective date of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56 may apply in writing to the Construction Code
Official for a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has
been approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered
by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The Construction Code Official shall make and issue such certificate
within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and fees
therefor. He shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his office.
C. Each certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(1) There exists in the City a duly established Planning Board and
there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land pursuant to
Chapter 291, P.L. 1975.122
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it related to the land shown in the
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that the subdivision of which the lands are a part is a
validly existing subdivision. The Construction Code Official shall be
entitled to demand and receive for such certificate issued by him a
reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14
and 54:5-15. The fees so collected shall be paid by him to the City.
A. These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the City. Any action taken by the Council
and the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 300-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-22
290:622
primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the
welfare of the entire community.
B. In the event that any section, subsection, paragraph or definition in this
chapter shall conflict with any provisions of the State BOCA Code, the
Uniform Construction Code or any other state or federal statute, rule or
regulation, and the municipality is prohibited by said statute, rule or
regulation from adopting stricter standards, then, in that case, the
Planning Board shall exercise its jurisdiction in reviewing the
application or applications before it is based on the applicable state or
federal statute, rule or regulation.
§ 300-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-22
290:623

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management
[Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 36-07; amended 1-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 2-08; 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 6-09]
§ 300-23. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement.
(1) It is hereby determined that the waterways within the City of Long
Branch are at times subjected to flooding, that such flooding is a
danger to the lives and property of the public; that such flooding is
also a danger to the natural resources of the City of Long Branch,
the county and the state; that development tends to accentuate
flooding by increasing stormwater runoff, due to alteration of the
hydrologic response of the watershed in changing from the
undeveloped to the developed condition; that such increased
flooding produced by the development of real property contributes
increased quantities of waterborne pollutants, and tends to
increase channel erosion; that such increased flooding, increased
erosion, and increased pollution constitutes deterioration of the
water resources of the City of Long Branch, the county and the
state; and that such increased flooding, increased erosion and
increased pollution can be controlled to some extent by the
regulation of stormwater runoff from such development.
(2) It is therefore determined that it is in the public interest to regulate
the development of real property and to establish standards to
regulate the additional discharge of stormwater runoff from such
developments as provided in this chapter. Flood control,
groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through
nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be explored before
relying on structural best management practices (BMPs).
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 300-24.
C. Applicability.
§ 300-23 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-23
290:625
§ 300-24. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the Monmouth
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Long Branch.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 300-23 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-24
290:626
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitats of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 300-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-24
290:627
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Long Branch.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Long Branch, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
§ 300-24 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-24
290:628
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest
within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOILS — The sum of dissolved and undissolved solids
and particulate matter of a buoyancy and/or specific gravity that prohibits
their settling in runoff.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 300-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-24
290:629
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 300-25. General standards.
§ 300-26. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 300-26. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
(3) For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall
apply in addition to this article except to the extent the RSIS are
superseded by this article or alternative standards applicable
under a regional stormwater management plan or water quality
management plan adopted in accordance with the rules of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 300-32.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitats for threatened and endangered species
§ 300-24 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:630
as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under § 300-26D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G, that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G, shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-26
290:631
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
§ 300-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:632
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below:
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard shall not apply under the following conditions or
situations:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-26
290:633
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the Monmouth County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 300-29, Sources for Technical Guidance, or
found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
§ 300-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:634
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 300-27, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within an urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-26
290:635
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 300-27, complete one of the
following:
[1] No increase in volume runoff. Demonstrate through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for stormwater
leaving the site, postconstruction runoff hydrographs for
the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events do not
exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[2] No increase in runoff rate. Demonstrate through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no increase,
as compared to the preconstruction condition, in the peak
runoff rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-,
ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff
will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of
existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full
development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[3] Reduction in runoff rate. Design stormwater management
measures so that the postconstruction peak runoff rates
for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events are
50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction
peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is attributable to
the portion of the site on which the proposed development
or project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not
be applied to postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal
flood hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point of
discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
§ 300-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:636
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 300-24 shall be submitted to
the Freehold Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Freehold Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber, or livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-26
290:637
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 300-29, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 300-29. TSS reduction
shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 300-28C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet pond 50 to 90
§ 300-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:638
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B – (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(7) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 300-29.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas have been established for the protection of water
quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated
and protected as follows:
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-26
290:639
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act. N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
§ 300-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-26
290:640
§ 300-27. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 300-26G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in § 300-26G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) above does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
§ 300-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-27
290:641
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 – Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
§ 300-27 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-27
290:642
§ 300-28. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 300-30B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 300-30.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
§ 300-27 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-28
290:643
§ 300-29. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 300-30. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
water quality design and performance standards established by
§ 300-26 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 300-26 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
§ 300-28 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-30
290:644
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 300-30 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-30
290:645
§ 300-31. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin:
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
§ 300-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-31
290:646
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 14 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 300-31C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from whom
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams, waterways that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
man-made features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of areas of
impervious surface, including but not limited to existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
§ 300-31 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-31
290:647
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 300-25
through 300-28 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 300-26.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measure
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 300-32.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 300-31C(1) through (6) of this article when
§ 300-31 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-31
290:648
§ 300-32. Maintenance and repair.
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
(9) Site plan checklist. Major development applications shall require
the applicant to complete and submit a copy of the site conditions
checklist, which can be found immediately following this section.123
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 300-23C shall comply
with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the municipality in a residential development or project.
Responsibility for facilities located in commercial or development
sites shall be the owner of the site. A named individual shall be
responsible for the safety and maintenance of said facility. The
posting of a two-year maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be required for all facilities not dedicated
to the municipality or other public agency.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
123. Editor's Note: Said checklist is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-31 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-32
290:649
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed, and submit such changes for approval by the City
Engineer.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
within 10 days of such a request.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 300-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-33
290:650
§ 300-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 300-34. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the article by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
§ 300-35. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this article.
§ 300-36. Fees.
All subdivision and site plan review fees associated with this article shall
be provided by the applicant as adopted by the City of Long Branch within
section § 69-29, Fees of this Code.
A. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains,
or uses any building, structure, or land in violation of this article shall
be subject to the following penalties.
B. Failure to comply with any provisions of this article shall be considered
a violation of the Coded Ordinances of Long Branch City and shall be
punishable by a fine of $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Each day of
such violation's continuance shall be considered as a separate offense
and shall be separately punishable. These penalties shall not be the
exclusive remedy available, and nothing in this article shall prevent an
applicant from obtaining injunctive relief.
§ 300-33 SOIL REMOVAL § 300-36
290:651
Chapter 303
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools as attractive nuisance — See
Ch. 262.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 300-36 LONG BRANCH CODE § 300-36
290:652
ARTICLE I
Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. 570 as Sec. 14-4 of the 1971 Code]
§ 303-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — All continuous property of the same ownership.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming or bathing pool or tank
permanently installed and having an inside structural depth in excess of 24
inches or a capacity in excess of 2,000 gallons, constructed or maintained
on any lot by any person for the use of himself, the members of his family or
family guests.
§ 303-2. Permit; fee.
§ 303-3. Violations and penalties.126
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. No person shall install or construct a private swimming pool without
first having obtained a permit from the Construction Code Official and
having paid a fee of $35.
B. All applications for a permit to install or construct a private swimming
pool shall be made on forms as may be required by the Construction
Code Official and shall be accompanied by a description giving the size,
shape, capacity and materials of construction, the location on the lot
and the name and address of the applicant.
C. The Construction Code Official shall issue a permit for the installation
or construction of a private swimming pool, provided that the same
complies with the provisions of this article and the building code124 and
Chapter 345, Zoning; and provided, further, that the application for the
same has been approved in writing by the Health Department.125
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 174, Construction Codes, Uniform.
125. Editor's Note: Former Secs. 14-4.3 through 14-4.14, which immediately followed this
subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
126. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 303-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 303-3
290:653

ARTICLE II
Public Recreational Bathing Places127
[Adopted 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1324 (Sec. 21-1 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 303-4. Definitions.
§ 303-5. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public recreational bathing
place within the City of Long Branch without first having procured a license
from the Department; provided however, that an application having been
submitted and received in accordance with the terms and procedures of this
article may be considered by the Department as permission to operate on a
provisional basis.
§ 303-6. Terms and procedures for licensure.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHAPTER IX — Chapter IX of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code
(N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq).
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health of the City of Long Branch.
ESTABLISHMENT — A public recreational bathing place at one given
location and including one or more bathing facilities.
FACILITY — An individual bathing beach, hot tub, spa, swimming pool
or wading pool.
LICENSEE — The operator of a public recreational bathing place.
B. Other terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings as given in
Chapter IX (8:26-1.3 Definitions).
A. The operator of a public recreational bathing place shall apply for said
license in writing and on a form provided by the Department.
B. Such application shall be submitted to the Department prior to
December 31 of each year for the following year or 30 days prior to the
proposed starting date of operation if not previously licensed or if a
seasonal operation.
C. A license shall be issued only after an application has been submitted,
reviewed and approved.
D. Approval of the application shall be contingent upon:
(1) The application being complete, accurate, signed by the operator
and otherwise in order.
127. Editor's Note: The power to regulate swimming pools is part of the general police power
granted by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-20 and 40:69A-30.
§ 303-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 303-6
290:655
§ 303-7. License fees; exemptions.
§ 303-8. Revocation or suspension of license; hearing.
(2) The tendering of the license fee.
(3) A "satisfactory" inspection evaluation, based on the standards set
forth in Chapter IX.
E. The license shall be effective for the given calendar year, January 1
through December 31, regardless of the date issued, and shall be
renewable annually.
A. Upon application for license, the applicant shall tender the license fee
of $50 for each establishment having one facility plus $25 for each
additional facility.128
B. The following shall be exempt from the license fee:
(1) Any establishment, the operation of which is for the purpose of a
nonprofit religious, charitable or benevolent organization.
(2) Any governmental agency or operation under the aegis of a
governmental agency or program.
(3) The Board of Education.
C. A fee shall be paid for the review of any plan submitted as required by
N.J.A.C. 8:26-2.1, as amended, to build, create or alter any facility or
establishment as defined by said regulation according to the following
fee schedule: [Added 11-12-1977 by Ord. No. 36-97; amended
2-26-2020 by Ord. No. 10-20]
(1) Public swimming pool: $370 each.
(2) Public whirlpool: $185 each.
(3) Public spa: $185 each.
(4) Public spray park, splash park, float tank: $125 each.
(5) Limited public pool alteration: $125 each.
D. The Health Director is empowered to create and promulgate forms and
regulations for the processing of licensing applications and fees
pursuant to this section. [Added 11-12-1997 by Ord. No. 36-97]
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
revoked or suspended by the Department for the violation by the
licensee of any provision of this article or of Chapter IX.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 303-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 303-8
290:656
§ 303-9. Closure of establishment.
§ 303-10. Violations and penalties.129
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I for each violation of any of the provisions of
this article, and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to
be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 303-11. Remedy not exclusive; severability.
The provisions of this article are not intended to be exclusive or to
supersede any other remedies provided by law or ordinance. If any clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall be adjudged by
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public recreational
bathing place, the license of which has been revoked or suspended.
C. A license shall not be revoked or suspended until the licensee shall have
been afforded the opportunity of a hearing before the City Health
Officer to show cause why such license should not be so revoked or
suspended.
(1) Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served
upon the licensee at least three days prior to the date set forth for
such hearing.
(2) The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds relied
upon for such revocation or suspension.
(3) The notice shall be served via certified mail, return receipt
requested, or via hand-delivery by a representative of the
Department or by the City Police Department.
A. An order to close a public recreational bathing place may be issued in
accordance with the enforcement provisions of Chapter IX. The
Department may request of an operator voluntary closure of his
establishment in lieu of prosecution whenever the establishment:
(1) Has received an inspection evaluation of "unsatisfactory."
(2) Has received three consecutive inspection evaluations of
"conditionally satisfactory."
(3) Presents a condition which is an imminent threat to the public
health.
B. If such a request to voluntarily close is not honored, the Department
may initiate an action at law, including a request for court injunction
closing the establishment and/or summary action in Municipal Court.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 303-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 303-11
290:657
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 303-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 303-11
290:658
Chapter 306
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Tax Collector — See Ch. 5, § 5-10C.
§ 303-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 303-11
290:659

ARTICLE I
Payment of Taxes Prior to Issuance of Licenses
[Adopted 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88 (Sec. 7-9 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 306-1. Payment of delinquent property taxes or assessments.
Any applicant for the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued by
the City of Long Branch or requiring the approval of the City of Long Branch
shall be required, if he, she or it is the owner thereof, to pay any delinquent
property taxes or assessments on the property wherein the business or
activity for which the license or permit is sought or wherein the business
activity is to be conducted.
§ 306-2. Revocation or suspension of license or permit.
The City of Long Branch shall, upon notice in to the licensee who is an
owner of the property upon which the licensed business or activity is
conducted, revoke or suspend said license or permit when said licensee has
failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. Notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his, her or its last known
address as shown on the application for the license or permit sought to be
resolved or suspended. Notice shall be considered effective upon mailing
by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon payment of the delinquent
taxes or assessments, the license or permit shall be restored.
§ 306-3. Alcoholic beverage licenses or permits.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 306-1 and 306-2 above, the provisions
of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic beverage license
or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq.
§ 306-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 306-3
290:661

ARTICLE II
Payment of Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 8-27-1991 by Ord. No. 29-91]
§ 306-4. Delinquency charges.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized and directed to charge 8% per
annum on the first $1,500 of taxes becoming delinquent after the due date
and 18% per annum on any amount of taxes in excess of $1,500 becoming
delinquent after the due date, and if a delinquency is in excess of $10,000
and remains in arrears after December 31, an additional penalty of 6%
shall be charged against the delinquency, all such payments to be calculated
from the date the tax, assessment or charges were payable until the date of
actual payment. This shall apply to all existing tax title certificates held by
the City of Long Branch.
§ 306-5. Tax sale certificates.
As to tax sale certificates, the Tax Collector is hereby authorized and
directed to collect 2% when the taxes, interest and costs shall exceed the
sum of $200. When the taxes, interest and costs shall exceed the sum of
$5,000, such additional sum shall be equal to 4% of such amount paid; and
when that sum exceeds $10,000, such additional sum shall be equal to 6%
of such amount paid. This shall apply to all existing tax sale certificates held
by the City of Long Branch.
§ 306-6. Exemption from interest.
No interest shall be charged if payment of any installment is made within
the the calendar day following the date upon which the same became
payable.
§ 306-7. Installments due on legal holidays or when office is closed.
Should the date upon which any installment becomes due fall on a date
which is a legal holiday or a date when the office of the Tax Collector is not
open for business for the day, no interest shall be charged if payment for
such installment is made on the first business day thereafter.
§ 306-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DELINQUENCY — The sum of all taxes, assessments and municipal charges
due on a given parcel of property covering any number of quarters or years.
§ 306-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 306-8
290:663

ARTICLE III
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 30-03]
§ 306-9. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c, 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 306-10. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
City of Long Branch which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the City
of Long Branch on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and 3% on
charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the City of
Long Branch on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel or motel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
§ 306-11. Tax in addition to other taxes or fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel or motel room.
§ 306-12. Exemption.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer
is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the Sales
and Use Tax Act pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
§ 306-13. Statutory requirements.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
§ 306-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 306-13
290:665
§ 306-14. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the City
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same
time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the City shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 306-15. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 306-13 LONG BRANCH CODE § 306-15
290:666
ARTICLE IV
Property Tax Exemptions for 100% Disabled Veterans
[Adopted 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 10-19]
§ 306-16. Refund of taxes collected on property as to which
exemption claim subsequently allowed.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.32, the dwelling house of any citizen and
resident of this state, honorably discharged from active service who has
been declared to have a 100% service-connected disability, by the
United States Veteran Administration, shall be exempt from taxation on
proper claim therefor, and shall provide the Assessor the required
documentation, who in turn shall allow said exemption.
B. It is within the discretion of the governing body to determine whether
to refund taxes to 100% disabled veterans filing for an exemption, and
the City does not currently have any written policy in place and would
like to adopt a uniform policy, which balances the interests of all of the
City's taxpayers while honoring qualified 100% disabled veterans for
their service to our nation.
C. Such exemptions shall be prorated by the City's Tax Collector for the
remainder of the taxable year from the date the claimant's application
is made to the City for the same and is approved by the Assessor, and a
refund shall be issued for any overpayment that has occurred.
§ 306-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 306-16
290:667
Chapter 308
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots and meters — See Ch. 244. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 308-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab to and fro along a public
street at a slow rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting
passengers. Only taxicabs licensed in the City of Long Branch shall be
allowed to cruise for fares in the City of Long Branch.[Amended
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
PUBLIC TAXICAB STAND — A section of a public street or public place
set apart for the exclusive use of a limited number of taxicabs when the
section is distinctly marked as such by a metal sign on the curb or other
conspicuous place or by clearly visible marks upon a surface of the street or
public place.[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
TAXICAB — Any automobile, taxicab or other vehicle propelled by
mechanical motor power engaged in the business of the transportation of
passengers for hire or pay within the city, either operated from stands in the
streets or on telephone calls to garages or in any other manner.
§ 308-2. Administration and enforcement.
§ 308-3. Owner's or operator's license; fees.
A. Licensing of taxicabs shall be by the City Council, and licenses shall be
issued by the City Clerk. All fees received for licenses issued under this
section shall be paid to the City Clerk.
B. The regulating and inspection of taxicabs, the examination of applicants
for license to own and operate taxicabs, the licensing of drivers and the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control
of the Police Chief. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
C. The Police Chief is authorized and empowered to establish reasonable
rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs and requirements
for construction and condition of fitness for the safe and adequate
transportation of passengers and the general cleanliness of taxicabs.
[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
§ 306-16 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-3
290:668
A. Required. No person shall hire out, keep or use for hire or pay or cause
to be kept or used for hire or pay any taxicab within the City without
first having obtained a license for the purpose.
B. Application.
(1) Application shall be made by the owner, lessee or bailee upon blank
forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. The application shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, lessee or bailee and
the applicant, the year, type and model of vehicle for which the
license is desired, the rate to be charged and the number of
persons it is capable of carrying and shall be accompanied by the
fee specified in Subsection C.
(2) The City Council shall schedule a hearing on the application, at
which all interested persons may appear and be heard.
(3) The issuance of taxi medallions is increased to 100. Sales of said
medallion licenses shall be by the direction of the Director of Public
Safety by public bid. Said public bidding shall be conducted by the
Clerk of the City of Long Branch, and the Director of Public Safety
shall direct the Clerk as to the minimum bid required. The bidding
process shall include the deposit by the prospective purchaser of
each medallion to a deposit of 10% of the bid price, with a closing
to take place with the balance of payment and the delivery of the
medallion purchased within 14 days of the date of the auction. If
the purchaser shall fail to complete the transaction within seven
days, 14 days being time of the essence, then, in that event, the
purchaser shall forfeit the said medallion and it shall be reauctioned
at a later date. The Director of Public Safety shall further
have the discretion to list the number of licenses authorized to be
sold at any one time and shall have the sole discretion to determine
the initial bid price. Should there be no bidding on the license, it
shall be within the discretion of the Director of Public Safety to set
the price at another auction.130 [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No.
866; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
C. The fee for each taxicab shall be $150 annually, beginning on the first
day of January, which fee is imposed for revenue. [Amended
4-10-1973 by Ord. No. 686; 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 22-10;
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
D. Inspection of vehicles.
(1) No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed
until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined
by the Police Department and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers.
130. Editor's Note: See also Ord. No. 20-14, adopted 9-9-2014, on file in the City offices, which
authorizes the sale of 20 taxicab medallions at auction and outlines the terms and
conditions of such auction.
§ 308-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 308-3
290:669
(2) There must be submitted with the application for a license to own
or operate a taxicab a certificate from the Police Department that
the taxicab is in a clean, sanitary and safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, which certificate shall contain the
state license number of the vehicle. Side curtains or shades shall
not be permitted on any vehicle. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 2-18]
(3) There shall be an inspection fee of $75 for the inspection or
reinspection of any taxi. [Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
E. Issuance of license.
(1) Upon approval and granting of a license by the City Council for the
operation of a taxicab within the City, the Police Department shall
provide the licensee with a card containing the name of the
applicant, a front straight view photograph of the applicant, the
City license number and a notice that in case of any complaint the
Department shall be notified of the same. The signature of the
Chief of Police shall appear on the license. The Police Department
shall furnish a rate card which bears the license number of the
vehicle and the rates of fares under which the taxicab is operated,
and which rate card shall be posted in each cab so as to clearly be
visible to the passenger in the rear seat. The rate card shall also
state that the passenger or passengers from the same household,
or who are traveling together or as a party, who first occupy a
taxicab, are required to consent to the taxicab being occupied by
other passengers. [Amended 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 861;
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
(2) Each licensee, every two years from the date of the issuance of a
license, shall be required to resubmit to a fingerprint and records
check by the Police Department and pay a fee in accordance with
the fee schedule set by the New Jersey State Police. Upon receipt of
the background information, the Police Chief shall be authorized to
reissue a license. In the event that the Police Chief feels that there
are just reasons for denying the taxicab license, the Police Chief
shall notify the taxicab license holder (licensee), who shall have the
right to have a hearing before the Council of the City of Long
Branch upon 30 days' written notice. [Added 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 49-95; amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
F. Transfer of license. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
(1) The taxicab must be registered in the State of New Jersey to the
medallion owner or, if leased, registered to the lessee. There shall
be no subleasing of licenses authorized by this subsection. Any
vehicle which is found to be subleased shall be subject to penalties
which could be imposed under § 308-11.
§ 308-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-3
290:670
(2) The license transfer fee shall be increased to $100. All transfers
must have a complete background check and investigation by the
Police Department, with all fees being paid by the applicant upon
obtaining City Council approval.
G. Insurance required. In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall
be unlawful for the owner to operate a taxicab or cause or permit a
taxicab to be operated, nor shall any license be issued, until the
applicant has presented proof and maintains himself or herself that he
or she has a minimum of $100,000 of liability insurance from an
insurance company licensed and regulated by the State of New Jersey.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
H. Insurance required. In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall
be unlawful for the owner to operate or cause or permit a taxicab to be
operated, nor shall any license be issued, until and unless the applicant
has complied with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1.
I. Supervision by police.
(1) The Police Department shall keep a register of the name of each
person owning or operating a vehicle licensed under this chapter,
together with the license number and the make and description of
each vehicle, with the date and complete record of inspection made
of it.
(2) The Police Department shall maintain constant vigilance over all
taxicabs to see that they are kept clean and in a condition of safety
for the transportation of passengers, and to this end shall have the
right at any and all times to inspect any and all licensed vehicles,
and shall maintain a record of all inspections.
(3) In the event that the City taxi is involved in a serious/fatal motor
vehicle accident within the City limits, it shall be brought to the
police traffic garage for a full inspection and kept for a reasonable
period of time to allow for the investigation of the accident. [Added
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
J. Licenses may be revoked or suspended at any time after hearing for:
[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
(1) By the City Council if a vehicle is not clean and safe condition for
the transportation of passengers and kept in conformity with the
terms of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations made by
the Council.
(2) If during the license period, licensee has been convicted of a crime
which violates any provision of Chapter 308, or driving while
intoxicated/under the influence, or reckless driving, or has any
judgment unsatisfied or record against him arising out of an
automobile accident, or who has made false answers in his
application for such license or any renewal thereof, who has failed
§ 308-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 308-3
290:671
§ 308-4. Driver's license.
or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxicab
service, or who has not complied fully with all requirements of this
chapter for such class of license.
(3) Any taxicab driver's license if the licensee or applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle.
(4) Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reasons of unsafe or unsanitary conditions, is
dangerous to the safety or health of the occupants of others.
(5) Except in cases where there is a risk of substantial harm to the
public, no denial, revocation, or suspension of any license shall take
effect unless, or until, the licensee has had an opportunity for a
hearing before the governing body. In the event that the Clerk, or
the Chief of Police, determine that a license should be denied,
revoked, or suspended, the applicant or licensee shall be notified of
their right to a hearing before the governing body, which hearing
shall be scheduled within 30 days of such determination, unless
waived by the applicant or licensee. Where there is a reasonable
basis to believe that the public is placed at risk of substantial harm,
the City Clerk and/or the Chief of Police may impose a temporary
suspension of such license pending a hearing before the governing
body, which shall be scheduled as soon as possible, but no later
than 30 days after such suspension.
A. Application. Each applicant for a driver's license shall conform to the
following regulations:
(1) Be a resident of the State of New Jersey for one year or more; be a
minimum of 21 years of age and present evidence, satisfactory to
the Police Department, of at least one year licensed automobile
driving with a New Jersey driver's license with no more than six
points. [Amended 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 954; 6-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 17-14; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
(2) Present the certificate of a reputable physician showing that he has
been examined within 60 days and that he is of sound physique,
with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
trouble or other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
(3) Present proof of either United States citizenship, a valid visa, or
working permit from the United States government. [Amended
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 8-02]
(4) Has not been convicted of any of the following crimes: [Amended
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 62-92; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 15-05;
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 24-16]
§ 308-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-4
290:672
(a) In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide,
kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault
or endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or having in his possession
any weapon enumerated in subsection r. of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a
crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A.
2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly persons
or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(b) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the world,
as a result of a conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a
crime which in that other jurisdiction or country is comparable
to one of the crimes enumerated in Subsection A(4)(a) of this
subsection.
(c) If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in this subsection can produce a certificate of
rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the
criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an equivalent
certification from the jurisdiction where the criminal offense
occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant
from operating or driving an autocab.
(d) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an operator
of an autocab who has received the consent to operate in the
City prior to November 29, 2011.
(5) Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
(6) Produce, on forms provided by the Police Department, affidavits of
his good character from at least two reputable citizens who have
known him personally and a further testimonial on a form provided
for that purpose from his last employer, unless in the estimation of
the Department sufficient reason is given for its omission.
[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
(7) Fill out, on a form provided by the Police Department, his full name,
residence, places of residence for the preceding five years, age,
height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, previous employment,
whether married or single, whether he has ever been convicted of a
high misdemeanor, misdemeanor or a violation of this chapter and
whether his license has ever been revoked and if so for what cause,
which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and
filed in the Department as a permanent record. He shall also
furnish four copies of a front-view photograph, size two inches by
two inches.
§ 308-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 308-4
290:673
§ 308-5. Taxicab stands. [Amended 4-11-1990 by Ord. No. 11-90]
(8) Be fingerprinted under the direction of the Police Chief and pay a
fee in accordance with the fee schedule set by the New Jersey State
Police.131 The fee will be used to pay the Division of State Police
Bureau of Identification for a complete and thorough history check
using the fingerprints, and the applicant shall pay any other fees in
accordance with such investigation as directed by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 53:1-20.6A as are applicable at the time
of application. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 62-92;
9-8-1994 by Ord. No. 34-94; 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 9-04;
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
B. Fees. The initial license fee for the driver of a taxicab shall be $75, and
a renewal shall be $50 for each year or part thereof, $12 of which is to
pay for the criminal history check required in Subsection A(8).
[Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 62-92; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
C. Taxicab pickup and dropoff points throughout the City will be
designated by the Traffic Department. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 17-14]
D. There will be a fine of $50 for parking in a taxicab pickup or dropoff
point. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
E. Any taxicab stand paid for in the year 2014 shall be valid until
December 31, 2014. [Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
A. Establishment of stands.
(1) The Director of the Department of Public Safety may establish
taxicab stands with telephone connection to certain taxicab
companies when in his judgment that course is necessary, and the
continuance of the taxicab stands shall be subject to his approval.
(2) Where the Director of the Department of Public Safety has given
permission to a certain taxicab company for a taxicab stand with
telephone connection, no other taxicab driver, other than a driver
for the company which has been assigned that stand, shall use this
stand or make any calls over his private telephone, under penalty of
suspension or revocation of the offender's driver's license.
B. Fees. The City shall charge a fee of $25 for each taxicab parking space
assigned in the street, renewable on an annual basis of $25 dollars per
year. [Amended 4-10-1973 by Ord. No. 686]
C. Location of stands. The current locations of existing taxicab stands
approved by the Director of Public Safety are as follows:
131. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 9-04, adopted 4-13-2004, also states that: "at the present time the
actual cost of state and federal fingerprinting is $54, which is payable by money order to
the New Jersey State Police."
§ 308-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-5
290:674
§ 308-6. Zones and rates. [Amended 5-10-1990 by Ord. No. 15-90]
(1) The west side of Long Branch Avenue, beginning at a point 35 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Seaview Avenue and extending
50 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) The west side of Third Avenue, beginning at a point 35 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Broadway and extending 75 feet northerly
therefrom.
(3) The east side of Third Avenue, beginning at a point 35 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Broadway and extending 50 feet northerly
therefrom.
D. Prohibited acts. No person shall at any time park a motor vehicle in any
taxicab stand.
A. Zones established. The city, for the purpose of establishing taxicab
rates, shall be divided into five zones.
(1) Zone 1 shall include all that area north of Joline Avenue, from the
Atlantic Ocean to the West Long Branch boundary.
(2) Zone 2 shall include all that area south of Joline Avenue to
Broadway from the Atlantic Ocean to the West Long Branch
boundary.
(3) Zone 3 shall include all that area south of Broadway and north of
Cedar Avenue, bounded on the east by the Atlantic Ocean and on
the west by the Borough of West Long Branch.
(4) Zone 4 shall include all that area south of Cedar Avenue to Park
Avenue, which extends from Norwood Avenue to Cedar Avenue,
bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east and the Borough of West
Long Branch on the west.
(5) Zone 5 shall include all that area south of Park Avenue, which
extends from Norwood Avenue to Ocean Avenue, bounded by the
Atlantic Ocean on the east and by the Borough of West Long Branch
and Ocean Township on the west and the Borough of Deal on the
south.
B. Rates established. The price that shall be charged by the owner or
driver shall be as follows: [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98;
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 27-07]
(1) To or from any place in Zone 1, $4.25 for one passenger and $1 for
each additional passenger from the same household, including all
persons over the age of five years. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 17-14]
(2) To or from any place in Zone 1 to Zone 2, or Zone 2 to Zone 1, $4.75
for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from the
§ 308-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 308-6
290:675
§ 308-7. Operation of taxicabs.
same household, including all persons over the age of five years.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
(3) To or from any place in Zone 1 to Zone 3, or Zone 3 to Zone 1, $5.25
for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from the
same household, including all persons over the age of five years.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
(4) To or from any place in Zone 1 to Zone 4, or Zone 4 to Zone 1, $5.75
for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from the
same household, including all persons over the age of five years.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
(5) To or from any place in Zone 1 to Zone 5, or Zone 5 to Zone 1, $6.25
for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from the
same household, including all persons over the age of five years.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
(6) Except as otherwise specified herein, to or from any place in Zone
2, $4 for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from
the household.
(7) Unless as otherwise specified herein, to or from any place in Zone
3, $4 for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from
the same household.
(8) Except as otherwise specified herein, to or from any place in Zone
4, $4 for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from
the same household.
(9) Except as otherwise specified herein, to or from any place in Zone
5, $4 for one passenger and $1 for each additional passenger from
the same household.
(10) Notwithstanding anything set forth hereinabove, the charge for
any senior citizen within any Zone shall be $3.
(11) There shall be no charge for luggage, bags or other similar items
commonly used for carrying or transporting other items, and the
owner or driver is required to have the trunk of the taxicab fully
available for storage and/or the carrying of luggage, bags or other
similar items commonly used for carrying or transporting other
items. However, if said luggage or bags do not fit within the trunk
of the taxicab and are required to be placed in the taxicab itself, an
additional charge of $0.50 shall be added to the total cost.
A. Soliciting prohibited. No taxicab, while waiting for employment by
passengers, shall stand on any public street or space other than at or
upon a taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this
chapter, nor shall any driver of a taxicab seek employment by
§ 308-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-7
290:676
§ 308-8. Displaying of card. [Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets of the City at any time without
displaying a card, placed in a manner so as to be conveniently read by any
passenger, containing the maximum rates of fare to be charged, the name
and license number of the licensee and the name, address and front straight
view photograph of the driver of the taxicab. Fare cards/fare stickers will be
placed on the passenger's rear door glass on the interior and exterior of the
vehicle.
§ 308-9. Decals. [Added 4-10-1973 by Ord. No. 686; amended
6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14]
repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro in a short
space before or otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly
access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railway
station or other place of public gathering; and no driver shall solicit
passengers for a taxicab.
B. Lost property. Every driver of a taxicab, immediately after the
termination of any hiring or employment, shall carefully search his
taxicab for any property lost or left therein, and any property, unless
sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, must be reported, in writing,
by the driver or owner of the taxicab to the Police Department, with
brief particulars and a description of the property, within 24 hours after
the finding.
C. General regulations.
(1) Every taxicab shall have a permanent illuminated taxi sign and be
plainly marked as a taxicab.
(2) Every taxicab owner shall operate and render service at least 16
hours every day of the week.
(3) Every taxicab owner shall operate his business from an established
place and shall maintain an office with a telephone.
A. Every licensed City taxi shall have the company name on the driver's
side, passenger side and rear of the vehicle, along with the car number.
The lettering must be three inches or greater in size.
B. All car numbers must be the same as the medallion number. Medallion
numbers may be adjusted as needed by the Director of Public Safety.
C. Any medallion owners who have been found guilty of repetitive
violations (three or more) within one calendar year shall be subject to
suspension or revocation and provided with a hearing within 30 days
before the City Council. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
§ 308-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 308-10
290:677
§ 308-10. Trouble lights. [Added 5-26-1987 by Ord. No. 1348]
All taxicabs shall be equipped with two flashing devices for the purpose
of warning the operators of other vehicles and law enforcement officials
that an emergency situation exists within the taxicab. These devices shall
be capable of activation by the operator of the taxicab and shall be of a
type approved by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, as required by
N.J.S.A. 39:3-54b. They shall be mounted one beneath the front bumper and
one under the rear guard of the taxicab and shall display flashing red lights
which shine on the roadway under the vehicle.
§ 308-11. Violations and penalties; minimum and maximum fines.
[Added 4-10-1973 by Ord. No. 686; amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
17-14]
A. Unlicensed taxi operating within City limits:
(1) First offense: $250.
(2) Second offense: $750.
B. Failure to display operator's license/rate card in view of passengers:
(1) First offense: $35.
(2) Second offense: $75.
C. Failure to have City taxi inspection:
(1) First offense: $35.
(2) Second offense: $75.
D. Failure to keep taxi clean or allowing unsafe equipment condition:
(1) First offense: $35.
(2) Second offense: $75.
E. Any taxi found to be operating in an unsafe condition two or more times
in a calendar year shall subject the taxi license/medallion to being
revoked. In the event that such a penalty is imposed on the owner or
licensee of a taxi, and such person is subject to such penalty, a hearing
shall be provided to the taxi owner at his/her request before the Council
of the City of Long Branch.
F. Any taxi involved in a serious/fatal motor vehicle accident within the
City limits which was being operated with the vehicle components in an
unsafe condition shall subject the license/medallion to suspension or
revocation. Such potential penalty shall allow the owner/operator to
seek a hearing before the Council of the City of Long Branch to
determine the appropriateness of any proposed penalty.
§ 308-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 308-11
290:678
Chapter 312
TENNIS COURTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
§ 312-1. Purpose.
All guidelines for the construction of private tennis courts for single-family
residences are contained in this chapter. This chapter does not concern
itself with commercial or public enterprises, except in the area of drainage
fence height and playing surface restrictions.
§ 312-2. Permit required. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
No tennis court shall be constructed, installed or remodeled unless and until
the owner of or the person in possession of the lot on which such tennis
court is intended to be constructed or located obtains a permit therefor
from the Construction Code Official.
§ 312-3. Application; fee.
G. Any taxi found to have fictitious documents, stickers, or any writing
shall have the license/medallion subject to permanent revocation or
suspension, which potential suspension shall allow the owner/operator
to seek a hearing before the Council of the City of Long Branch.
H. Any licensee/medallion which is leased and found in violation of any of
the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have notice of any
violation and notice of any potential hearing through certified mail to
the medallion owner at the address provided by the owner to the City
Clerk of the City of Long Branch.
I. Any medallion owners who have been found guilty of repetitive
violations (three or more) within one calendar year shall be subject to
suspension or revocation pending a hearing within 30 days before the
City Council. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18]
A. Application for a tennis court permit shall be made in writing on forms
supplied by the city and shall be accompanied by a plot plan of the lot
showing the proposed location thereon of such tennis court, its
dimensions, the dimensions of the lot and the distance of the proposed
tennis court from the various property lines and from all structures on
such lot, together with plans, elevations and complete specifications of
the design, materials and method of construction of such tennis court.
Such plans and specifications and the plot plans shall bear the
signature and seal of a licensed engineer or land surveyor. Such
§ 308-11 TENNIS COURTS § 312-3
312:679
§ 312-4. Construction requirements.
application shall contain the consent of the applicant to inspections by
municipal inspectors and police for the purpose of ascertaining that the
provisions of this and other chapters are being compiled with, and shall
be accompanied by a fee of $35.
B. All other applicants, whether public (parks) or commercial (clubs,
hotels, high-rises, garden apartments, etc.), must make application to
the Planning Board and are subject to a site plan review. The applicant
must meet all requirements concerning drainage, setbacks, fence
height and playing surface, as contained within this chapter. He must
also meet all requirements set down within the City of Long Branch
zoning ordinances132 that apply to the applicant's use for the site.
Within these standards the applicant will not be allowed to construct a
tennis facility unless he meets the square-footage-to-lot-coverage ratio
for his specific land use. Lighting and sound systems for public and
commercial sites will be evaluated only within the context of a formal
site plan application in light of the specific use of and the zone in which
the property falls.
A. Setback lines. Tennis courts shall be located in the rear yard, except in
the case of a corner lot. On a corner lot, the tennis court shall be located
in the quadrant of the lot which is furthest removed from both street
lines. Tennis courts shall be located at least 20 feet from each lot line
and at least 10 feet from any structure on each lot. [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 16-07]
B. Zoning ordinances. Outdoor tennis courts shall be deemed to be
"detached structures for permitted accessory uses" within the meaning
of Chapter 345, Zoning, and shall be subject to all the provisions of such
ordinances, except where the express provisions of this chapter are
inconsistent therewith. In such cases the express provisions of this
chapter shall control. No tennis court shall be used unless and until the
Construction Code Official has approved its construction and has issued
a certificate of occupancy.
C. Nonconforming premises. In the event that the land, buildings and uses
at the premises upon which it is proposed to construct tennis courts do
not conform in all particulars with all requirements of the zoning
ordinances, a permit, if issued, shall be made subject to the condition
that a variance must be granted or recommended by the Board of
Adjustment before the permit shall become effective.
D. Drainage. All drainage must be handled on-site through a piped system
or sheet runoff in such a manner as not to infringe upon adjacent
property drainage plans, must be signed and stamped by a licensed
professional engineer and must be included within application for
construction.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 312-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 312-4
312:680
§ 312-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 316
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 5,
§ 5-13.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 322.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 316-1. Establishment of list. [Amended 3-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1096]
The Public Safety Director of the City of Long Branch shall establish a list
of persons or firms who shall be utilized by the Police Department of the
E. Illumination.
(1) Tennis courts shall not be illuminated for the purpose of playing
tennis at night. Lighting of the court for other purposes shall
provide not more than three watts per square foot of court area
with three footcandles' illumination.
(2) All electric wiring shall conform with the National Electric Code of
the National Fire Protection Association and shall be subject to
inspection and approval by an inspection agency approved by the
New Jersey Public Utility Commission.
(3) Any illumination used shall be so designed, shielded and directed
as to prevent any direct rays of light and any glare from reaching
any portion of neighboring properties.
F. Sound systems. No sound-amplifying, public address or other soundmagnification
system or equipment or unit shall be used in connection
with the use of a tennis court.
G. Fences. The tennis court may be enclosed within a fence of not more
than 15 feet in height and which is of good quality, steel chain link
fencing with an open mesh covered with a green vinyl coating.
H. Soil erosion; sediment control. If more than 5,000 square feet of surface
area is to be disturbed, certification from the County Soil Conservation
Committee must be received before any construction may begin.133
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Soil Removal.
§ 312-4 TENNIS COURTS § 316-1
312:681
City to provide towing and wrecking services for abandoned, wrecked or
impounded vehicles. This list shall be established based upon the filing of
applications by those interested parties, said application to be in a form as
fully described in § 316-2 of this chapter.
§ 316-2. Application for license; requirements of applicant.
A. The Public Safety Director be and the same hereby is authorized to use
John's Truck and Auto of 505 Joline Avenue, Long Branch, New Jersey,
as a contact and storage facility for abandoned vehicles in the City of
Long Branch. [Added 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02; amended
4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 9-05]
A. An application for a license as a proprietor of a towing or wrecking
business to be placed upon the list to be utilized by the Police
Department shall be made by the person or firm engaged in operating a
wrecker or wreckers. The application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Police Department and specifically report the following facts:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is
made for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the officers and directors thereof, its registered office and its
resident agent.
(2) The year, make and type of each wrecker used in said business, its
serial number, registration number and registered owner.
(3) The address where the wrecker or wreckers shall be regularly
garaged, the telephone number available on a twenty-four-hourper-
day basis and the names of all operators, their addresses and
the serial numbers of their New Jersey motor vehicle licenses.
B. The application for a towing-wrecking license shall be accompanied by
a certificate of liability insurance for said wrecker in the policy limits of
no less than $250,000 for one person, $500,000 for one accident and
$20,000 for property damage. The certificate of insurance shall be
issued by a company certified to do business in New Jersey, and each
policy so required must contain an endorsement providing for 30 days'
notice to the City in the event of any material changes in the policy or
cancellation thereof.
C. The City Clerk shall refer the application for a license to the Police
Department for a check of all equipment, personnel and facilities of the
applicant to determine the ability of the applicant to perform the
business herein regulated.
D. The office, workshop and storage areas of the applicant must be located
in zones where such use is permitted and lie within the boundaries of
the City of Long Branch.
E. Each vendor providing towing service must show proof of ownership or
a lease agreement for a proper land area to store a minimum of 20 cars.
§ 316-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 316-2
312:682
Adequate lighting shielded from abutting premises shall be maintained
during night hours, and a security fence of at least six feet in height
shall be maintained. [Amended 3-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1096]
F. Each wrecker must meet all of the requirements of N.J.S.A. Title 39,
Motor Vehicle Rules and Regulations, and must have a lifting capacity
of at least four tons. In addition, each wrecker must have the following
equipment:
(1) One large broom and shovel.
(2) At least one set of dolly wheels.
(3) Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
(4) Tow sling-type tow bar and/or wheel lift to prevent any part of the
crane metal from touching towed vehicles. [Amended 7-23-1991
by Ord. No. 24-91]
(5) Emergency warning lights.
(6) Portable safety lights to be installed on the rear of the towed
vehicle if necessary.
(7) Safety flares for night work.
(8) At least 50 feet of adequate size cable or chain to be used when
winching is necessary. [Added 3-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1096]
(9) Snatch block to be used for winching. [Added 3-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 1096]
G. After the application has been submitted and been reviewed by the
Police Department, it shall be forwarded to the Director of Public Safety
for approval or disapproval by him. Such approval or disapproval shall
be dependent on both the applicant's technical ability to perform the
requested tasks as outlined above and upon the applicant's personal
fitness to engage in a business regulated in the public interest. Factors
which the Police Department and the Director of Public Safety shall
determine as disqualifying for reasons of personal fitness shall include:
(1) Conviction of an indictable offense;
(2) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; and
(3) Conviction of a crime involving the use or possession of a controlled
dangerous substance.
H. No license for a tower or wrecker shall be granted unless and until the
number of licenses issued and outstanding shall be less than six.
[Added 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88]
§ 316-2 TENNIS COURTS § 316-3
312:683
§ 316-3. Records.
The Director of Public Safety shall see that a record is maintained
containing the names, addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers
of all licensed wreckers and a record of the types of wreckers available to
meet the specific need of the emergency. The Director of Public Safety shall
also see that a record is maintained of the regular response of wreckers to
police calls and any and all complaints from vehicle owners as to improper
service or charges.
§ 316-4. Revolving list; order of calls.
The Public Safety Director shall maintain a revolving list of licensed
wreckers to provide service where needed and instruct all duty officers to
call those listed in alphabetical order on a rotational basis. All owners or
operators of disabled vehicles shall retain the right to direct the towing
vehicle to remove the damaged vehicle to a garage or workshop of their own
choosing.
§ 316-5. Fees and charges. [Amended 3-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1096;
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88; 4-23-1991 by Ord. No. 9-91; 7-23-1991
by Ord. No. 24-91]
A. Fee schedule: result of public impounds.
(1) For passenger vehicles, mopeds, motorcycles under 8,000 pounds,
the towing fee shall be as follows: [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord.
No. 47-98; 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2-15]
(a) Passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles,
adjacent to the confines of the roadway, from any point in the
City of Long Branch any day of the week, at any time of day or
night and all holidays are a flat fee of $100.
(b) Passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles,
adjacent to the confines of the roadway, from any point in the
City of Long Branch, during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Friday: $75.
(c) Passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles,
adjacent to the confines of the roadway, from any point in the
City of Long Branch, at any time of the day or night on
Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $75.
(d) Any vehicles 8,000 pounds or greater registered gross weight,
from any point within the City of Long Branch, at any time of
the day or night: $125.
(2) Where dolly-towing or flatbed towing is required, an additional fee
of $35 shall be charged; or wheel lift: $125 all vehicles and trailers
8,000 pounds gvw or 20 feet or greater in length (including load).
§ 316-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 316-5
312:684
*Within City limits; $2.50 per mile out of City limits. [Amended
1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 47-98; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(3) When the winching of any vehicles or the recovery of any vehicles
is required, within 25 feet from the roadway, an additional fee of
$65 shall be charged. For any vehicle that is more than 25 feet from
the roadway, an additional fee of $2.50 per foot of cable utilized
shall be charged. [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 47-98;
3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01]
(4) Where passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles, are
stored prior to reclamation by the owner, the fees shall be as
follows: [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 47-98; 3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 9-01; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(a) Indoors. A fee of $40 per day shall be charged.
(b) Outdoors. A fee of $35 per day shall be charged.
(c) Outdoor (unsecured). A fee of $15 per day shall be charged.
(d) Vehicles or trailers 8,000 pounds or greater gvw or greater
than 20 feet in length; an additional charge of $50.
(5) Where vehicles over 8,000 pounds weight rating, as identified on
the manufacturer’s GVWR placard for load on vehicle or trailer, or
any vehicle over 20 feet in length including the load on the trailer
are stored prior to reclamation by the owner, the fees shall be as
follows: [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 47-98; 9-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 35-07]
(a) Indoors. A fee of $42 per day shall be charged. The request for
a vehicle to be stored inside shall be made by the owner of the
vehicle or by the City of Long Branch Police Department’s
Traffic Safety Unit. Any vehicle which is stored inside shall
remain inside until the vehicle is retrieved or a request by the
owner or this agency is given to place the vehicle in another
location.
(b) Outdoors. A fee of $27 per day shall be charged.
(6) The towing and service charges for City-of-Long Branch-owned
vehicles, excluding fire trucks and garbage trucks, shall be as
follows: [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07]
(a) Vehicles up to 8,000 pounds weight rating, as identified on the
manufacturer’s GVWR placard, or any vehicle over 20 feet in
length including the load on the trailer:
(b) Vehicles over 8,000 pounds weight rating, as identified on the
manufacturer’s GVWR placard, or any vehicle over 20 feet in
length including the load on the trailer:
§ 316-5 TENNIS COURTS § 316-5
312:685
(7) Where the owner of a vehicle requests a wrecker for a service call,
on a vehicle not to be towed, the charge for this service shall not
exceed the City rates for towing.
(8) Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner a written
estimate of costs and a written receipt when paid.
B. Fee schedule: result of accident or theft recovery. The following is the
fee schedule for towing and storage services as a result of an accident
or theft recovery:
(1) When towing services are required at the scene of an automobile
accident, the day rate shall apply when the time of the accident is
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
New Jersey State holidays. The night, weekend and holiday rate
shall otherwise apply.
(2) When towing services are otherwise required, the day rate shall
apply when the vehicle is transported (pickup and delivery) entirely
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except New Jersey State holidays. The night, weekend and
holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
(3) Days. Day rates shall be as follows: [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord.
No. 9-01; 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07]
(a) First mile or less:
[1] Wheel lift/strap, $75.
[2] Flatbed, $100.
(b) Each additional mile: $2.50.
(c) For any vehicle or trailer greater than 20 feet in length or with
a weight rating greater than 8,000 pounds, as identified on the
manufacturer’s GVWR placard, there shall be an additional
ten-dollar charge base hook up.
(4) Nights, weekends and New Jersey State holidays. Rates shall be as
follows: [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01; 9-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 35-07]
(a) First mile or less:
[1] Wheel lift/strap, $75.
[2] Flatbed, $100.
(b) Each additional mile: $2.50.
(c) For any vehicle or trailer greater than 20 feet in length or with
a weight rating greater than 8,000 pounds, as identified on the
§ 316-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 316-5
312:686
§ 316-6. Cruising, soliciting and gratuities prohibited.
The practice of cruising with a wrecker or tow truck is forbidden.
Furthermore, no person shall pay any emolument to any third person not
manufacturer’s GVWR placard, there shall be an additional
ten-dollar charge per mile.
(5) Inside building. Storage facility rates shall be $40. For any vehicle
or trailer greater than 20 feet in length or with a weight rating
greater than 8,000 pounds, as identified on the manufacturer's
GVWR placard, there shall be an additional charge of $2 per day.
The request for a vehicle to be stored inside shall be made by the
owner of the vehicle, or by the City of Long Branch Police
Department's Traffic Safety Unit. Any vehicle, which is stored
inside, shall remain inside, until the vehicle is retrieved or a
request by the owner or this agency is given to place the vehicle in
another location. [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01;
9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(6) Outside secured storage facility capacity. Rates shall be $35. For
any vehicle or trailer greater than 20 feet in length or with a weight
rating greater than 8,000 pounds, as identified on the
manufacturer's GVWR placard, there shall be an additional charge
of $2 per day. [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01;
9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(7) Outside unsecured storage facility capacity. Rates shall be $15. For
any vehicle or trailer greater than 20 feet in length or with a weight
rating greater than 8,000 pounds, as identified on the
manufacturer's GVWR placard, there shall be an additional charge
of $2 per day. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07;
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(8) Additional flatbed truck to provide towing services, if necessary,
shall result in an additional charge of no greater than $50. [Added
3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 9-01; amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2-15]
(9) Use of materials for cleaning an accident scene and for material
and labor required for the application, cleanup and disposal of
absorbent material required for the cleanup of fuel leaks or spills
covering less than 100 square feet of the roadway. Fluid leaks or
spills larger than 100 square feet will be mitigated by the Fire
Department of the City of Long Branch, $35. [Added 3-27-2001
by Ord. No. 9-01; amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 43-03;
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(10) Use of collision wrap for unsecured broken windows shall result in
an additional charge of no greater than $25 per window. [Added
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
§ 316-5 TENNIS COURTS § 316-6
312:687
involved in the accident or to any police officer for information as to the
location of any accident or soliciting the employment of the licensee's of any
accident or soliciting the employment of the licensee's service, nor give any
gratuities, fees or other compensation or gifts to any members of the Police
Department.
§ 316-7. License fee; term; renewal; annual inspection fee.
[Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88]
The fee for the license issued under this chapter shall be $150, paid on
receipt of said license from the City Clerk. The license shall remain valid
from January 1 to December 31 of each year. It may be renewed annually by
the operator paying a fee of $150, provided that the operator continues to
comply with all the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 316-8. Responsibilities of tower or wrecker.
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such employment, the person or firm agrees
to the following:
A. Tow truck annual inspection fee: $75 per truck. [Added 2-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 2-15]
A. In order to provide the public with prompt and adequate tow truck
service, the tow truck operator will be asked to respond within 20
minutes after receipt of the call. If the operator cannot respond within
such time, he shall so notify the person requesting the service, and the
person requesting said service, if time is of the essence, may call
another licensee on the rotating list. [Amended 3-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 1096]
B. Clean all debris at the accident site emanating from the accident,
including the application, cleanup and disposal of absorbent material
required for the cleanup of fluid leaks or spills covering less than 100
square feet of the roadway. [Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No.
43-03]
C. Provide the Police Department and the City-approved title processing
company with the information of any and all unclaimed vehicles.
Vehicles over 15 business days for junk title, 20 business days for
operable vehicles: [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88;
2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-15]
(1) Year, make, color and vehicle identification number.
(2) Owner's name and address, if available.
D. Maintain a ledger of all towing or wrecking jobs handled, the name of
the owner or operator, if known, the charges made for the service and
the date and amount of payments.
§ 316-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 316-8
312:688
§ 316-9. Director of Public Safety; powers and duties; hearing for
grievances.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby given the authority to promulgate
rules and regulations necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of
this chapter, subject to approval by resolution by the City Council of the
City of Long Branch. The Director of Public Safety is hereby given the
authority to suspend or revoke the right of any person or firm which is
on the authorized list if the person or firm violates any of the terms and
E. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this chapter.
F. Comply with Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards.
G. Provide the City of Long Branch with a written agreement to indemnify
and hold the City harmless against any claims arising out of the towing
operator's work which may be found to be negligently performed. The
agreement shall also include indemnification for any legal fees and
costs and expenses incurred by the city. [Added 3-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 1096]
H. Three refusals per month by any tower operator will result in a hearing
before the Public Safety Director, at which time the license may be
suspended or revoked. A refusal shall include but not be limited to the
following: [Added 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88; amended
7-23-1991 by Ord. No. 24-91]
(1) No answer at phone numbers supplied.
(2) Failure to respond, once notified, in the appropriate time.
(3) Verbal refusal.
I. Required hours of operation for release of vehicles are as follows:
[Added 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88; amended 2-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 2-15]
(1) Monday through Friday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(2) Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
(3) Any vehicle released after hours of the operation are subject to an
additional fee of $100.
J. All impounded vehicles as well as vehicles towed as a result of an
accident shall be stored in a secured area as defined in § 316-2E.
[Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 51-00]
K. The only vehicles which shall be stored in an outside unsecured area
shall be those which are currently registered and operable, not having
been towed as a result of being impounded or in an accident, and only
after expressed permission of the owner of the vehicle is granted for
such storage. [Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 51-00]
§ 316-8 TENNIS COURTS § 316-9
312:689
conditions of this chapter. Any person or firm aggrieved by any rule or
regulation promulgated by the Director of Public Safety or by a suspension
or revocation made by him shall be given a hearing by the City Council
within 15 days of the filing with the City Clerk of a request for a hearing.
§ 316-10. Prerogative of owner/operator to choose tower or wrecker.
[Amended 3-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1096]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent any owner or
operator of a motor vehicle from calling any tower or wrecker of his own
choice.
§ 316-11. Restrictions. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent any owner or
operator of a motor vehicle from calling any wrecker or tower of his own
choice, provided that the tower can respond within a reasonable amount
of time and provided that he does not tie up a police officer. Additionally,
nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to obligate the City of Long
Branch or any of its officers or employees to become obligated in any way
whatsoever for any storage charges or towing fees as authorized by this
chapter.
§ 316-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1096; amended 4-23-1991 by Ord. No. 9-91]
Each and every person or entity violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or the chapter which it amends or supplements, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 for a first offense,
not more than $10,000 for a second offense and not more than $15,000 for
each subsequent offense.
Chapter 319
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 35. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
§ 319-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHADE TREE — Shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located
or which may hereafter be planted in any public street, park or parkway
in the city except those located or planted on county highways, parks and
parkways and state highways.
§ 316-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 319-1
319:690
STREET — All streets, roads, roadways, public highways, parks or
parkways, public alleys, public places in the city except county parks,
parkways and highways and state highways.
§ 319-2. Permission required for certain acts.
§ 319-3. Open space required.
An open space of not less than two feet outside the trunks of trees at their
bases on all sides shall be maintained on all trees on public streets, except
where limited by curb or sidewalk.
§ 319-4. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall plant or cause to be planted any shade or ornamental
tree or shrub in any street or park unless the planting shall have been
first approved and the place where it is to be planted designated by the
Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee and a permit has
been granted. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
B. No person shall do or cause to be done by others to any tree, shrub or
plant on a public street or place either purposely, carelessly or
negligently or in any manner without the permission of the Council of
the City of Long Branch or its designee any of the following acts:
[Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
(1) Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove.
(2) Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
(3) Spray with any chemical.
(4) Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device.
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree
or shrub.
C. No person shall, without permission of the Council of the City of Long
Branch or its designee, place or maintain upon the ground in any public
street or place any stone, cement or other sidewalks or any stone,
cement or other substance which shall impede the free access of air and
water to the roots of any tree or shrub in any public street or place.
[Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent a governmental agency from
affixing a public notice to a tree in connection with administering
governmental affairs.
A. No person shall place salt, brine, oil or other substances injurious to
plant growth in any public street or place in such manner as to injure
any tree or shrub.
§ 319-1 TREES § 319-4
319:691
§ 319-5. Regulations for laying sidewalks and excavations.
§ 319-6. Wires. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
B. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller or
other engine in any public street in such a manner that the heat vapors
or fumes may injure any tree or shrub.
A. No person shall lay any sidewalk along or open, construct, curb or pave
any street or do any like act so as to interfere with or do injury to any
street shade tree without the consent of the Council of the City of Long
Branch or its designee. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
B. No statute giving any person or state, county or municipal board, body
or official power or authority to lay any sidewalk along or open,
construct, curb or pave any street, or do any similar act, shall be
construed to permit or authorize any interference with or injury to a
shade tree within the city without the consent of the Council of the City
of Long Branch or its designee. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
41-99]
C. Nothing in this section shall be held to take away or diminish any of the
powers or authority of any county park commission over the trees or
shrubbery in the county park or parkway within its jurisdiction or to
give any other commission or board any power or authority with respect
to the trees or shrubbery.
D. In the erection, altering or repairing of any building or structure, the
owner or contractor shall place guards around all nearby trees in public
streets or places as will effectually prevent injury to the trees.
E. No person shall excavate within two feet of any tree or shrub without
the permission of the Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee.
[Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
F. Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall be used or
operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any tree, shrub
or plant in any public street or place.
G. Where in authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or cut
roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such roots under advice from the Council of the
City of Long Branch or its designee. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 41-99]
A. No person shall, without permission of the Council of the City of Long
Branch or its designee, attach or fasten any wire, insulator or other
device for holding any wire to any tree or shrub in any public street or
place.
§ 319-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 319-6
319:692
§ 319-7. Removal of dangerous trees; notice. [Amended 11-9-1999
by Ord. No. 41-99]
§ 319-8. Application to Council of the City of Long Branch or its
designee; interference with work of Council of the City of Long
Branch or its designee. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 41-99]
§ 319-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 320
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 147.
Noise — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 345.
B. A utility company or its agents may, with prior permission of the Council
of the City of Long Branch or its designee, prune and remove trees for
line clearance.134
A. The Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee shall have the
power to remove or require the removal of any tree or part thereof on
public or private lands when it has been determined to be dangerous to
public safety.
B. The Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a
tree or part thereof dangerous to public safety unless public safety
requires immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
A. Where the permission, consent or approval of the Council of the City of
Long Branch is required by the provisions of this chapter, any person
required to obtain its permission, consent or approval shall first make
application to the Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee.
B. No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the
Council of the City of Long Branch or its designee or its designated
agents in the performance of its lawful duties.
134. Editor's Note: Ch. A350, Cable Television Franchise, § A350-8D.
§ 319-6 TREES § 319-9
319:693

ARTICLE I
Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-14]
§ 320-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safe, effective and efficient
use of solar energy systems while protecting the public health, safety
and welfare through appropriate zoning and land use controls. Whereas
a purpose of the Municipal Land Use Law135 is to promote utilization of
renewable energy resources, and existing zoning regulations do not address
solar power, the City of Long Branch finds it necessary and appropriate to
standardize and streamline the requirements for solar energy systems.
§ 320-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system consisting
of one or more roof- and/or ground-mounted solar collector devices and
solar-related equipment that supplies electrical or thermal power for the
principal use of the property on which the solar energy system is located,
except that excess electrical power generated and not presently needed
for on-site use may be used by the utility company. Accessory solar energy
systems shall not otherwise be used for the generation of power for
commercial purposes.
BOARD — The City of Long Branch Planning Board or Zoning Board.
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the solar
energy system in accordance with this article.
SOLAR CARPORT — A solar energy system mounted on a canopy or carport
structure within a parking lot.
SOLAR ENERGY PRODUCTION FACILITY — A solar energy system
principally used to capture solar energy and convert it to electrical energy
for sale to a utility for off-site uses. Solar energy production facilities
may consist of one or more freestanding ground- or roof-mounted solar
collector devices, solar-related equipment and other accessory structures
and buildings including light reflectors, concentrators, and heat
exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system of panels or other solar energy
devices, including solar-related equipment, the purpose of which is to
provide for the collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water
heating. The term may be used to refer to both accessory solar energy
systems and solar energy production facilities.
135. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 320-1 TREES § 320-2
319:695
SOLAR-RELATED EQUIPMENT — Items including but not limited to a solar
photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device
panels, lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets, framing and possibly
foundations used for or intended to be used for collection of solar energy.
ZONE OF VISUAL INFLUENCE — The area from which a proposed solar
energy system is theoretically visible. The zone may be presented as a
map with markings or colorings and may include computer generated
simulations.
§ 320-3. Applicability.
§ 320-4. Standards.
A. General. This article applies to solar energy systems to be installed and
constructed after the effective date of this article. Any upgrade,
modification, or structural change that materially alters the size or
placement of an existing solar energy system, or the abandonment of
that system, shall comply with the provisions of this article.
B. Redevelopment areas and areas in need of rehabilitation. The
installation, construction or modification of a solar energy system in
any redevelopment area designated by the City of Long Branch
pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law136 shall be
exempt from this article and subject instead to the adopted
redevelopment plan and/or rehabilitation plan or requirements for that
area.
A. General. The following standards apply to all solar energy systems:
(1) Solar energy systems shall be designed and located in order to
prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent
properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way.
(2) Solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable City noise
standards.
(3) Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising or signs, either temporary or permanent, except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
system. The manufacturer or operator identification, emergency
contact information, and appropriate warning signage shall be
posted on or near the system in a clearly visible manner.
(4) The design of solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping
that will blend the facility into the natural setting and existing
environment.
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A: 12A-1 et seq.
§ 320-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-4
319:696
(5) All on-site utility and transmission lines shall, to the extent feasible,
be placed underground.
(6) Any solar energy systems that are to be used by someone other
than the owner of the property shall provide evidence of an
agreement between the property owner and the facility owner or
operator confirming the facility owner or operator has the
permission of the property owner to install and utilize a solar
energy system, and the expiration date of the agreement.
(7) A roof-mounted system, whether mounted on the principal building
or accessory building, may not exceed the maximum principal
building height or accessory building height specified for the
building type in the underlying zoning district. In no instance shall
any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the edge of the
roof.
(8) The total surface area of all ground-mounted solar collectors,
regardless of the mounted angle, including solar photovoltaic cells,
panels, arrays, and solar hot air or water collector devices shall not
be included in the calculation of total lot or building coverage.
(9) All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the
operation of the solar energy system shall be screened from any
adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for residential
purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery, trees, or other
noninvasive plant species which provides a visual screen. In lieu of
a planting screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance137 may be used.
(10) The placement of a solar energy system shall not reduce or
otherwise interfere with required parking areas, open space or
landscaped areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, stormwater
facilities or any other required amenity, facility, or infrastructure
element.
B. Accessory solar energy systems.
(1) Roof-mounted systems. Roof-mounted accessory solar energy
systems are permitted as an accessory use on the same lot as a
principal use in all zoning districts in accordance with § 320-4A of
this article and the following additional requirements:
(a) Solar panels mounted on a sloped roof shall not exceed a
height of 12 inches from the finished surface of the rooftop.
(2) Ground-mounted systems. Whenever practical, all accessory solar
energy systems shall be roof-mounted. If a ground-mounted system
is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
system cannot feasibly be attached to a building due to structural
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.
§ 320-4 TREES § 320-4
319:697
limitations of the building or the height restrictions imposed by
this article. In those cases, ground-mounted systems are permitted
as an accessory use on the same lot as a principal use in all
zoning districts in accordance with § 320-4A of this article and the
following additional requirements:
(a) The minimum lot size for a ground-mounted system shall be 1/2
acre, provided that the lot provides the ability to conform to
the other applicable requirements of this article.
(b) In residential districts, all ground-mounted systems shall be
set back a minimum distance of five feet from all property lines
if 100 square feet or less or a minimum distance of 10 feet from
all property lines if greater than 100 square feet. In
commercial and industrial districts, all ground-mounted
systems shall be set back in conformance with the district
standards for accessory structures or 10 feet, whichever is
greater.
(c) In any zone other than residential that abuts a residential
district, all ground-mounted systems shall be set back a
minimum distance of 20 feet from all property lines.
(d) No portion of a ground-mounted system shall be located within
or above any front yard or side yard or along any street
frontage.
(e) Ground-mounted systems shall not exceed six feet in height
measured from the ground to the highest point of the structure
including panels, except that in the MB-Manufacturing
Business and I-Industrial Districts, the maximum height shall
be 12 feet.
(f) In no case shall the surface area of a ground-mounted system
exceed half the building footprint of the principal structure.
C. Solar energy production facility. A solar energy production facility shall
be considered a permitted principal use in the MB-Manufacturing
Business and I-Industrial Districts in accordance with § 320-4A of this
article and the following additional requirements:
(1) Solar energy production facilities may be roof-mounted or groundmounted
or a combination thereof.
(2) Solar energy production facilities shall adhere to the schedule of
lot, yard and bulk requirements of the district in which they are
located except that ground-mounted systems shall not exceed a
height of 12 feet at their highest point from the ground.
(3) Ground-mounted systems shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum eight-foot high fence with a self-locking gate, and
provided with screening and buffering in accordance with the
§ 320-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-4
319:698
§ 320-5. Administration.
provisions of the zoning ordinance. Fence locations shall adhere to
the schedule of setback requirements of the district in which they
are located.
(4) Lighting shall be provided to the extent it is required for security
and maintenance purposes but not to such a degree as to constitute
a nuisance to adjoining residential districts or properties.
Photometric plans and adequate shielding are required.
D. Special standards for solar carports. Solar carports may be installed as
either accessory solar energy systems or solar energy production
facilities in parking lots containing 20 or more spaces. Solar carports
are subject to the applicable provisions of § 320-4A, B and C and the
following special standards:
(1) The outside edge of a carport shall be set back at least 20 feet from
any property line.
(2) The maximum height of a carport shall be 18 feet measured from
the ground to the highest point of the structure including panels.
(3) The structure shall not reduce the number of required on-site
parking or loading spaces.
(4) The structure shall not block or interfere with any required on-site
lighting.
(5) The structure shall not interfere with safe and efficient pedestrian
or vehicular circulation.
(6) Signage is permitted on the carport in accordance with the
standards provided in the zoning ordinance and shall be counted in
the overall sign package for the property. Signs shall not extend
beyond any surface of the structure.
(7) Solar carports shall not be counted in the calculation of building
coverage if installed over paved parking areas.
(8) Solar carports installed on the top of parking structures shall be
governed by the same standards applicable to the parking
structure on which they are mounted.
(9) Solar carports are not permitted in residential zones unless a
commercial use with a parking lot preexists.
A. Permits. All solar energy systems require a construction and zoning
permit prior to installation. Applications for a solar energy system shall
include information demonstrating compliance with the provisions of
this article including the following:
§ 320-4 TREES § 320-5
319:699
(1) The manufacturer's specifications for all components of the
proposed system.
(2) Scaled horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings illustrating the
location of the system on the building or on the property for a
ground-mounted system, including the property lines.
(3) For all roof-mounted systems other than a flat roof, the elevation
must show the highest finished slope of the solar collector and the
slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted, and the
distance from the roof edge.
(4) For flat roof applications, a drawing shall be submitted showing the
distance to the roof edge and any parapets on the building and shall
identify the height of the building and the highest finished height of
the solar collector above the finished surface of the roof.
B. Site plan. Site plan approval shall be required for the installation of all
ground-mounted accessory solar energy systems, all solar energy
production facilities, and solar carports as follows:
(1) In addition to the information required by any other section of this
article and all other site plan details generally required by City
ordinance, the site plan application shall include a visual analysis of
the subject property that illustrates the appearance of the
proposed solar energy system from at least three strategic
locations around and within the zone of visual impact.
(2) Site plan approval shall expire if the solar energy system is not
installed and functioning within 24 months from the date of
approval or if the solar energy system is abandoned as provided for
in this article.
(3) Ground-mounted accessory solar energy systems installed on
properties where the principal use is a single- or two-family home
are exempt from site plan approval; but are required to submit a
recent survey of the property indicating the proposed location of
the solar energy system as part of the construction or zoning
permit application.
C. Historic buildings and districts. Applications for solar energy systems
on buildings or grounds within designated historic buildings shall be
referred to the Long Branch Historic Commission as outlined in
Chapter 345, Article XII, Historic Preservation Ordinance, of the City
Codebook.
D. Utility notification and interconnection. Prior to the installation of a
solar energy system, the owner of the system shall provide the
Construction Official and/or Zoning Officer with written confirmation
that the public utility company has been informed of the owner's intent
to install an interconnected solar energy system.
§ 320-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-5
319:700
E. Public projects. The Long Branch governing body or other public
agency seeking to construct a solar energy system is exempt from the
provisions of this article but shall refer the plan to the planning board
for review and recommendation pursuant to the terms of the Municipal
Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
F. Abandonment.
(1) Notice. An accessory solar energy system, solar energy production
facility, or solar carport that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period shall be deemed abandoned. The municipal
Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of
the abandoned system. The owner shall have the right to respond
to the notice of abandonment within 30 days from the receipt date.
The municipal Zoning Officer shall withdraw the notice of
abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been
withdrawn if the owner provides the municipal Zoning Officer with
information demonstrating that the system has not been
abandoned.
(2) Removal. If an accessory solar energy system, solar energy
production facility, or solar carport is determined to be abandoned,
the owner shall remove the system and all related improvements
within 90 days of receipt of the notice of abandonment at the
owner's sole expense. The owner shall obtain a demolition permit
prior to removing the system. If the owner fails to remove the
abandoned system, the municipality may pursue a legal action to
have the system removed at the owner's expense.
§ 320-5 TREES § 320-5
319:701

ARTICLE II
Small Wind Energy Systems
[Adopted 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 15-14]
§ 320-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safe, effective and efficient
use of small wind energy systems while protecting the public health, safety
and welfare through appropriate zoning and land use controls. Whereas
a purpose of the Municipal Land Use Law138 is to promote utilization of
renewable energy resources, and existing zoning regulations do not address
wind power, the City of Long Branch finds it necessary and appropriate
to standardize and streamline the requirements for small wind energy
systems.
§ 320-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
BOARD — The City of Long Branch Planning Board or Zoning Board.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER OR MET TOWER — A structure designed to
support the gathering of wind energy resource data, and includes the tower,
base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment anemometers
and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that
are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics
over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to
characterize the wind resource at a given location. A met tower shall be
permitted under the same standards and permit procedures as a small wind
energy system.
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the
small energy system in accordance with this article.
SETBACK DISTANCE — The horizontal distance from the center of the
supporting structure to the nearest property line or to the nearest overhead
utility easement or underground petroleum product pipeline easement.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which will be used primarily for onsite consumption.
TOTAL HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation of the
finished grade to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its
highest point, or to the highest point of any stationary or moving component
of the wind energy system, whichever is higher.
TOWER — A monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a
wind generator.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 320-6 TREES § 320-7
319:703
ZONE OF VISUAL INFLUENCE — The area over which a proposed small
wind energy system may be theoretically visible. The zone may be presented
as a map with markings or colorings and may include computer generated
simulations.
§ 320-8. Applicability.
§ 320-9. Standards.
A. General. This article applies to small wind energy systems to be
installed and constructed after the effective date of this article. Any
upgrade, modification, or structural change that materially alters the
size or placement of an existing small wind energy system, or the
abandonment of that system, shall comply with the provisions of this
article.
B. Redevelopment areas and areas in need of rehabilitation. The
installation, construction or modification of a small wind energy system
in any redevelopment area designated by the City of Long Branch
pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law139 shall be
exempt from this article and subject instead to the adopted
redevelopment plan and/or rehabilitation plan or requirements for that
area.
A. Permitted Accessory Structure. A ground-based small wind energy
system shall be a permitted accessory structure in the C-4, RC-1, M,
MB, 1, and S-2 Zones and on all publicly owned properties. The primary
purpose of the accessory small wind energy system shall be to provide
power for the principal use of the property upon which it is located.
Only one small energy system is permitted on any given site. Roofmounted
small wind energy systems are prohibited.
B. Design standards.
(1) Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for a small wind energy
system shall be one-half acre, provided the lot provides the ability
of the small wind energy system to conform to the setback and
height requirements below.
(2) Location. No portion of small wind energy system shall be located
within or above any front yard, side yard, along any street frontage,
nor within any required setback of any property.
(3) Setbacks. A small wind energy system shall be set back a distance
equal to the zone's setback requirements for a principal building,
one rotor radius plus 15 feet, or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
Setbacks may be increased by the Board for reasons of public
safety in order to account for the distance to overhead power lines.
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A: 12A-1 et seq.
§ 320-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-9
319:704
No portion of a wind generator shall extend beyond the required
setback line, or into any of the following:
(a) Any public or private right-of-way, easement, or leasehold,
unless written permission is granted by the government entity
or private party with jurisdiction over said area.
(b) Any overhead utility lines, or aerial easements for same, unless
written permission is granted by the utility or entity that owns
and/or controls the lines.
(4) Height. A small wind energy system shall not exceed a total height
of 50 feet on lots between one-half acre and one acre and 80 feet on
lots between one acre and three acres. On lots of three acres or
more, a maximum height of 120 feet is permitted. In all cases the
bottom of the rotor blade sweep shall be at least 20 feet above the
ground surface.
(5) Noise. The noise level of any small wind energy system shall not
exceed 55 dBA at a common property line or 50 dBA at the closest
occupied structure. These levels may be exceeded during shortterm
events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
(6) Lighting. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially
lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration. If lighting is required, the owner shall provide a
copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings
and/or lights for the small wind energy system.
(7) Visual impacts.
(a) The wind generator and the tower shall remain painted or
finished in the color or finish that was originally applied by the
manufacturer or as directed by the Board to blend into the
surrounding environment.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the small wind energy
system's visual impact will be minimized in the zone of visual
influence including but not limited to surrounding neighbors
and the larger community. This may include but not be limited
to information regarding site selection, turbine design or
appearance, buffering and screening of ground-based
electrical and control equipment, or the reduction or
elimination of guy wires, and obstruction of water views.
(c) All on-site electrical wires associated with a small wind energy
system shall, to the extent feasible, be placed underground.
(8) Signs. There shall be no signs, either temporary or permanent, on a
small wind energy system or any associated building, except for the
manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning
signs, or owner identification.
§ 320-9 TREES § 320-9
319:705
§ 320-10. Administration.
(9) Access.
(a) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment
associated with a small wind energy system shall be labeled
and secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall
be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts, a
ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the
tower, for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
(b) Any mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for
the operation of a small wind energy system, including a
building for batteries and storage cells, shall be enclosed with
a six-foot-high fence. The supporting tower shall also be
enclosed with a six-foot-high fence unless the base of the tower
is not climbable for a distance of 12 feet.
(10) Ancillary buildings. When a building is necessary for storage cells
or related mechanical equipment, the building shall be subject to
the same setback requirements as the supporting tower and shall
not exceed 10 feet in height.
(11) Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that
which is absolutely necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. All
applications for a small wind energy system shall conform to the
provisions of the City ordinances with respect to tree removal.
A. Site plan. A zoning permit with grading plan and site plan approval
shall be required for the installation of a small wind energy system. In
addition to other application materials required by City ordinance, the
site plan application shall be accompanied by a plot plan that includes
the following:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property.
(2) Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
property.
(3) Location of the proposed small wind energy system tower.
(4) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(5) Any overhead utility lines.
(6) Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer
and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding
or guyed).
§ 320-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-10
319:706
(7) Tower and tower foundation drawings signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey;
(8) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine manufacturer or
qualified engineer including noise levels of the proposed wind
energy system at all property lines and at the closest neighboring
inhabited dwelling.
(9) A visual analysis including photos of the subject property that
graphically simulates the appearance of any proposed small wind
energy system and indicating its view from at least five locations
around and within the zone of visual impact.
(10) A report from a structural engineer containing the following: a
description of the tower, including a description of the design
characteristics and material; and documentation to establish that
the tower has sufficient structural integrity for the proposed uses
at the proposed location and meets the applicable minimum safety
requirements. The applicant shall provide evidence that the
proposed tower height does not exceed the height recommended
by the manufacturer of the wind turbine.
(11) A wildlife habitat assessment report, unless otherwise waived by
the reviewing Board, either as part of an environmental impact
statement or as a separate report that specifically addresses the
wildlife habitat affected by the installation of a small wind energy
system.
B. Expiration. Site plan approval shall expire if the small wind energy
system is not installed and functioning within 24 months from the date
of approval or if the small wind energy system is abandoned as provided
for in this article.
C. Utility notification and interconnection. Prior to the installation of a
small wind energy system, the owner of the system shall provide the
construction official and/or zoning officer with written confirmation that
the public utility company has been informed of the owner's intent to
install an interconnected small wind energy system.
D. Public projects. The governing body or other public agency seeking to
construct a wind energy system is exempt from the provisions of this
article but shall refer the plan to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation pursuant to the terms of the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
E. Abandonment.
(1) Notice. A small wind energy system that is out of service for a
continuous twelve-month period shall be deemed abandoned. The
municipal Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner of an abandoned small wind energy system. The owner shall
have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30
§ 320-10 TREES § 320-10
319:707
days from the receipt date. The municipal Zoning Officer shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the
notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides the municipal
Zoning Officer with information demonstrating the small wind
energy system has not been abandoned.
(2) Removal. If the small wind energy system is determined to be
abandoned, the owner of the small wind energy system shall
remove the wind generator from the tower at the owner's sole
expense within 90 days of receipt of notice of abandonment. The
owner shall obtain a demolition permit prior to removing the
system. If the owner fails to remove the wind generator from the
tower, the municipality may pursue a legal action to have the wind
generator removed at the owner's expense.
§ 320-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 320-10
319:708
Chapter 322
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles as attractive
nuisances — See Ch. 262.
Towing — See Ch. 316.
Private sale of motor vehicles — See Ch. 330.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 332.
§ 322-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by other than human power, designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to
transport persons or property or pull machinery, including, but not by way
of limitation, an automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon.
§ 322-2. Abandoning vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon a vehicle within the city, and no person shall
leave a vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be
abandoned.
§ 322-3. Junked or wrecked vehicles on city property.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on a street or highway within the city.
§ 322-4. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles; exceptions.
No person in charge or control of property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain
on the property longer than 48 hours; and no person shall leave such
vehicles on any property within the city for a longer time than 48 hours. This
section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the
premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner,
when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise, provided that
§ 320-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 322-4
322:709
the vehicle is housed or completely screened from view; or a vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the city.
§ 322-5. Impoundment; notification of owner; fee.140
The Chief of Police, Director of Public Safety or any member of the Police
Department designated by him is authorized to remove or have removed
any vehicle left at any place within the city which appears to be present in
violation of this chapter. Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with applicable statutes. The Chief
of Police, or any member of the Police Department acting for him, shall
notify the registered and legal owner, in writing, by personal service or by
certified mail, at the last-known address of the owner, of the removal of
the vehicle, the reason for the removal and the location of the vehicle. The
vehicle shall be retained and impounded until the owner or his authorized
agent pays the cost of such taking and removal, together with a garage
charge of $15 for each day that the vehicle is retained and impounded.
Chapter 325
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Towing — See Ch. 316.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 322.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 322-4 LONG BRANCH CODE § 322-5
322:710
ARTICLE I
Traffic and Parking Regulations
§ 325-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 325-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current
use in the City.
§ 325-3. Parking.
A. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe
other more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
(1) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I (§ 325-25)
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
(2) The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow
has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
(3) Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking
upon streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are displayed. The Director of the Office of
Emergency Management or, in his absence, his designee is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires, public celebrations, etc., dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the
free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or
owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of
the signs. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 10-96]
(4) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for
§ 325-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-3
322:711
the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
costs of removal and storage which may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
(5) The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
C. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. No person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described
in Schedule II (§ 325-26) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
D. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. No person
shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III of any
day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 325-27) attached to and
made a part of this chapter. [Amended 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1008]
E. Parking prohibited during certain hours during certain times of the
year. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule IV of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, between
such dates specified in Schedule IV, upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV (§ 325-28) attached to and made a part
of this chapter. [Amended 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1008]
F. Parking prohibited during certain additional hours during certain
additional times of the year. No person shall park a vehicle between the
hours specified in Schedule IVA of any day, except Sundays and public
holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IVA (§ 325-29) attached to and made a part of this chapter.141
G. Parking time limited on certain streets. No person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule V at any time between
the hours listed in Schedule V of any day, except Sundays and public
holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule V (§ 325-30) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
H. Alternate side of the street parking. No person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified in Schedule XIX of any day, except Sundays
and public holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIX (§ 325-45) attached to and made a part of
this chapter. [Added 11-28-1986 by Ord. No. 1300]
I. No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or park or permit his
vehicle to stand at locations or on streets set forth in Schedule XIV
(§ 325-40) attached to and made a part of this chapter. [Added
7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 648]
J. Loading zones. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the
areas described in Schedule XVII (§ 325-43) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading zones. There shall
141. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-3
322:712
be no parking in these areas except for the surplus of commercial
loading and unloading. LOADING ZONE, NO PARKING signs shall be
installed as provided therein. [Added 8-19-1980 by Ord. No. 990]
K. Restricted parking.
(1) No person, other than those persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, shall
be permitted to park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XVIII (§ 325-44) attached to and
made a part of this chapter. All vehicles in these spaces will park at
a forty-five-degree angle. [Added 6-23-1981 by Ord. No. 1028]
(2) Penalty for restricted parking. Unless otherwise set forth, any
person or violator of this section shall be subject to the penalty as
provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)c. [Added 3-9-1993 by Ord. No.
6-93]142
L. Prohibited parking certain vehicles, equipment and trailers. [Amended
4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 16-95; 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 32-95]
(1) No truck, tow truck, bus, tractor-trailer or trailer body of any kind,
vacation home or camper trailer, coach or similar vehicle of any
kind, with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
8,000 pounds, shall be parked on any street in any zone or any boat
or boat trailer of any size shall be parked on any street in any zone
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The foregoing
restrictions shall also apply to the parking of any vehicles,
regardless of weight rating, that have roof storage of ladders,
scaffolding, other equipment, materials or items which overhang
either the front or rear bumper of the vehicle, extending beyond
said bumper or bumpers of the vehicle. [Amended 10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 35-03; 12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(2) No truck, limousine, recreational vehicle or vehicle, trailer, truck,
van, taxi, bus (school or otherwise, tow truck, recreational vehicle
with lettering or design showing the name and/or contact
information of a commercial service thereon (a "prohibited
vehicle") may park on streets within the City between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., seven days a week, without a permit
issued in accordance with this chapter. "Commercial vehicle" is
defined as any commercial vehicle which is registered or is
required to be registered as a commercial vehicle either by the
State of New Jersey or the state in which the vehicle is registered.
Permits shall be issued by the Director of Public Safety, or their
designee, under the following conditions: [Added 12-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19143]
142. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-3.11, Penalty, as amended by Ord. No. 16-94, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98. For
penalty provisions, see § 325-23.
§ 325-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-3
322:713
(a) A resident of the City may apply for and receive a permit
allowing the parking of a prohibited vehicle within the City on
the following conditions:
[1] The vehicle registration and applicant's drivers license
must bear the same address within the City of Long
Branch under which the permit is to be issued.
[2] No more than one permit shall be issued per residence or
postal address.
(3) Construction trailers or equipment upon approval of the Chief of
Police or his designee may be permitted to be parked on any street
in any zone during the construction of the principal structure
therein and shall be removed at the completion of the principal
structure. The location of the parked trailer or equipment will be
coordinated with the Traffic Division and will comply with state and
local laws. In the event that a safety problem arises, the trailer or
equipment can be required to be relocated or removed from the
roadway at any time. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
(4) This prohibition shall not apply to service vehicles parked during
the performance of said services at the location in question. On-call
status shall not be considered the performance of a service.
[Amended 12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(5) Any vehicle, boat, equipment or trailer in violation of this
subsection, after being cited, may be impounded by any police
officer. The owner shall pay the cost of any towing and storage as
set forth in Chapter 316, Towing, § 316-5, Fees and charges.
(6) The penalty for violations of this subsection shall be governed by
§ 325-23. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
M. Prohibited off-street parking. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 18-99]
(1) The parking of vehicles, of any nature, on any off-street property in
the City shall be prohibited unless the parking occurs in an area
defined pursuant to Code § 345-42, Off-street parking regulations.
(2) The enforcing authority for this subsection is granted to the Police
Department of the City of Long Branch, the Fire Prevention Bureau
and the Zoning Officer.
(3) The fine for a violation of this subsection shall be up to $500 per
offense. A court appearance shall be required for any summons
issued pursuant to this subsection.
N. Angled parking. Angled parking shall be permitted on streets as
designated in § 325-51, Schedule XXV: Angled Parking, attached hereto
143. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
L(2) through (5) as Subsection L(3) through (6), respectively.
§ 325-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-3
322:714
§ 325-3.1. Temporary suspension of parking restrictions. [Added
10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 21-08; 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
§ 325-4. Limiting use of streets to a certain class of vehicles.
[Amended 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 903; 6-13-1978 by Ord. No. 914;
1-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1380]
Trucks, buses and other vehicles over the registered gross weight as set out
in Schedule VI (§ 325-31) are hereby excluded from all streets in the City of
Long Branch, except for the pickup and delivery of materials. The tonnages
specified shall in no event be more than four tons registered gross weight.
§ 325-5. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 325-32) attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 325-6. Parking on one-way streets. [Amended 3-27-1990 by Ord.
No. 6-90]
Parking, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-135b, shall be permitted on those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule VIIA (§ 325-33) attached hereto
and made a part hereof.
§ 325-7. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 325-34) attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield right-of-way signs are provided for in the designation.
and made a part of this chapter. Failure to park in the manner as
required by this section may be the subject of a summons issued by
the enforcing authority of this chapter with penalties for violations
governed by § 325-23. [Added 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 45-02]
A. The Chief of Police, or his designee, is hereby authorized to suspend
parking restrictions temporarily in the City of Long Branch under
circumstances, for durations, in areas, and at times as the Director, or
his designee, deems, in his discretion, appropriate and in the interests
of public safety.
B. The suspension of the parking restrictions by the Chief of Police or his
designee shall not last for a period of time greater than 72 hours.
C. This section shall in no way permit the Chief of Police or his designee to
lift, suspend, or in any way modify those parking restrictions governed
by Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 325-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-8
322:715
§ 325-8. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 325-35) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 325-9. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 325-36) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield right-of-way signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
§ 325-10. Prohibited left turns. [Amended 1-12-1988 by Ord. No.
1381144]
No person shall make a left turn at the locations described in Schedule XI
(§ 325-37) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 325-11. Right turn only.145
The streets or parts of streets as described in Schedule XII (§ 325-38)
attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated for right
turns only.
§ 325-12. Speed limits. [Amended 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 815;
10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1130; 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1307]
A. Signs. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained as
required by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles and as
specified in the letter and authorization dated December 16, 1968, from
the Traffic Safety Service of the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the
streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 325-39) attached
to and made a part of this chapter is hereby established at the rate of
speed indicated.
C. Regulatory and warning signs. Regulatory and warning signs shall be
erected and maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits as
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
[Amended 1-8-1974 by Ord. No. 719]
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-8 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-13
322:716
§ 325-13. Traffic control signals. [Added 11-14-1972 by Ord. No.
660; amended 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 813; 5-11-1976 by Ord. No.
814]
Traffic control signals and other traffic regulations shall be installed and
established in accordance with Schedule XV (§ 325-41) attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 325-14. Fire lanes. [Added 1-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1380146]
No person shall at any time park a motor vehicle in any fire zone or fire
lane.
§ 325-15. Traffic regulation of public or semipublic nonprofit
institutions or corporations. [Amended 2-24-1983 by Ord. No.
1092147]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, providing that the Board of
Directors of any corporation or the Board of Trustees of any corporation or
other institution of a public or semipublic character not for pecuniary profit
incorporation under N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. may request that the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. shall be made applicable to the semipublic or
private roads, streets, driveways, trails, terraces, bridle paths, parkways,
tenants, employees and other roadways open to or used by the public,
tenants, employees and the members of such institutions for purposes of
vehicular travel by such persons, and not as a matter of public right, the
following named entities located in the City of Long Branch have filed
a request that the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. shall be made
applicable to, and it is hereby ordained that the following shall be made
applicable:
A. Housing Authority property. [Added 4-23-1974 by Ord. No. 739;
amended 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 22-94]
(1) Speed limits. (Reserved)
(2) No parking. (Reserved)
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation.
B. Monmouth College.
(1) General provisions. All of the general provisions of Subtitle 1, Title
39, of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey are
applicable to the following designated and particularly described
areas:
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-15
322:717
(a) The gate-controlled entrance and roadway from Cedar Avenue,
south to the Fine Arts Building.
(b) The parking area on the west side of the Fine Arts Building.
(c) The roadway from the south end of the parking area forming a
semicircle about the Fine Arts Building ending at the south
entrance of said building.
(d) The entrances and driveways located at the Monmouth College
Police Building.
(e) The parking area located south of the Monmouth College
Police Building.
C. Kossick Way Municipal Parking Lot. [Added 7-23-1991 by Ord. No.
20-91]
(1) Parking in designated areas. All vehicles must park only in
designated areas and between the lines provided.
(2) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking sign
and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.148
(3) Through street. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right sides of each street intersecting the through street.
(a) Main Drive: entire length.
(b) From Brighton Avenue to West End Court.
(4) Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Main Drive and West End Court Main Drive
(5) Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
148. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the City
Clerk, attached to Ord. No. 20-91.
§ 325-15 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-15
322:718
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Car Wash Drive 15 Entire length
Main Drive 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
Road A 15 Entire length
Truck Lane 15 Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
(6) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicles at
the owner's or operator's expense.
(7) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Car Wash Drive Both Entire length
Main Drive Both Entire length
North Drive Both Entire length
Road A Both Entire length
Truck Lane Both Entire length
(8) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated: [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 57-92]
Name of Street Direction Limits
North Drive Eastbound Entire length from
municipal property line to
Main Drive
(9) Work to be paid by City. That all signs, posts, bolts or other
necessary materials be installed and paid for by the City. Work shall
be checked by the Police Department to ensure installations meet
state and federal specifications, and all signing shall conform to the
current Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices.149
D. The Marina Bay Club. [Added 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 24-95]
§ 325-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-15
322:719
(1) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(2) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking sign
and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
(3) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Lot A Drive and Patten Avenue Lot A Drive
Marina Bay Drive and Patten Avenue Marina Bay Drive
Marina Bay Drive and Road A Marina Bay Drive
(4) Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Marina Bay Drive 15 Entire length
Road A 15 Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
(5) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
(6) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
149. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-12.3j, regarding penalties, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
For penalty provisions see § 325-23.
§ 325-15 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-15
322:720
§ 325-16. Bus stops. [Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 18-94]
The locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 325-42) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.152
§ 325-17. No passing zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 325-46) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as no passing zones.
§ 325-18. Lane use reservations. [Added 11-1-1988 by Ord. No.
79-88; amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 99-89]
The lane locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 325-47) attached to and
made a part of this chapter are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 325-19. No turn on red. [Added 12-30-1976 by Ord. No. 859;
12-26-1979 by Ord. No. 973]
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop) indication on the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XXII (§ 325-48) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 325-20. Mid-block crosswalks. [Added 1-28-1992 by Ord. No.
44-92]
Name of Street Side Time Location
All cluster driveways Both All Entire length
Marina Bay Drive Both All Entire length
Road A Both All Entire length
(7) That all signs, posts or other necessary materials be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to ensure installations meet state and federal
specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.150
(8) Effect of regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason
held to be invalid, such decision shall not effect the validity of the
remaining portion of the regulation.151
150. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-2.4h, regarding penalties, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
For penalty provisions, see § 325-23.
151. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, 200 Ocean Boulevard Corporation, added 10-8-1996
by Ord. No. 32-96, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19.
152. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-14a, regarding penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98.
§ 325-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-20
322:721
§ 325-21. Parking on Board of Education grounds. [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1130]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the roadways or
grounds of the Board of Education except in designated areas, between the
painted lines, and all vehicles so parked shall be properly identified.
§ 325-22. Closing of streets. [Added 6-22-1976 by Ord. No. 822]
A. The following described location is hereby designated as a mid-block
crosswalk:
Name of Street Location
Morris Avenue Beginning 110 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Hillside Avenue and
extending six feet westerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue [Added
10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
41-04]
Beginning at a point 380 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Atlantic Avenue and
extending to a point 10 feet therefrom
Seventh Avenue [Added
10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
22-06]
Beginning at a point 74 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Park Place and
extending to a point 10 feet southerly
therefrom
Willow Avenue Beginning 495 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Prospect Street and
extending six feet easterly therefrom
B. No parking on mid-block crosswalks. There shall be no parking at any
time within the areas of mid-block crosswalks in the City of Long
Branch.
A. Authority of Mayor.
(1) Under and by virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the Mayor of the City of
Long Branch is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic for
any period of time or on any day or days or during specified hours
on any day or days whenever he finds that said closing is necessary
for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare or for any
such other reason as he may deem necessary.
(2) Under and by virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the Mayor of the City of
Long Branch is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
posting of proper warning signs of such aforesaid closing on any
street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in
pursuance thereof.
(3) Under and by virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the Mayor of the City of
Long Branch is hereby authorized to promulgate by regulation
§ 325-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-22
322:722
§ 325-23. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
36-98]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 325-24. Traffic controls for street and highway construction and
maintenance operations. [Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 22-97]
penalties for violation of this section or any regulation issued
thereunder.
B. Violation and penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for
by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this section, its supplements and amendments, or by
regulation issued thereunder, shall become liable to the penalty as
stated in § 325-23 of this chapter.
A. Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
(1) The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above- and
below-ground, which requires blocking the roadway and
obstructing the normal flow of traffic, and that such obstructions
are or can become dangerous when not properly controlled. In
order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish control and regulations
directed to the safe and expeditious movement and to provide
safety for the work force performing these operations.
(2) The City of Long Branch in the County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, hereafter known as "MUTCD," except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates wherever
construction maintenance, operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. A person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work
is in violation of this section.
B. Preconstruction meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the person,
contractor or the case of a public utility as required under the public
utility agreement wishing to conduct work on, under or above the
roadway to contact the Traffic Bureau of the City of Long Branch Police
Department in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit
plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
§ 325-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-24
322:723
approved by the Traffic Bureau of the Long Branch Police Department
is in violation of this section.
C. Hazardous conditions. The person, contractor or utility shall provide
the Traffic Bureau of the Long Branch Police Department with at least
two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to
the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the
call from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the
City may respond to correct such hazardous conditions. The reasonable
fees for such emergency service by the City shall be charged to the
person, contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
D. Hours. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or
utility work on any roadway in the City of Long Branch before 9:00 a.m.
or after 5:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. in the case of an emergency or for the
safety and convenience of the general public and the Long Branch
Police Department. If it is determined by the officer in charge that the
construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00
p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard,
the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
E. Road closing and detours. Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not
be permitted unless approved by the Long Branch Police Traffic Bureau
or, in the case of emergency, the officer in charge of the station house.
F. Traffic directors. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or
maintenance sites when determined to be necessary by the Long
Branch Police Department Traffic Bureau or, in case of emergency, the
officer in charge of the station house, that the same is necessary to
provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
G. Stop work. The Long Branch Police Department Traffic Bureau or, in the
case of an emergency, the officer in charge of the station house shall
have the authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment
and vehicles and stored material within the street, right-of-way
backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to
abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
H. Site preparation. It is to be expressly understood that no materials,
vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area
until all construction, signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed.
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
statute, any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of
this section regarding traffic controls for street and highway
§ 325-24 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-24
322:724
§ 325-24.1. Residential parking program. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 10-98]
construction maintenance operations shall, upon conviction
thereof, for a first offense pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $750 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
(2) For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine for not less
than $750 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days.
A. Program established.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle without a valid permit
as provided for herein on a street marked and designated "Resident
Permit Parking Only." [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19;
12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(2) The governing body shall determine by ordinance the streets to be
designated as "Resident Permit Parking Only."
(3) Emergency and public utility vehicles may park within the permit
parking area during the time they are rendering service for repairs
within the permit parking area.
(4) Contractors, service and delivery vehicles bearing the name and
address of a commercial business may park without a permit
during the time they are rendering service to a residence within the
permit parking area.
B. Issuance of permits. [Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19153]
(1) Residential parking permits shall be issued by the Chief of Police of
the City of Long Branch, or his designee, to residents of the City of
Long Branch who own or lease one or more passenger motor
vehicles.
(2) The passenger motor vehicles must be registered to the dwelling
unit resident on a street designated as "Resident Permit Parking
Only." [Amended 12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
(3) Applications for resident permit parking under this section shall be
made via an online parking management system supplied by the
Chief of Police, or his designee, of the City of Long Branch.
(4) The design of the permit and its placement on or in the vehicle shall
be determined by the Chief of Police, or his designee.
153. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, Visitor permits, which
immediately followed this subsection.
§ 325-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-24.1
322:725
§ 325-24.2. Handicapped parking. [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No.
3-02]
The locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 325-50) attached to and made
a part of this chapter are hereby designated as handicapped parking zones.
(5) The quantity of permits issued for each area will be at the
discretion of the Long Branch Police Department. The total
quantity of permits issued will exceed the amount of available
parking. The purchase of a residential parking permit will not
guarantee a space will always be available for all permit holders.
(6) Residential parking permits listed in § 325-49 shall be available for
sale at a cost of $25 per permit; such permit will be valid for one
calendar year and must be renewed annually.
(7) Once an application is approved, an area/zone-specific decal will be
affixed to the vehicle which is only valid in the specific area/zone
for which it is issued. [Added 12-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 325-24.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-24.2
322:726
ARTICLE II
Schedules
§ 325-25. Schedule I: Emergency No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3B, no person shall park a vehicle
on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Atlantic Avenue Entire length
Bath Avenue Entire length
Branchport Avenue Entire length
Brighton Avenue Entire length
Broadway Entire length
Buttonwood Avenue [Repealed
6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
Cedar Avenue Entire length
Chelsea Avenue Entire length
Dunbar Avenue Entire length
Garfield Avenue [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 10-96]
Between Memorial Parkway and
Third Avenue
Joline Avenue Entire length
Liberty Street Entire length
Lincoln Avenue Entire length
Long Branch Avenue Entire length
Memorial Parkway Entire length
Morris Avenue [Repealed
6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
North Bath Avenue Entire length
North Lincoln Avenue Entire length
Norwood Avenue Entire length
Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue)
Entire length
Ocean Avenue Entire length
Park Avenue Entire length
Pavilion Avenue Entire length
Rivergate Way [Added 4-12-2011
by Ord. No. 9-11]
Entire length
Rockwell Avenue Entire length
§ 325-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-25
322:727
Name of Street Location
Sairs Avenue Entire length
Sampson Place [Added
7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1111]
Entire length
Seaview Avenue Entire length
Second Avenue Entire length
South Bath Avenue Entire length
South Broadway Entire length
Third Avenue Entire length
Van Court Avenue Entire length
West End Avenue Entire length
Westwood Avenue Entire length
Willow Avenue [Added 3-26-1996
by Ord. No. 10-96]
Entire length
§ 325-26. Schedule II: Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets. [Amended 11-23-1971 by Ord. No. 618; 11-14-1972 by Ord.
No. 660; 8-28-1973 by Ord. No. 700; 5-27-1975 by Ord. No. 780;
5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 815; 9-28-1976 by Ord. No. 831; 10-12-1976
by Ord. No. 833; 9-14-1977 by Ord. No. 891; 7-25-1978 by Ord. No.
920; 8-8-1978 by Ord. No. 922; 6-19-1979 by Ord. No. 948;
8-19-1980 by Ord. No. 990; 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1008; 5-12-1981
by Ord. No. 1020; 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1023]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3C, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Abbottsford Avenue
[Repealed 6-26-2019
by Ord. No. 12-19]
Academy Street
[Repealed 6-26-2019
by Ord. No. 12-19]
Adams Street [Added
6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 18-11]
North Entire length
Adams Street [Added
6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 18-11]
South Beginning at a point 150 feet from the
easterly curbline of Ocean Avenue and
extending easterly to the terminus of
the street
Atlantic Avenue North Between Church Street and Long
Branch Avenue
§ 325-25 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:728
Name of Street Side Location
Avenel Boulevard
(formerly Fanchon
Avenue) [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
Both Between Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Avenue (formerly New Ocean Avenue) -
- Marion Place
Avenel Boulevard
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
North From Calvert Avenue to its easterly
terminus
Avenel Boulevard
[Added 4-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1328]
North From Calvert Street to Ocean
Boulevard
Avenel Boulevard
[Added 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 31-05]
North East of old Ocean Avenue
Avery Avenue [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
Both From the easterly terminus of Avery
Avenue to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Avery Avenue [Added
9-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 137-89]
North Beginning at a point 210 feet from the
easterly curbline of Ocean Boulevard
and extending 140 feet easterly
therefrom
Bath Avenue [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 17-91]
North Beginning at a point 353 feet west of
the westerly curbline of West Avenue
and extending 66 feet therefrom
Bath Avenue North Beginning 35 feet from the easterly
curbline of Prospect Street and
extending 130 feet easterly therefrom
Bath Avenue North Between Third Avenue and Railroad
Bath Avenue [Added
1-22-2020 by Ord.
No. 2-20]
North From the northeast corner of West
Avenue extending 222 feet east to its
terminus
Bath Avenue [Added
5-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 7-13]
South From the easterly curbline of Coral
Place, extending 400 feet easterly on
Bath Avenue to the westerly curbline of
Second Avenue
Bath Avenue [Added
11-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 27-16]
South From the westerly curbline of Coral
Place, extending 55 feet westerly on
Bath Avenue to the easterly curbline of
Sairs Avenue
Bath Avenue [Added
4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1328]
South Between Sairs Avenue and Railroad
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:729
Name of Street Side Location
Bath Avenue South Between Springdale Avenue and
Indiana Avenue
Bay Avenue [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 20-09]
Both Entire length
Belmont Avenue Both Between a point 100 feet west of
Second Avenue and Second Avenue
Belmont Avenue South Between Third Avenue and Memorial
Parkway
Bonforte Road [Added
6-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 23-05]
East From the southerly curbline of
Howland Avenue to northern curbline
of Brown Road
Branchport Avenue
[Added 10-10-2000
by Ord. No. 37-00]
East Beginning at a point 125 feet from the
northerly corner of Vernon Street and
extending to the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Irving Place
Branchport Avenue West Between Russell Avenue and Irving
Place
Branchport Avenue West For a distance of 100 feet northward
from the projected northerly curbline
of Route 36
Brighton Avenue
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
Both From the easterly terminus of Brighton
Avenue to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 4-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 10-00]
South Beginning at a point 80 feet west of the
prolongation of Sairs Avenue and
extending 23 feet westerly therefrom
Broadway [Added
4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1328]
South Beginning at a point 25 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Second Avenue
and extending 75 feet westerly
therefrom
Broadway Buttonwood
Avenue [Amended
8-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 1181]
South
South
Between Norwood Avenue and
Branchport Avenue Between a point
400 feet west of Grand Avenue and
Grand Avenue
Cedar Avenue Both Between Greens Avenue and railroad
Cedar Avenue North From the railroad tracks to Norwood
Avenue
Cedar Avenue South From railroad tracks to Van Court
Avenue
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:730
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue
[Added 12-27-2001
by Ord. No. 46-01]
North Beginning at a point 343 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Liberty Street
and extending 50 feet westerly
therefrom, except for police vehicles
Cottage Place [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
North From the easterly terminus of Cottage
Place to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Cottage Place [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
South From a point 135 feet east of the
easterly curbline at Ocean Boulevard to
the easterly terminus of Cottage Place
Cypress Street
[Added 2-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 3-17;
amended 4-11-2017
by Ord. No. 6-17]
North Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Jackson Street extending 296 feet
along the northerly curbline of Cypress
Street
Dale Street [Added
5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
21-07]
South From the easterly curb line of
Vanderbilt Avenue extending 100 feet
east therefrom
Dudley Street
[Amended 6-26-2019
by Ord. No. 11-19]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Broadway, extending 360 feet, along
the westerly curbline of Dudley Street,
extending to southern curbline of
Hampton Avenue
Dunbar Avenue North Between Third Avenue and Second
Avenue
Dunbar Avenue North From the crosswalk at Third Avenue
east a distance of 240 feet
Dunbar Avenue South From the crosswalk at Third Avenue
east 130 feet
Eastwood Avenue
[Amended 9-11-1984
by Ord. No. 1185]
South From the intersection with Rockwell
Avenue south 490 feet
Elmwood Avenue Both Between Long Branch Avenue and
Hearn Avenue
Elmwood Avenue Both Between Long Branch Avenue and
MacArthur Avenue
First Avenue
[Amended 7-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1111]
Both Between Laird Street and South
Broadway
Franklin Avenue
[Added 10-13-1987
by Ord. No. 1372]
North Beginning at a point 200 feet from the
easterly curbline of Second Avenue and
extending to its easterly terminus
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:731
Name of Street Side Location
Franklin Avenue
[Added 10-13-1987
by Ord. No. 1372]
South Beginning at a point 265 feet from the
easterly curbline of Second Avenue and
extending to its easterly terminus
Franklin Avenue South Between Ocean Avenue and Ethel Place
Franklin Terrace
[Added 4-16-1981 by
Ord. No. 1328]
North Between Ocean Boulevard and Ocean
Avenue
Garfield Road Both Between Ocean Avenue and Garfield
Terrace
Garfield Terrace Both Entire length
Grand Avenue [Added
7-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1111]
East Between Broadway and McClellan
Street
Grand Avenue East Between Broadway and Russell Avenue
High Street East Between Bath Avenue and Norwood
Avenue
High Street [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
North From the easterly curbline of Norwood
Avenue to a point 120 feet easterly
therefrom
High Street [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
South From the easterly curbline of Norwood
Avenue to a point 100 feet therefrom
High Street [Added
8-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 32-04]
West From the southerly curve line of Bath
Avenue to a point 257 feet along the
westerly edge of High Street
Hillside Avenue
[Added 2-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 3-17]
North
and east
Beginning at the easterly curbline of
South Seventh Avenue, extending 896
feet along the northerly and easterly
curblines of Hillside Avenue
Howland Avenue
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
Both From the westerly curbline of Ocean
Avenue to a point 60 feet westerly
therefrom
Howland Place West Entire length
Hoyt Street Both Entire length
Hulick Place [Added
7-27-2010 by Ord.
No. 9-10]
East From the southerly terminus of Avery
Avenue to a point 307 feet southerly
therefrom
Hulick Place [Added
7-27-2010 by Ord.
No. 9-10]
West Entire side
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:732
Name of Street Side Location
Idyle Place Both Entire length
Indiana Avenue West Between Bath Avenue and Eastbourne
Avenue
Jackson Street West Between Broadway and Kennedy Street
Joline Avenue Both Between Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue) and the easterly
terminus
Joline Avenue North Between a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Liberty Street and
a point 215 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Liberty Street
Joline Avenue South Between a point 150 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Liberty Street and
a point 110 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Liberty Street
Laird Street
[Amended 6-23-1987
by Ord. No. 1352]
South Between Ocean Avenue and
Abbottsford Avenue
Lake Avenue [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 149-89;
amended 6-23-1998
by Ord. No. 16-98;
7-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 19-98]
Both Entire length
Leslie Court Both Entire length
Lewis Alley Both Between Liberty Street and Rockwell
Avenue
Liberty Alley [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
Both Between Liberty Street and Rockwell
Avenue
Liberty Street East Between a point 215 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Joline Avenue and
a point 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Joline Avenue
Liberty Street West Between a point 200 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Joline Avenue and
a point 215 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Joline Avenue
Long Branch Avenue
[Added 11-24-2009
by Ord. No. 20-09]
East From Airsdale Avenue north to Bay
Avenue
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:733
Name of Street Side Location
Long Branch Avenue
[Added 9-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 27-90]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Seaview Avenue and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom
Long Branch Avenue East Between Seaview Avenue and Sampson
Place
Long Branch Avenue
[Added 9-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 27-90]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Seaview Avenue and extending 150
feet northerly therefrom
Long Branch Avenue West Between Elmwood Avenue and Joline
Avenue
MacArthur Avenue
[Added 7-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 129-89]
East Beginning at a point 97 feet from the
southerly curbline of Atlantic Avenue
and extending 60 feet southerly
therefrom
Marine Terrace
[Added 5-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 8-16]
South From Grant Street extending 237 feet
east
Marion Place [Added
6-9-2009 by Ord. No.
10-09]
East Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
northerly curbline of Avenel Boulevard
and extending 425 feet northerly
therefrom.
Marshall Court
[Added 4-8-2014 by
Ord. No. 7-14]
South From Hoey Avenue extending 290 feet
west
Marvin Drive Both Entire length
Matilda Terrace
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
North Between Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard
Matilda Terrace
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
South From the easterly terminus of Matilda
Terrace to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Melrose Terrace
[Amended 4-16-1987
by Ord. No. 1328;
repealed 8-23-2016
by Ord. No. 22-16]
Morris Avenue North Beginning 50 feet from the easterly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 75 feet easterly therefrom
Morris Avenue North Beginning 35 feet from the westerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:734
Name of Street Side Location
Morris Avenue [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063; repealed
8-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 22-16]
Morris Avenue [Added
1-12-1988 by Ord.
No. 1380]
South Beginning at a point 248 feet from the
westerly curbline of Westwood Avenue
and extending 45 feet westerly
therefrom
Morris Avenue South Beginning 35 feet from the easterly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 130 feet easterly therefrom
Morris Avenue South Beginning 50 feet from the westerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 80 feet westerly therefrom
Morris Avenue [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
South Between Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard
Morris Avenue [Added
12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 32-17]
West Beginning 226 feet south of the
southwest corner of Morris Avenue and
Broadway, extending 184 feet south
down the westerly curbline of Morris
Avenue
Myrtle Lane Both Entire length
Norgrove Place Both Between Norwood Avenue and Van
Court Avenue
North Bath Avenue
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
Both From Ocean Avenue to Ocean
Boulevard
North Lake Drive South Between Ocean Avenue and the rightof-
way of the New York and Long
Branch Railroad
Norwood Avenue
(Route 71) [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
East Between High Street and Winter Street
Norwood Avenue East From Cedar Avenue to Hollywood
Avenue
Norwood Avenue
(Route 71) [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
East From the southerly curbline of High
Street to a point 410 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:735
Name of Street Side Location
Norwood Avenue West Between Broadway and Wall Street
Norwood Avenue
(Route 71) [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
West Between Wall Street and Overton Place
Oakwood Avenue East Between Broadway and Gerard Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
4-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 1063]
Both Between Atlantic Avenue and Presley
Street
Ocean Avenue
[Amended 8-23-2016
by Ord. No. 22-16]
Both Between North Bath Avenue and
Morris Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both Between North Lake Drive and New
Court
Ocean Avenue [Added
5-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 10-02]
East Between South Bath Avenue and North
Bath Avenue
Ocean Avenue East Between Takanassee Lake Bridge and
Park Avenue
Ocean Avenue
[Repealed 8-23-2016
by Ord. No. 22-16]
Ocean Avenue
(formerly New Ocean
Avenue)
Both Between Seaview Avenue and Avenel
Boulevard (formerly Fanchon Avenue)
Ocean Avenue North
[Amended 1-24-1995
by Ord. No. 2-95]
Both Between Avenel Boulevard and Joline
Avenue
Ocean Avenue North
[Amended 1-24-1995
by Ord. No. 2-95]
East Between Joline Avenue and Seaview
Avenue
Ocean Boulevard Both From Brighton Avenue to Morris
Avenue
Ocean Terrace [Added
5-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 8-16]
North From Ocean Boulevard extending 130
feet east
Palmer Avenue West Between Brighton Avenue and West
End Court
Park Avenue [Added
5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 13-97]
South Between Norwood Avenue and Truax
Street
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:736
Name of Street Side Location
Pavilion Avenue
[Amended 3-14-2000
by Ord. No. 4-00]
North Beginning 35 feet from the easterly
curbline of Ocean Boulevard and
extending 65 feet easterly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue North Beginning 50 feet from the easterly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 75 feet easterly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue North Beginning 35 feet from the westerly
curbline of Ocean Boulevard and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue North Beginning 35 feet from the westerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 130 feet westerly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue North Between a point 500 feet east of Third
Avenue and Third Avenue
Pavilion Avenue South Beginning 35 feet from the easterly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 130 feet easterly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue
[Amended 3-14-2000
by Ord. No. 4-00]
South Beginning 35 feet from the westerly
curbline of Ocean Boulevard and
extending 65 feet westerly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue South Beginning 50 feet from the westerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 75 feet westerly therefrom
Pavilion Avenue South Between Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard
Pearl Street East Between Broadway and Norwood
Avenue
Plaza Court
[Amended 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. 10-15;
11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 29-17]
Both Entire length, except beginning 383
feet east of the easterly curb of Ocean
Avenue/Plaza Court, extending 63 feet
east, encompassing 3 parking spaces
on the south side
Potter Avenue Both Between Liberty Street and Rockwell
Avenue
Pullman Avenue
[Added 11-23-1999
by Ord. No. 44-99;
repealed 11-28-2017
by Ord. No. 30-17]
Pullman Avenue
[Added 11-23-1999
by Ord. No. 44-99]
South Between Ocean Avenue and Leslie
Court
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:737
Name of Street Side Location
Pullman Avenue
[Added 11-23-1999
by Ord. No. 44-99]
South Between Ocean Avenue and the
easterly terminus
Pullman Avenue
[Repealed 6-8-1999
by Ord. No. 27-99]
Rivergate Way [Added
8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
30-95; amended
11-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 37-96;
10-27-1998 by Ord.
No. 36-98; repealed
4-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 9-11]
Rockwell Avenue East Between Union Avenue and Eastwood
Avenue
Rockwell Avenue
[Added 5-8-1984 by
Ord. No. 1163]
West Between Monmouth Avenue and
Halburton Place
Rockwell Avenue West From Monmouth Avenue to Broadway
Rosalyn Court [Added
8-24-1999 by Ord.
No. 35-99]
East/
South
Beginning at a point 222 feet from the
northerly curbline of Albert Place and
extending 138 feet northerly to
easterly therefrom
Seaview Avenue
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
North From Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue) to the easterly terminus
of Seaview Avenue
Second Avenue
[Added 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 5-00]
East Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Dunbar Avenue and extending 60 feet
northerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 5-00]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Dunbar Avenue and extending 155 feet
southerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 11-10-1987
by Ord. No. 1378]
East Beginning at a point 43 feet from the
prolongation of the southerly curbline
of Garfield Avenue and extending 125
feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 8-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 33-07]
East Beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Garfield Avenue
and extending 60 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:738
Name of Street Side Location
Second Avenue
[Added 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 21-97;
repealed 6-23-1998
by Ord. No. 14-98_]
Second Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the northerly
curbline of Morris Avenue and
extending 115 feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Morris Avenue and
extending 130 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the northerly
curbline of Pavilion Avenue and
extending 115 feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Pavilion Avenue and
extending 130 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue East Between a point 100 feet north of
Cedar Avenue and Cedar Avenue
Second Avenue
[Added 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 5-00]
West Beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curb- line of Dunbar Avenue
and extending 175 feet northerly
therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 5-00]
West Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Dunbar Avenue
and extending 200 feet southerly
therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 8-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 33-07]
West Beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Garfield Avenue
and extending 60 feet northerly
therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 8-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 33-07]
West Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Garfield Avenue
and extending 60 feet northerly
therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 8-25-1992 by
Ord. No. 69-92]
West Beginning at a point 330 feet from the
southerly curbline of Pavilion Avenue
and extending 70 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:739
Name of Street Side Location
Second Avenue
[Added 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 21-97;
repealed 6-23-1998
by Ord. No. 14-98]
Second Avenue
[Added 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 21-97]
West Beginning at the southerly curbline of
West End Avenue and extending 66 feet
southerly therefrom
Second Avenue West Beginning 35 feet from the northerly
curbline of Morris Avenue and
extending 125 feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue West Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Morris Avenue and
extending 120 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue West Beginning 35 feet from the northerly
curbline of Pavilion Avenue and
extending 125 feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue West Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Pavilion Avenue and
extending 120 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue West Between Cedar Avenue and New Court
Second Avenue West Between Pavilion Avenue and Dunbar
Avenue
Second Avenue
[Added 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 5-00]
West Beginning at the southerly curbline of
South Bath Avenue and extending 155
feet southerly therefrom
Seventh Avenue Both From the Seventh Avenue northerly
curbline to a point 50 feet northerly
therefrom
Seventh Avenue East Beginning at a point 149 feet north of
the Seventh Avenue easterly curbline
extending to Wharburton Place
northerly thereof
Seventh Avenue West Beginning at a point 379 feet north of
the Seventh Avenue westerly curbline
extending to Wharburton Place
northerly thereof
Sixth Avenue Both Between Joline Avenue and Pacific
Street
South Bath Avenue
[Repealed 7-12-2005
by Ord. No. 25-05]
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-26
322:740
Name of Street Side Location
South Lake Drive North Between Ocean Avenue and the rightof-
way of the New York and Long
Branch Railroad
South Lake Drive
[Added 9-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 20-18]
North Beginning at the northwest corner of
Ocean Avenue and South Lake Drive
extending 1,186 feet west along the
northern curbline of South Lake Drive
Sternberger Avenue Both Between Ocean Avenue and Wertheim
Place
Sycamore Avenue Both Between Ocean Avenue and Elberon
Avenue
Third Avenue [Added
2-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 4-90]
East Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Bath Avenue extending 1,000 feet
northerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
2-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 3-90]
West Beginning at a point 755 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Bath Avenue,
extending 300 feet northerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
2-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 3-90]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Bath Avenue, extending 560 feet
northerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
5-8-1984 by Ord. No.
1166]
West Between Bath Avenue and Lowden
Avenue, except that parking shall be
permitted at the taxi stand beginning
at a point 550 feet north of the
northerly line of Bath Avenue and
extending 30 feet northerly therefrom
by authorized taxis only
Third Avenue [Added
6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 14-11]
West From Broadway extending 160 feet
south
Third Avenue [Added
10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 34-98]
West Between Morris Avenue and Clinton
Place
Truax Street [Added
12-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 36-05]
East From the southerly curbline of Park
Avenue to northern curbline of Albert
Place
Wall Street [Added
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1147]
North Between Norwood Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue
Westbourne Avenue
[Added 5-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 5-16]
South From Tabor Street extending 177 feet
east
§ 325-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-26
322:741
Name of Street Side Location
West End Avenue
[Added 4-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 1063]
Both From the westerly curbline of Ocean
Avenue to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
West Street West Entire length
Westwood Avenue East Between Woolley Avenue and
Eastbourne Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Amended 8-14-1984
by Ord. No. 1180]
West Between Bath Avenue and Mark Drive
Willow Avenue
[Added 5-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 21-95]
South Beginning at a point 289 feet west of
the westerly curbline or Westwood
Avenue and extending 46 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 325-27. Schedule III: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Amended 11-14-1982 by Ord. No. 660; 12-12-1972
by Ord. No. 665; 4-24-1973 by Ord. No. 689; 5-11-1976 by Ord. No.
815; 11-23-1976 by Ord. No. 839; 8-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1074;
7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1111]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3D, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Bath Avenue
[Added
1-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 3-06]
North From Westwood Avenue
east to West Street
Berdan Place
[Added
7-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 22-91]
South 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point 325
feet from the westerly
curbline of Branchport
Avenue and extending to
the westerly terminus
Berg Avenue
[Added
10-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 35-11]
Both Entire length from
Norwood Avenue
extending to Van Court
Avenue
§ 325-26 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-27
322:742
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Berg Avenue
[Added
6-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 15-98;
amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Beginning at a point 50
feet east from the easterly
curbline of Norwood
Avenue to a point 220 feet
easterly therefrom
Berg Avenue
[Added
6-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 15-98;
amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Beginning at a point 35
feet east from the easterly
curbline of Norwood
Avenue to a point 235 feet
easterly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added
8-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 26-91]
Both 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m. Boulevard
From railroad tracks to
Ocean
Broadway Both 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Victor Avenue to
Ocean Avenue
Cedar Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From Marvin Drive to
Norwood Avenue
Cedar Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From Norwood Avenue to
Van Court Avenue
Central Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Wednesday
Rockwell Avenue to
termination point east and
beyond Ellis Avenue
Central Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Thursday
Rockwell Avenue to
termination point east and
beyond Ellis Avenue
Clarence Avenue
[Added 1-9-2001
by Ord. No.
57-00; amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Elinore Avenue
[Amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 325-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-27
322:743
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Highland Avenue
[Amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Between Van Court
Avenue and Norwood
Avenue
Hoey Avenue
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
repealed
1-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 35-17]
Hollywood Avenue
[Added
11-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 42-07]
Both 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Norwood Avenue to
Monmouth Place
Hollywood Avenue
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
amended
7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 26-11;
repealed
7-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 14-16]
Hollywood
Terrace [Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
repealed
1-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 35-17]
Jane Street
[Added
12-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 50-00]
North 1-hour parking
only
Entire length
Jersey Avenue
[Added
10-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 44-02;
amended
5-27-2003 by
Ord. No. 15-03]
North
and
south
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Vancourt
Avenue, extending 183
feet east on Jersey
Avenue, covering the
north and south side
curblines of Jersey Avenue
§ 325-27 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-27
322:744
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Kirby Avenue
[Amended
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Between Van Court
Avenue and Norwood
Avenue
Lenox Avenue
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
repealed
1-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 35-17]
Mark Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Marshall Court
[Repealed
2-8-2005 by Ord.
No. 4-05]
Marvin Drive
[Amended
2-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-01]
Both 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Monmouth Place
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00]
Both 10:00 p.m .to
6:00 a.m.
From Westwood Avenue to
Hollywood Avenue
Oakley Avenue
[Added
6-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 10-08]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length from Van
Court Avenue to Woodgate
Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From Seaview Avenue and
Brighton Avenue
Ocean Avenue
[Added
6-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 127-89]
Both 4:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m. Monday
through
Saturday
Between Chelsea Avenue
and Laird Street
Pavilion Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 325-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-27
322:745
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Pearl Street
[Added
9-25-2001 by
Ord. No. 33-01;
amended
5-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 9-02]
West 2-hour parking
only Monday
through Friday
Beginning at a point 135
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Broadway
extending 56 feet
southerly therefrom
Second Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From Broadway to
Garfield Avenue
Third Avenue
[Added
12-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 50-00]
Both 1-hour parking
only
Between Chelsea Avenue
and Broadway
Van Court Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From Cedar Avenue to
Clarence Avenue
West End Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
From Indiana Avenue to
Westwood Avenue
West End Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesday
Between Wardell Place
and Westwood Avenue
West End Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Thursday
Between Wardell Place
and Westwood Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
repealed
1-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 35-17]
Woodgate Avenue
[Added
6-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 23-00;
repealed
1-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 35-17]
§ 325-27 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-28
322:746
§ 325-28. Schedule IV: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours
During Certain Times of the Year. [Amended 8-9-1977 by Ord. No.
885; 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1008; 7-4-1983 by Ord. No. 1111;
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 33-90; 1-25-1994 by Ord. No. 6-94]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3E, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following streets on
a legal school day from September 1 to June 30, inclusive:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Chelton Avenue
(Lenna Conrow)
North 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Between Heam Avenue and
Long Branch Avenue
Division Street
(Holy Trinity)
East 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning 25 feet from the
northerly curbline of Willow
Avenue and extending 135
feet northerly therefrom
Eastbourne
Avenue [Added
10-23-2007 by
Ord. No. 39-07]
Both 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Railroad tracks extending
west to Indiana Avenue
entire length
Eastbourne
Avenue (Beatty
Lane)
North 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 35 feet
from the easterly curbline of
Westwood Avenue and
extending 191 feet easterly
therefrom
Eastbourne
Avenue (Beatty
Lane)
South 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 35 feet
from the easterly curbline of
Westwood Avenue and
extending 226 feet easterly
therefrom
Exchange Place
(Holy Trinity)
North 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 60 feet
from the easterly curbline of
Division Street to a point
164 feet easterly therefrom
Garfield Avenue
(Audrey Clark
School)
[Amended
4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-05]
South 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 220
feet from the easterly
curbline of Third Avenue to
a point 200 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 325-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-28
322:747
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Hendrickson
Avenue (Gregory
School)
[Amended
4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-05;
repealed
8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 19-14]
Mark Drive Both 8:00 a.m
to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
Morris Avenue
(Anastasia)
[Amended
10-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
South 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
from the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Hillside
Avenue extending 261 feet
westerly therefrom
Myrtle Avenue
[Added
8-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 20-12]
6:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.,
school
days
In front of 127 Myrtle
Avenue
Seventh Avenue
(Gregory School)
[Repealed
8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 19-14]
West End Avenue Both 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Between Indiana Avenue
and Westwood Avenue
West End Avenue
(West End
School)
[Amended
4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-05]
South 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 35 feet
from the easterly curbline of
Sairs Avenue to a point 325
feet easterly therefrom
Westwood Avenue East 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
From a point 130 feet from
the southerly curbline of
Bath Avenue to the
northerly curbline of
Eastbourne Avenue (Beatty
Lane)
§ 325-28 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-28
322:748
§ 325-29. Schedule IVA: Parking prohibited during certain
additional hours during certain additional times of the year. [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1130]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3F, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following streets from June 15
to September 15 inclusive:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Westwood Avenue West 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Between Mark Drive and
West End Avenue
Willow Avenue
(Anastasia
School)
[Amended
4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-05]
North 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 316
feet from the easterly
curbline of Prospect Street
and extending to a point 337
feet easterly therefrom
Woolley Avenue
[Repealed
7-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 13-16]
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3E, and in addition thereto,
no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day of
the week, including Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
following streets from May 1 to September 30 inclusive: [Added
10-23-1984 by Ord. No. 1189; amended 4-16-1987 by Ord. No.
1326; 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 1329; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 33-90]
Name
of Street Side Time Location
Marion Place Both 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Saturday,
Sunday, and
holidays
Entire length
Ocean Avenue Both 8:00 p.m. to
5:00 a.m.
Between Atlantic Avenue
and Avenel Boulevard
Ocean Avenue
[Added
4-25-2000 by
Ord. No. 11-00]
East 10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Between North Bath
Avenue and Melrose
Terrace
§ 325-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-29
322:749
Name of Street Side Time Location
Breakwater Lane Both 10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Broadway [Added
2-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 49-98]
South 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the easterly side of the
entrance driveway at 540
Broadway 100 feet to the
east
Eaton Avenue
[Repealed
3-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 8-01]
Lincoln Avenue Both 10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Elberon Avenue
and Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue Both 10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Takanassee Lake
Bridge and Lincoln Avenue
Ocean Avenue
[Amended
1-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 2-95;
repealed
8-25-1998 by
Ord. No. 29-98]
Ocean Avenue
North [Added
12-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 52-00;
repealed
7-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 15-08]
Park Avenue
[Amended
6-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 27-99;
repealed
7-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 14-08]
Stuyvesant Place Both 10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 325-30. Schedule V: Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3G, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
§ 325-29 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-30
322:750
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Atlantic Avenue
[Added
11-1-1988 by
Ord. No.
76-88]
South 15 minutes Beginning at the
prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Church
Street and extending
easterly to a point 65 feet
from the easterly curbline
of Hoyt Street therefrom
Branchport
Avenue [Added
4-16-1986 by
Ord. No. 1326;
repealed
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
12-07]
Branchport
Avenue [Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1286]
West 5 minutes from
8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point 35
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Russell Court
extending 20 feet southerly
therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
Both 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Ocean Avenue
and Second Avenue
Brighton Avenue
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
Both 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Second Avenue
and Long Long Branch
Railroad right-of-way
Brighton Court
[Added
9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 1361]
Both 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Entire length
Broadway
[Added
8-11-1992 by
Ord. No.
65-92A]
North 15 minutes,
Monday through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 25
feet from the easterly
curbline of Sixth Avenue
and extending 40 feet
easterly therefrom
Broadway
[Added
8-11-1992 by
Ord. No.
65-92A]
North 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 65
feet from the easterly
curbline of Sixth Avenue
and extending 60 feet
easterly
§ 325-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-30
322:751
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Broadway
[Added
8-11-1992 by
Ord. No.
65-92A]
North 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Second Avenue
and North Fifth Avenue
Broadway
[Added
8-11-1992 by
Ord. No.
65-92A]
North 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Sixth Avenue and
Seventh Avenue
Broadway
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
South 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Second Avenue
and Lippincott Avenue
Cleveland
Avenue
North 30 minutes Beginning 35 feet from the
southeast corner of
Prospect Street to a point
50 feet east
Cleveland
Avenue
South 30 minutes Beginning 35 feet from the
southeast corner of
Prospect Street to a point
50 feet east
East Street
[Added
4-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1326]
North 15 minutes from
7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Beginning 35 feet from the
easterly curbline of
Branchport Avenue to a
point 90 feet easterly
therefrom
Elberon Train
Station Parking
Lot [Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
East 2 hours, Monday
through Friday,
6:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 192
feet from the westerly
curbline of Lincoln Avenue
and extending 235 feet
southerly therefrom (only
the spaces adjacent to
Elberon Library)
Franklin Avenue
[Added
9-8-1998 by
Ord. No.
30-98]
Both 2 hours, Monday
through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Beginning at the easterly
line of Third Avenue and
extending 500 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 325-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-30
322:752
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Liberty Street
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
East 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Broadway and
Liberty Street
Lincoln Avenue
[Added
8-19-1980 by
Ord. No. 990]
Both 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning 35 feet from
Lincoln Court and
continuing west to Lincoln
Square
Lincoln Court Both 2 hours, Monday
through Friday
Between Lincoln Avenue
and Lincoln Square
Lincoln Square Both 2 hours, Monday
through Friday
Between Lincoln Avenue
and Lincoln Square
Memorial
Parkway [Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
East 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Broadway and
Belmont Avenue
Memorial
Parkway [Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
West 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Broadway and
Belmont Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added
6-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 8-10]
North 20 minutes from
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 122
feet from the east curbline
of Hillside Avenue and
extending 50 feet east
therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Amended
2-14-1989 by
Ord. No.
93-89]
North 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 50
feet from the easterly
curbline of Third Avenue
and extending 140 feet
easterly therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Added
3-11-1986 by
Ord. No. 1268;
amended
8-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 1284;
7-23-1991 by
Ord. No.
18-91]
North 15 minutes from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 35
feet west of the westerly
curbline of Westwood
Avenue and extending 76
feet therefrom
§ 325-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-30
322:753
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Morris Avenue
[Amended
8-9-1977 by
Ord. No. 889]
South 15 minutes from
7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Beginning 35 feet from the
northeast corner of the
intersection of Morris
Avenue and South 7th
Avenue to a point 40 feet
east
Ocean Avenue Both 8:00 p.m. to 5:00
a.m.
Between Atlantic Avenue
and Avenel Boulevard
Ocean Avenue
[Added
10-11-1994 by
Ord. No.
51-94]
East 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Brighton Avenue
and New Court
Ocean Avenue
[Added
10-11-1994 by
Ord. No.
51-94]
West 1/2 hour,
Monday through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Brighton Avenue
and New Court
Ocean Avenue
[Added
12-11-2007 by
Ord. No.
44-07]
West 15 minutes, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
Between West End Court
and New Court, last three
end parking spaces closest
thereto
Ocean Avenue
[Added
12-11-2007 by
Ord. No.
44-07]
West 2 hours Between West End Court
and New Court, seven
spaces in the middle of the
parking lot
Ocean Avenue
North [Added
1-22-2020 by
Ord. No. 3-20]
West 30 minutes, May
1 through
September 30
Beginning at a point 168
feet north of the northwest
corner of Joline/Ocean
Avenue North extending
160 feet north down the
westerly curbline
Pavilion Avenue
[Added
10-24-1989 by
Ord. No.
144-89]
North 15 minutes, 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
Beginning at a point 50
feet from the easterly
curbline of Third Avenue
and extending 35 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 325-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-30
322:754
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Pavilion Avenue
[Added
5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1336]
South 15 minutes, 9:00
am to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Saturday
Beginning at a point 50
feet easterly from the
easterly curbline 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Pearl Street
[Added
4-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 7-02]
West 2 hours, Monday
through Friday
From Broadway to Bath
Avenue
Pier Village (all)
[Added
5-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 9-14]
2 hours 10:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.; 4 hours
5:00 p.m. to
12:00 a.m.
Poole Avenue
[Added
12-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 45-95;
repealed
3-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
14-07]
Prospect Street East 30 minutes Beginning 35 feet from the
northeast corner of
Cleveland Avenue to a
point 75 feet north
Prospect Street East 30 minutes Beginning 35 feet from the
southeast corner of
Cleveland Avenue to a
point 50 feet south
Prospect Street West 30 minutes Beginning 35 feet from the
southeast corner of
Exchange Place to a place
to a point 83 feet south
Russell Court
[Added
5-27-2003 by
Ord. No.
19-03]
North 1 hour Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Branchport
Avenue extending 268 feet
on Russell Court, extending
72 feet covering 6 parking
spaces, not including
handicapped spaces
§ 325-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-30
322:755
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Sairs Avenue
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
Both 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
From Brighton Avenue for
200 feet in a northerly
direction
Second Avenue
[Added
7-24-2019 by
Ord. No.
15-19]
Both 2 hours Between Broadway and
Belmont Avenue
Second Avenue
[Added
9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 1361]
Both 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Monday through
Saturday
Between Montgomery
Avenue and West End
Court
Third Avenue
[Added
9-27-1988 by
Ord. No.
64-88]
Both 30 minutes from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Between Broadway and
Belmont Avenue
Third Avenue
[Added
5-27-2003 by
Ord. No.
16-03]
East 2 hours Beginning at a point 36
feet north of the northern
curbline of Franklin
Avenue extending 100 feet
north on Third Avenue
Third Avenue
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
East 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Liberty Alley and
Union
Third Avenue
[Added
5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1336;
amended
1-24-1989 by
Ord. No.
93-89]
East 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point of 25
feet from the northerly
curbline of Morris Avenue
and extending 215 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 325-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-30
322:756
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Third Avenue
[Amended
12-27-1984 by
Ord. No. 1200;
5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1341;
2-23-1988 by
Ord. No. 11-88;
1-9-1989 by
Ord. No.
155-89]
East 1 hour, 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Between Morris Avenue
and Pavilion Avenue
Third Avenue
[Added
2-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 2-90]
West 1 hour, 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 560
feet from the northerly
curbline of Bath Avenue
extending 195 feet
northerly therefrom
Third Avenue
[Added
1-9-1989 by
Ord. No.
155-89]
West 1 hour, 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 150
feet from the prolongation
of the northerly curbline of
Pavilion Avenue and
extending to Morris
Avenue
Third Avenue
[Added
1-9-1989 by
Ord. No.
155-89]
West 1 hour, 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 77
feet from the prolongation
of the southerly curbline of
Pavilion Avenue and
extending 137 feet
southerly therefrom
Third Avenue
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
West 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Liberty Alley and
Union
Upper Broadway
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1306]
North 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Washington
Street and Branchport
Upper Broadway
[Added
11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 1300]
South 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Between Washington
Street and Pearl Street
§ 325-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-30
322:757
Name
of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours/days) Location
Washington
Street
West 2 hours, Monday
through
Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 50
feet north of the curbline of
Broadway and extending
30 feet north thereof
West End Court
[Added
9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 1361]
North 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
Beginning 25 feet from the
westerly curbline of Ocean
Avenue and extending 90
feet westerly therefrom
West End Court
[Added
9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 1361]
South 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
Beginning 67 feet from the
westerly curbline of Ocean
Avenue and extending 40
feet westerly therefrom
Westwood
Avenue [Added
11-27-2007 by
Ord. No.
43-07]
West 15 minutes, 7:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Beginning at a point 45
feet from the curbline of
Jeffrey Streetand extending
50 feet north therefrom
Westwood
Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by
Ord. No.
126-89]
West 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 100
feet from the southerly
curbline of Morris Avenue
and extending 45 feet
southerly therefrom
Westwood
Avenue [Added
9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 1362]
West 15 minutes, 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Beginning 25 feet from the
southerly curbline of
Jefferson Street and
extending 40 feet southerly
therefrom
Westwood
Avenue [Added
2-27-1996 by
Ord. No. 7-96]
West 2 hours, Monday
through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.; Saturday,
8:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Beginning 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Poole
Avenue and extending 25
feet northerly therefrom
§ 325-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-31
322:758
§ 325-31. Schedule VI: Limiting Use of Streets to a Certain Class of
Vehicles. [Amended 6-22-1971 by Ord. No. 605; 6-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 914; 6-26-1984 by Ord. No. 1175; 10-23-1984 by Ord. No. 1189;
9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1363; 1-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1380; 12-27-1988
by Ord. No. 87-88; 7-23-1991 by Ord. No. 21-91]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-4, trucks, buses and other
vehicles over four tons' registered gross weight are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described herein, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such street:
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street Entire length
Columbia Avenue Entire length
Edwards Avenue Both Between Atlantic and Joline Avenue
Florence Avenue Both Between Atlantic Avenue and Joline
Avenue (Highway 36)
Franklin Avenue Between Second Avenue and Third Avenue
Neptune Avenue Entire length
Ocean Terrace Entire length
Overton Place
[Added 7-23-1991
by Ord. No.
23-91]
Between Norwood Avenue and Oakwood
Avenue
Seaview Avenue Between its easterly and westerly
intersection with Ocean Avenue north
West End Avenue Both Between Second Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard
White Street Entire length
§ 325-32. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets. [Amended 3-14-1972 by
Ord. No. 630; 6-22-1976 by Ord. No. 824; 11-23-1976 by Ord. No.
838; 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 879; 7-25-1978 by Ord. No. 920;
8-8-1978 by Ord. No. 922; 5-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1068; 7-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1111; 10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1130; 11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136; 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1238; 5-24-1988 by Ord. No. 32-88;
9-27-1988 by Ord. No. 66-88; 11-1-1988 by Ord. No. 80-88; 5-9-1989
by Ord. No. 109-89; 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 142-89; 8-24-1993 by
Ord. No. 24-93]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-5, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 325-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-32
322:759
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Abbottsford
Avenue
Southbound Between South Broadway and
Laird Street
Academy Street Southbound Between Broadway and Belmont
Avenue
Arthur Avenue Eastbound Entire length
Belmont Avenue Eastbound Between Third Avenue and
Memorial Parkway
Bonforte Road
[Added
1-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 26-09]
Southbound Howland Avenue to Brown Road
Brown Road
[Added
1-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 26-09;
amended
6-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 6-10]
Eastbound Bonforte Road to Old Ocean
Avenue
Conover Street Westbound Entire length
Eastwood Avenue Southbound Between Joline Avenue and
Rockwell Avenue
Exchange Place Westbound Between Prospect Street and
Division Street
First Avenue Northbound Between Laird Street and South
Broadway
Fourth Avenue Southbound Between Broadway and Chelsea
Avenue
Franklin Terrace Eastbound Between Ocean Boulevard and
Ocean Avenue
Garfield Road Eastbound Between Ocean Avenue and
Atlantic Ocean to intersection of
Garfield Terrace
Garfield Terrace Westbound Between Atlantic Avenue and
Ocean Avenue
Grand Avenue Northbound From Broadway to Russell Avenue
Hendrickson
Avenue
[Repealed
12-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 18-13]
§ 325-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-32
322:760
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Howland Avenue
[Added
1-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 26-09]
Eastbound Ocean Boulevard to Old Ocean
Avenue
Laird Street Westbound Between Ocean Avenue and
Ocean Boulevard_
Liberty Alley Westbound Between Liberty Street and
Rockwell Avenue
Marine Terrace Southbound Between Ocean Terrace and
Ocean Terrace
Melrose Terrace Westbound Between Ocean Boulevard and
Ocean Avenue
Nesto Terrace Northbound Between Ocean Boulevard and
Morris Avenue
North Broadway Westbound Between Ocean Boulevard North
and North Second Avenue
Ocean Avenue
[Added
7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 29-99;
repealed
4-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 6-02]
Ocean Avenue Northbound Between South Bath Avenue and
North Bath Avenue
Ocean Avenue
[Added
1-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 26-09;
amended
6-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 6-10]
Southbound Howland Avenue to West End
Avenue
Ocean Avenue
North
Northbound Between Ocean Terrace and
Seaview Avenue
Ocean Terrace Eastbound Between Ocean Boulevard North
and Ocean Avenue North
Overlook Avenue Eastbound Between Hoey Avenue and the
intersection of North and South
Lake Drive
§ 325-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-32
322:761
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Palmer Avenue Southbound From Brighton Avenue to West
End Court
Pearl Street Southbound Between Broadway and Bath
Avenue
Pearl Street West Between Bath Avenue and
Norwood Avenue
Prospect Alley Northbound Between Prospect Street and
Division Street
Rose Street Northbound Between Morris Avenue and
Melrose Terrace
Rose Street Southbound Entire street
Russell Court
[Added
11-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 42-99]
Westbound Between Branchport Avenue and
Grand Avenue
Seaview Avenue Eastbound Between Fay Street and Ocean
Avenue (formerly New Ocean
Avenue)
South Bath
Avenue
Eastbound Between North Bath Avenue and
Second Avenue
South Broadway Eastbound Between Ocean Boulevard North
and Second Avenue
Sternberger
Avenue
Westbound Entire length
Stokes Alley Eastbound Between Third Avenue and
Memorial Parkway
Van Dyke Place Westbound Between Third Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Wertheim Place Northbound Entire length
Westwood Avenue
[Added
11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
Southbound Between Third Avenue and
Franklin Avenue
§ 325-33. Schedule VIIA: Parking on one-way streets. [Added
3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
In association with the provisions of § 325-6, parking of vehicles parallel
with the left-hand edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic on
the left-hand side of the road and with the curb side of the vehicle within
§ 325-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-33
322:762
six inches of the edge of the roadway shall be permitted on the following
described streets or parts of streets which have been described as one-way
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
South Bath Avenue North Between North Bath Avenue and Second
Avenue
South Cookman
Avenue [Added
3-24-1992 by
Ord. No. 50-92]
West Only in an area 26 feet in width
§ 325-34. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield right-of-way signs are provided for in the
designations:
Name of Street Location
Bath Avenue Between Broadway and Westwood Avenue
Bath Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Westwood Avenue and Second
Avenue
Branchport Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Broadway and Route 36
Brighton Avenue [Added
5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
28-88; amended 7-26-1988
by Ord. No. 45-88]
Between Ocean Boulevard (County Road
57) and Westwood Avenue, thence between
Westwood Avenue and Norwood Avenue
(County Road 25)
Broadway-North Broadway
[Added 10-27-1983 by Ord.
No. 1130]
Entire length
Brookdale Avenue-Hollywood
Avenue [Added 10-27-1983
by Ord. No. 1130]
Between Westwood Avenue and Lenox
Avenue The intersection of Brookdale
Avenue and Hollywood Avenue is
designated as a Yield Intersection with a
yield sign installed on Hollywood Avenue
facing eastbound traffic.
Chelsea Avenue [Added
12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
86-88]
Between Second Avenue and Third Avenue
§ 325-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-34
322:763
Name of Street Location
Chelsea Avenue [Added
12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
86-88]
Between Third Avenue and Morris Avenue
Florence Avenue [Added
5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
28-88; 7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 45-88]
From State Highway 36 to Atlantic Avenue
(County Road 29), thence to the westerly
curbline of Patten Avenue
Grand Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Broadway and Route 36
High Street [Added
5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
28-88; amended 7-26-1988
by Ord. No. 45-88]
Between Bath Avenue and Norwood
Avenue (County Road 25)
Liberty Street Between Broadway and Joline Avenue
Liberty Street Between Joline Avenue and Atlantic Avenue
Long Branch Avenue Between North Broadway and Atlantic
Avenue
Ludlow Street [Added
6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-98]
From Joline Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
Memorial Parkway Between Chelsea Avenue and Broadway
Myrtle Avenue [Added
10-27-1987 by Ord. No.
1130]
Entire length
Ocean Avenue [Amended
12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
87-88]
Between South Bath Avenue and Laird
Street
Ocean Avenue [Added
5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 815;
amended 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Between the Borough of Deal - City of Long
Branch Corporate Line and Brighton
Avenue
Ocean Avenue North [Added
12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
87-88]
Between Ocean Terrace and the northerly
curbline of Seaview Avenue
Ocean Avenue North [Added
12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
87-88]
Between Seaview Avenue and the City of
Long Branch Borough of Monmouth Beach
Corporate line
Ocean Boulevard [Added
5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 815;
amended 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Between Brighton Avenue and South
Broadway
§ 325-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-34
322:764
Name of Street Location
Ocean Boulevard [Added
5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 815;
amended 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Between South Broadway and the City of
Long Branch - Borough of Monmouth
Beach Corporate Line
Park Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Norwood Avenue (Rt. 71) to Ocean Avenue
Rockwell Avenue [Added
6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-98]
From Broadway to Joline Avenue
Rockwell Avenue [Added
6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-98]
From Joline Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
Sairs Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Entire length
Second Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Brighton Avenue and Broadway
Second Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Cedar Avenue and Brighton
Avenue
Seventh Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130; amended 6-9-1998
by Ord. No. 13-98]
From Broadway to Joline Avenue
Seventh Avenue [Added
6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-98]
From Joline Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
Third Avenue [Added
12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
86-88]
Between Bath Avenue and Broadway
Van Court Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Entire length
Washington Street Between Broadway and Joline Avenue
Washington Street [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Broadway and Route 36
§ 325-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-34
322:765
Name of Street Location
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
28-88; amended 7-26-1988
by Ord. No. 45-88]
Between Cedar Avenue (County Road 25)
and Bath Avenue, thence between Bath
Avenue and Third Avenue
Woodgate Avenue [Added
10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Between Park Avenue and Cedar Avenue
§ 325-35. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections. [Amended 7-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1111]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-8, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Abbottsford Avenue and Laird
Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Abbottsford Avenue
Airsdale Avenue and Narragansett
Avenue
Narragansett Avenue
Avenel Boulevard and MacArthur
Avenue
MacArthur Avenue
Bath Avenue and High Street High Street
Bath Avenue and Indiana Avenue Indiana Avenue
Bath Avenue and Morrell Street Morrell Street
Bath Avenue and Pearl Street Pearl Street
Bath Avenue and Prospect Street Prospect Street
Bath Avenue and Third Avenue Third Avenue
Bath Avenue and West Avenue West Avenue
Branchport Avenue and Atlantic
Avenue
Atlantic Avenue
Cedar Avenue and Hoey Avenue Hoey Avenue
Cedar Avenue and Second Avenue Second Avenue
Cedar Avenue and Westwood
Avenue
Westwood Avenue
Church Street and Columbia
Avenue [Added 5-10-1988 by
Ord. No. 25-88]
Church Street
Church Street and White Street
[Added 5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
25-88]
White Street
§ 325-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-35
322:766
Intersection Stop Sign on
Columbia Avenue and Riverdale
Avenue [Added 5-10-1988 by
Ord. No. 25-88]
Columbia Avenue
Cottage Avenue and Bowyer
Avenue [Added 11-26-1991 by
Ord. No. 40-91]
Bowyer Avenue
Division Street and Exchange
Place [Added 5-11-1976 by Ord.
No. 815]
Exchange Place
Edwards Avenue and Pacific
Street [Added 6-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-98]
Pacific Street
Fifth Avenue and Pacific Street Pacific Street
Fifth Avenue and Vanderveer
Place [Added 6-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-98]
Vanderveer Place
First Avenue and Laird Street
[Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1238]
First Avenue
Florence Avenue and Patten
Avenue
Patten Avenue
Franklin Terrace and Ocean
Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Franklin Terrace
Gerard Avenue and Oakhill
Avenue [Added 5-11-1976 by
Ord. No. 815]
Oakhill Avenue
High Street and Eastbourne
Avenue
Eastbourne Avenue
Hollywood Avenue and Woodgate
Avenue
Woodgate Avenue
Joline Avenue and Clifton Avenue Clifton Avenue
Joline Avenue and Hearn Avenue Hearn Avenue
Liberty Alley and Third Avenue
[Added 2-14-1989 by Ord. No.
93-89; amended 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 103-89]
Liberty Alley
Lincoln Avenue and Elberson
Avenue
Elberson Avenue
§ 325-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-35
322:767
Intersection Stop Sign on
Lincoln Avenue and Lincoln Court
[Added 11-14-1972 by Ord. No.
660]
Lincoln Court
Lincoln Court and Lincoln Square
[Added 5-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1341]
Lincoln Square
Long Branch Avenue and Airsdale
Avenue [Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 6-97]
Airsdale Avenue
Madison Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard North [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1238]
Madison Avenue
Marion Place and Avenel
Boulevard [Added 7-28-1983 by
Ord. No. 1112]
Marion Place
Melrose Terrace and Ocean
Boulevard [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Melrose Terrace
Morford Avenue and Grove Street Grove Street
Morris Avenue and Chelsea
Avenue
Chelsea Avenue
Morris Avenue and Division Street Division Street
Morris Avenue and Hillside
Avenue
Hillside Avenue
Morris Avenue and Prospect
Street
Prospect Street
Narragansett Avenue and Naberal
Avenue
Naberal Avenue
Nesto Terrace and Morris Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1238]
Nesto Terrace
Nesto Terrace and Ocean
Boulevard [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Nesto Terrace
North Fifth Avenue and Halberton
Street
Halberton Street
North Sixth Avenue and
Halberton Street
Halberton Street
Oakwood Avenue and Campbell
Avenue
Campbell Avenue
§ 325-35 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-35
322:768
Intersection Stop Sign on
Ocean Avenue and North Bath
Avenue [Amended 3-14-1972 by
Ord. No. 630]
South leg of Ocean Avenue facing
northbound traffic
Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue) and Avenel
Boulevard [Added 7-28-1983 by
Ord. No. 1112]
Ocean Avenue (formerly New Ocean
Avenue)
Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue) and Seaview
Avenue [Amended 3-14-1972 by
Ord. No. 603]
West leg of Seaview Avenue facing
eastbound traffic
Ocean Avenue North and Seaview
Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Ocean Avenue
Ocean Terrace and Ocean Avenue
North [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Ocean Terrace
Old Ocean Avenue and West End
Avenue [Added 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 18-17]
West End Avenue
Overton Place and Winter Street
[Added 11-23-1999 by Ord. No.
43-99]
Winter Street
Park Avenue and Eaton Terrace Eaton Terrace
Park Avenue and Lincoln Court Lincoln Court
Park Avenue and Railroad Line Railroad Line
Park Avenue and Van Court
Avenue
Van Court Avenue
Park Avenue and Woodgate
Avenue
Woodgate Avenue
Port-au-Peck Avenue and Pattern
Avenue
Pattern Avenue
Railroad Avenue and Hollywood
Avenue [Added 11-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 56-94]
Hollywood Avenue
Rockwell Avenue and Union
Avenue
Union Avenue
Sairs Avenue and Eastbourne
Avenue
Eastbourne Avenue
Sairs Avenue and Matilda Terrace Matilda Terrace
§ 325-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-35
322:769
Intersection Stop Sign on
Sairs Avenue and West End
Avenue
West End Avenue
Sixth Avenue and Vanderveer
Place [Added 6-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-98]
Vanderveer Place
South Lincoln Avenue and
Railroad Lane
Railroad Lane
Third Avenue and Dunbar Avenue Dunbar Avenue
Third Avenue and Morris Avenue Morris Avenue
Third Avenue and Pavilion Avenue
[Added 11-14-1972 by Ord. No.
660]
Pavilion Avenue
Third Avenue and Westwood
Avenue
Westwood Avenue
West End Avenue and Hoey Street
[Amended 6-22-1976 by Ord.
No. 823]
Hoey Street
West End Avenue and Indiana
Avenue
Indiana Avenue
West End Court and Kossick Way Kossick Way
West Street and Jerolamon
Avenue
Jerolamon Avenue
West Street and White Street White Street
Willow Avenue and Division Street Division Street
Willow Avenue and Prospect
Street
Prospect Street
Woodgate Avenue and Highland
Avenue
Highland Avenue
§ 325-36. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-9, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
§ 325-35 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-36
322:770
Intersection Yield Sign on
Cottage Avenue and Shrewsbury
Avenue [Added 5-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 34-88]
Shrewsbury Avenue
Franklin and Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by Ord. No.
75-88; amended 12-27-1988 by
Ord. No. 85-88]
Westwood Avenue southbound traffic
only
Hollywood Avenue and Monmouth
Avenue [Added 10-23-1984 by
Ord. No. 1188]
Monmouth Place
Laird Street and Ocean Boulevard
[Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1238]
Laird Street
North Bath Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard
Ocean Boulevard
North Bath Avenue and South
Bath Avenue
South Bath Avenue
Norwood Avenue and Broadway
[Added 7-23-1991 by Ord. No.
19-91]
Broadway
South Lincoln Avenue and Lincoln
Avenue [Added 10-27-1983 by
Ord. No. 1130]
Lincoln Avenue
Traux Street and Albert Place
[Added 10-27-1983 by Ord. No.
1130]
Albert Place
Woodgate Avenue and Lenox
Avenue [Added 4-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 9-98]
Lenox Avenue
§ 325-37. Schedule XI: Prohibited Left Turns. [Added 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-10, no person shall make a left
turn at the following locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Bath Avenue [Added 7-23-1991
by Ord. No. 19-91]
West to south on Norwood Avenue
Franklin Terrace [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1238]
East to north on Ocean Avenue
North Bath Avenue [Added
6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 17-90]
West to east on South Bath Avenue
§ 325-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-37
322:771
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Ocean Avenue North to west on North Bath Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added 6-8-1999
by Ord. No. 26-99]
East to west from Renaissance Estates
property
Ocean Boulevard [Added
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 19-09]
North to west on Montgomery Avenue
Renaissance Estates [Added
6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 26-99]
North to south on Ocean Avenue
Route NJ 36 (Joline Avenue) and
the Gregory School Apartments
driveway (350 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Seventh
Avenue) (Block Number 332, Lot
Number 1) (approximate milepost
4.75) [Added 10-28-2014 by
Ord. No. 23-14]
Westbound from Route NJ 36 (Joline
Avenue) to southbound into the
Gregory School Apartments driveway
South Bath Avenue [Added
5-9-1989 by Ord. No. 109-89;
amended 7-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 132-89]
East to north on Second Avenue
§ 325-38. Schedule XII: Right Turn Only.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-11, the following streets or parts
of streets described hereinafter are hereby designated as right turn only
streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Indiana Avenue [Added
8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
32-07]
Northbound from Indiana Avenue to
eastbound onto Bath Avenue from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday from
September 1 to June 30, annually
Montgomery Avenue East to south on Ocean Boulevard
Route NJ 36 (Joline Avenue)
and the Gregory School
Apartments driveway (350
feet east of the easterly
curbline of Seventh Avenue)
(Block Number 332, Lot
Number 1) (approximate
milepost 4.75) [Added
10-28-2014 by Ord. No.
23-14]
Northbound from the Gregory School
Apartments driveway to eastbound on
Route NJ 36 (Joline Avenue)
§ 325-37 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-39
322:772
§ 325-39. Schedule XIII: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-12B, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Brighton Avenue
[Added 3-22-1988
by Ord. No. 19-88;
amended
7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 44-88]
Zone 1 30 Between Norwood Avenue and the
New Jersey Transit Railroad tracks;
thence
Zone 2 25 Between the New Jersey Transit
Railroad tracks and Ocean Avenue
Ocean Avenue, and
the connecting
portions of North
Bath Avenue, Ocean
Boulevard, Seaview
Avenue, Fachon
Avenue (now a part
of Avenel Boulevard)
and Avenel
Boulevard
[Amended
1-8-1974 by Ord.
No. 719; amended
1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1149]
Zone 1 40 From the southerly Long Branch City
line to Morris Avenue on Ocean
Avenue and Ocean Boulevard; thence
Zone 2 (Reserved)
Zone 3 35 On Ocean Avenue between South Bath
Avenue and Morris Avenue; thence
Zone 4 25 On Ocean Avenue from Morris Avenue
to Avenel Boulevard; thence
Zone 5 25 On Ocean Avenue from Avenel
Boulevard to the northerly Long
Branch City line
§ 325-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-39
322:773
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-18-1988
by Ord. No. 18-88]
Zone 1 35 From Cedar Avenue to the center of
Bath Avenue; thence
Zone 2 30 To Third Avenue
School Zone
[Added
5-10-1988 by
Ord. No. 27-88]
25 In the Long Branch High School Zone,
in Zone 1, during recess or while
children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing
hours
§ 325-40. Schedule XIV: No Stopping or Standing. [Added 7-11-1972
by Ord. No. 648]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3I, no stopping, parking or
standing of vehicles shall be permitted on the following locations and
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 8-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 28-91]
Both Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Branchport Avenue and
extending 375 feet therefrom
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Florence Avenue and extending
230 feet easterly therefrom
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
North From a point 325 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Florence
Avenue to a point 230 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Florence
Avenue
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 100-89]
North From Church Street to Ocean
Avenue north
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
North From the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Branchport
Avenue and extending 196 feet
easterly therefrom
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
South Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Florence Avenue and extending
225 feet easterly therefrom
§ 325-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:774
Name of Street Side Location
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
South From a point 370 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Florence
Avenue to a point 225 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Florence
Avenue
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 100-89]
South From Route 36 (Ocean Boulevard
north) to Ocean Avenue north
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
South From the easterly curbline of
Branchport Avenue to a point 198
feet easterly therefrom
Bath Avenue [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Norwood Avenue and extending
295 feet easterly therefrom
Bath Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
North From a point 125 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Westwood
Avenue to a point 130 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Bath
Avenue
Bath Avenue [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
South Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Norwood Avenue and extending
165 feet easterly therefrom
Bath Avenue [Added
12-12-1989 by Ord.
No. 152-89]
South Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Sairs Avenue and extending 110
feet easterly therefrom
Bath Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
South From Springdale Avenue to Indiana
Avenue
Branchport Avenue
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
Both From a point 125 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Joline Avenue
northerly to McClellan Street
Branchport Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of State Highway #36 (Joline
Avenue) and extending 125 feet
southerly therefrom
Branchport Avenue
[Amended 1-22-1985
by Ord. No. 1203]
East Between East Berdan Place and
Joline Avenue (Highway 36)
Branchport Avenue
[Amended 1-22-1985
by Ord. No. 1203;
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East From the southerly curbline of
Atlantic Avenue to a point 166 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:775
Name of Street Side Location
Branchport Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
West Beginning at the southerly curbline
of State Highway #36 (Joline
Avenue) and extending 125 feet
southerly therefrom
Branchport Avenue
[Amended 1-22-1985
by Ord. No. 1203]
West Between Atlantic Avenue and Joline
Avenue (Highway 36)
Branchport Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
West From the northerly curbline of
Berdan Place to a point 443 feet
northerly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 12-12-1989
by Ord. No. 152-89]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Sairs Avenue and extending 110
feet easterly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 6-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 123-89]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Westwood Avenue and extending
75 feet easterly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 3-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 48-92]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Kossick Way and extending 50
feet westerly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 3-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 8-90]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending 75
feet westerly therefrom
Brighton Avenue
[Added 6-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 123-89]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Westwood Avenue and extending
75 feet westerly therefrom
Broadway [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Branchport Avenue and
extending 60 feet easterly
therefrom
Broadway [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
North From a point 70 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
to a point 35 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
Broadway [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
North From Branchport Avenue to a point
90 feet west of the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of Norwood
Avenue
Broadway North From Third Avenue to Rockwell
Avenue
Broadway [Added
6-12-1990 by Ord.
No. 18-90]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Morrell Street and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:776
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
South Between Grand Avenue and
Norwood Avenue
Broadway [Added
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
South From Norwood Avenue to a point
60 feet east of the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Branchport
Avenue
Broadway [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
and extending 44 feet easterly
therefrom
Broadway [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
and extending 102 feet westerly
therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending
195 feet easterly therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 128-89]
North Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Ocean Avenue and extending 210
feet westerly therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
North Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending
365 feet westerly therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
10-23-1984 by Ord.
No. 1190; amended
12-23-1986 by Ord.
No. 1309]
North Between Norwood Avenue and
Westwood Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
North From a point 500 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Westwood
Avenue to a point 185 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Westwood
Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 128-89]
South Beginning a the westerly curbline
of Ocean Avenue and extending 195
feet westerly therefrom
Cedar Avenue South Between Norwood Avenue and Van
Court Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From the easterly curbline of Van
Court Avenue to a point 2,724 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:777
Name of Street Side Location
Cedar Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
South From the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Second Avenue
and extending 195 feet easterly
therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
South From the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Second Avenue
and extending 365 feet westerly
therefrom
Cedar Avenue [Added
3-25-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From the westerly curbline of Van
Court Avenue to a point 35 feet
westerly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1339]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending 75
feet easterly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 78-88]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Third Avenue and extending 75
feet easterly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
North From the easterly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard to a point 120
feet easterly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1339]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending 75
feet westerly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 78-88]
South Beginning at the westerly curbline
of Third Avenue and extending 75
feet westerly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
South From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard to a point 125
feet westerly therefrom
Franklin Terrace
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
South Between Ocean Avenue and Ethel
Avenue
Florence Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
East Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Atlantic Avenue and extending
130 feet northerly therefrom
Florence Avenue
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
East From a point 165 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Atlantic
Avenue to a point 130 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Atlantic
Avenue
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:778
Name of Street Side Location
Florence Avenue
[Added 12-23-1986
by Ord. No. 1309]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Atlantic Avenue and extending
125 feet northerly therefrom
Florence Avenue
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
West From a point 160 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Atlantic
Avenue to a point 165 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Atlantic
Avenue
Franklin Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
Both Between Third Avenue and
Westwood Avenue
Joline Avenue [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1238]
Both Between Ocean Boulevard North
and Ocean Avenue North
Joline Avenue [Added
10-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 894]
Both From the easterly curbline of
Ocean Avenue (formerly New
Ocean Avenue) to a point 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
North From a point 46 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Seventh
Avenue to a point 56 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Seventh
Avenue
Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
North From a point 225 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
to a point 490 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From a point 50 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Seventh
Avenue to a point 50 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Seventh
Avenue
Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
South From a point 250 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
to a point 480 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
Kossick Way [Added
4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1327]
Both Between Brighton Avenue and West
End Court
Lincoln Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
North From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Avenue to a point 50 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:779
Name of Street Side Location
Lincoln Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
South From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Avenue to a point 96 feet
westerly therefrom
Long Branch Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
West From the northerly curbline of
North Broadway to a point 140 feet
northerly therefrom
Morris Avenue [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1238]
South From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard to a point 120
feet westerly therefrom
Morris Avenue [Added
4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1325]
South From the westerly curbline of
Westwood Avenue and extending
90 feet westerly therefrom
Myrtle Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East From a point 40 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) to a point 206 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Joline Avenue (Highway 36)
Myrtle Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East From the northerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 35 feet north
therefrom
Myrtle Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
West From a point 114 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) to a point 206 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Joline Avenue (Highway 36)
Myrtle Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
West From the northerly curbline of
Broadway to a point 94 feet north
therefrom
North Bath Avenue
[Added 10-24-1989
by Ord. No. 143-89]
North Beginning at the easterly curbline
of Second Avenue and extending 75
feet easterly therefrom
North Bath Avenue
[Added 6-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 22-90]
South Between Second Avenue and South
Bath Avenue
North Broadway
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
North Between Long Branch Avenue and
Second Avenue
North Broadway
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
South From a point 180 feet from the
easterly curbline of Ocean
Boulevard North to a point 190 feet
from the westerly curbline of Ocean
Boulevard North
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:780
Name of Street Side Location
Norwood Avenue
[Added 7-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 19-91]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Bath Avenue and extending 120
feet southerly therefrom
Norwood Avenue
[Added 6-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 59-92]
East Between High Street and Overton
Place as a no stopping or standing
area
Norwood Avenue
[Added 11-22-1983
by Ord. No. 1136]
East From South Lincoln Avenue to
Cedar Avenue
Norwood Avenue
(County Road 25)
[Added 10-23-1984
by Ord. No. 1190]
East From the northerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue northerly 365 feet
Norwood Avenue
[Added 7-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 19-91]
West Between Conover Street and
Broadway
Oakwood Avenue
[Added 4-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 108-89]
East Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Gerard Avenue and extending
675 feet northerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue
(formerly New Ocean
Avenue) [Added
10-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 894]
Both Beginning 100 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Route 36
Joline Avenue to a point 100 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Route 36 Joline Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
5-12-1987 by Ord.
No. 1339]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Brighton Avenue and extending
275 feet southerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East Between Garfield Road and
Garfield Terrace
Ocean Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 128-89]
East From a point 435 feet south of the
prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Cedar Avenue to a point
255 feet north of the prolongation
of the northerly curbline of Cedar
Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East From the northerly curbline of
Garfield Terrace to a point 45 feet
northerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
East From the southerly curbline of
Garfield Road to a point 92 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:781
Name of Street Side Location
Ocean Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 128-89]
West From a point 420 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Cedar Avenue
to a point 270 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Cedar Avenue
Ocean Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
West From the northerly curbline of
Lincoln Avenue to a point 234 feet
northerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue [Added
3-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1204]
West From the southerly curbline of
Lincoln Avenue to a point 56 feet
southerly therefrom
Ocean Avenue North
[Added 8-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 1284]
East Beginning at a point 170 feet
southerly from the prolongation of
Atlantic Avenue, extending 32 feet
southerly therefrom
Ocean Boulevard
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
Both Between Morris Avenue and South
Broadway
Ocean Boulevard
North [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1238]
Both Between South Broadway and
Monmouth Beach line
Park Avenue [Added
11-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 1136]
Both From Norwood Avenue (Route 71)
to a point 120 feet easterly
therefrom
Park Avenue (East)
[Added 7-11-1972 by
Ord. No. 648]
Westbound
(northerly)
From the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Route 71 to a
point 125 feet easterly thereof
Pearl Street [Added
9-8-1987 by Ord. No.
1360]
West Beginning 25 feet from the
southerly curbline of Broadway and
extending 33 feet southerly
therefrom
Rivington Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
North From the westerly curbline of
Myrtle Avenue to a point 35 feet
westerly therefrom
Rivington Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
South From the westerly curbline of
Myrtle Avenue to a point 65 feet
westerly therefrom
Sairs Avenue East From a point 164 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West End
Avenue to a point 164 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West End
Avenue
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:782
Name of Street Side Location
Sairs Avenue West From a point 164 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West End
Avenue to a point 164 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West End
Avenue
Seaview Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
North From a point 130 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Ocean
Boulevard North to a point 155 feet
east of the easterly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard North
Seaview Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
South From a point 155 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Ocean
Boulevard North to a point 155 feet
east of the easterly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard North
Second Avenue
[Added 7-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 128-89]
East Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Cedar Avenue and extending 150
feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 3-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 8-90]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Brighton Avenue and extending
75 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1339]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Chelsea Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 10-24-1989
by Ord. No. 143-89]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of North Bath Avenue and
extending 75 feet southerly
therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 3-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 8-90]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Brighton Avenue and extending
75 feet westerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 7-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 128-89]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Cedar Avenue and extending 150
feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 5-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1339]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Chelsea Avenue and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom
Second Avenue
[Added 10-10-1989
by Ord. No. 143-89]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of North Bath Avenue and
extending 75 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:783
Name of Street Side Location
Second Avenue
[Added 10-24-1989
by Ord. No. 143-89]
West North Bath Avenue and South Bath
Avenue
Seventh Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
East From a point 44 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) to a point 98 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Joline Avenue (Highway 36)
Seventh Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
West From a point 100 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Joline Avenue
(Highway 36) to a point 45 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Joline Avenue (Highway 36)
South Broadway
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
North From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard North to a point
220 feet westerly therefrom
South Broadway
[Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1238]
South From the westerly curbline of
Ocean Boulevard to a point 425
feet westerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 79-88]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Chelsea Avenue and extending
275 feet southerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 79-88]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Franklin Avenue and extending
130 feet southerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 78-88]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Chelsea Avenue and extending
75 feet northerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 125-89]
West Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Broadway and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 79-88]
West Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Franklin Avenue and extending
170 feet southerly therefrom
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 79-88]
West Between Chelsea Avenue and
Westwood Avenue
Third Avenue [Added
11-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 79-88]
West Between Westwood Avenue and
Franklin Avenue
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-40
322:784
Name of Street Side Location
Van Court Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
East From the southerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue to a point 55 feet
southerly therefrom
Van Court Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
West From the southerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue to a point 55 feet
southerly therefrom
West Avenue [Added
4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 1325]
East From the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and extending 98 feet
southerly therefrom
West End Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
North From a point 70 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Westwood
Avenue to a point 70 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Westwood
Avenue
West End Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
South From a point 70 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Westwood
Avenue to a point 70 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Westwood
Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 123-89]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Brighton Avenue and extending
75 feet southerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
East Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Franklin Avenue and extending
110 feet southerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
East Between Third Avenue and
Franklin Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-22-1983
by Ord. No. 1136]
East From a point 125 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Bath Avenue
to a point 130 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Bath Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
East From a point 70 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West End
Avenue to a point 70 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West End
Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
East From the northerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue to a point 35 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 325-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-40
322:785
Name of Street Side Location
Westwood Avenue
[Added 4-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1325]
East From the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-13-1989 by
Ord. No. 123-89]
West Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Brighton Avenue and extending
75 feet northerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
West From a point 60 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Franklin
Avenue and extending southerly to
the New Jersey Transit Railroad
tracks
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
West From a point 70 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West End
Avenue to a point 70 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West End
Avenue
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 1204]
West From the northerly curbline of
Cedar Avenue to a point 70 feet
northerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 4-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 1325]
West From the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and extending 188
feet northerly therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 79-88]
West From the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Third Avenue
and extending 125 feet southerly
therefrom
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-22-1983
by Ord. No. 1136]
West From West End Avenue to a point
130 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Bath Avenue
§ 325-41. Schedule XV: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended
10-27-1983 by Ord.No. 1130; 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88; 6-13-1989
by Ord. No. 124-89]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-13, the following traffic control
signals shall be installed at the locations noted:
Intersection
Atlantic Avenue and Branchport Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1241]
Bath Avenue and Westwood Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1239]
Brighton Avenue and Ocean Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1239]
§ 325-40 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-41
322:786
Intersection
Brighton Avenue and Second Avenue [Added 3-13-1990 by Ord. No.
7-90]
Brighton Avenue and Westwood Avenue [Added 6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
124-89]
Broadway and Myrtle Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1241]
Broadway, Bath Avenue and Norwood Avenue [Added 7-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 19-91]
Cedar Avenue and Ocean Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1239]
Chelsea Avenue and Ocean Boulevard [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1240]
Chelsea Avenue and Third Avenue [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
102-89]
Lincoln Avenue and Ocean Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1241]
Morris Avenue and Ocean Boulevard [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1240]
Myrtle Avenue and State Highway 36 [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1241]
North Bath Avenue and Second Avenue [Added 10-24-1989 by Ord. No.
141-89]
North Broadway and Ocean Boulevard North [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord.
No.1240]
Seaview Avenue and Ocean Boulevard North [Added 9-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1240]
Second Avenue and Chelsea Avenue
South Broadway and Ocean Boulevard North/Ocean Boulevard [Added
9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1240]
Wall Street, High Street and Norwood Avenue [Added 9-10-1985 by
Ord. No. 1239]
Westwood Avenue and Morris Avenue and West Avenue [Added
3-22-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88]
§ 325-42. Schedule XVI: Bus Stops. [Added 6-24-1980 by Ord. No.
984; amended 12-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1002]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 325-16, the following described
locations are designated bus stops.
§ 325-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-42
322:787
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway, eastbound along the southerly line at:
Pearl Street Near Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Pearl Street and extending 115 feet
westerly therefrom
Morris Avenue Far Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Morris Avenue and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom
Lippincott Avenue Near Beginning at the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Lippincott
Avenue and extending 145 feet
westerly therefrom
South Fifth Avenue Far Beginning at the easterly curbline of
South Fifth Avenue and extending
120 feet easterly therefrom
Third Avenue
[Amended
3-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 6-91]
Near Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Third Avenue and extending 120 feet
westerly therefrom
Memorial Parkway Far Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Memorial Parkway and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom
Broadway, westbound along the northerly side thereof at:
Second Avenue Far Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Second Avenue and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom
Third Avenue Near Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Third Avenue and extending 120 feet
westerly therefrom
Lippincott Avenue Far Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Lippincott Avenue and extending 115
feet westerly therefrom
Morris Avenue Far Beginning at the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Morris Avenue
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Washington Street
[Amended
8-14-1990 by Ord.
No. 25-90]
Near Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Washington Street and extending
120 feet easterly therefrom
Grand Avenue Near Between Grand Avenue and Jusha
Lane (entire block 110 feet)
Along Brighton Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
§ 325-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-42
322:788
Name of Street Side Location
Second Avenue
[Added 4-28-1987
by Ord. No. 1332]
Near Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Second Avenue and extending 160
feet easterly therefrom
Along Liberty Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
Broadway Far Beginning at the northerly curb of
Broadway and extending 100 feet
northerly therefrom
Along Memorial Parkway, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
Broadway Far Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Broadway and extending 110 feet
southerly therefrom
Along Ocean Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
Laird Street Near Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Laird Street and extending 150
feet northerly therefrom
Along Ocean Boulevard, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
Melrose Terrace
[Added 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. 27-11]
Near Beginning at the southerly curbline
of Melrose Terrace and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom
Along Ocean Boulevard, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
Nesto Terrace
[Added 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. 27-11]
Near Beginning at the northerly curbline
of Nesto Terrace and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom
Along Pavilion Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
Ocean Avenue
[Added 4-28-1987
by Ord. No. 1332]
Near Beginning 66 feet from the westerly
curbline of Ocean Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
Along Second Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
North Bath Avenue
[Added 9-10-1985
by Ord. No. 1237;
amended
11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 37-98]
Far Beginning at the northerly curbline
of North Bath Avenue and extending
120 feet northerly therefrom
(Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.)
Along South Broadway, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
Second Avenue Far Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Second Avenue and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom
Along Third Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
§ 325-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-42
322:789
§ 325-43. Schedule XVII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3J, the following locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Brighton Avenue
[Added
10-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 40-95]
North Beginning at a point 95 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Sairs Avenue and
extending 30 feet easterly therefrom
(Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m.
to 5 p.m., postal vehicles only)
Broadway [Added
10-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 40-95]
North Beginning at a point 60 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Branchport Avenue
and extending 30 feet easterly
therefrom (Monday through Saturday
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., postal vehicles
only)
Broadway [Added
8-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 29-95]
North Beginning at a point 130 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Liberty Street
and extending 40 feet therefrom (7:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday)
Name of Street Side Location
Between Pavilion
Avenue and Bath
Avenue (mid-block)
[Added 4-28-1987
by Ord. No. 1332;
amended
9-24-1991 by Ord.
No. 36-91]
Beginning 295 feet south of the
southerly curb of Pavilion Avenue
and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
Along Third Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
Pavilion Avenue
[Added 4-9-1985
by Ord. No. 1215;
amended 1-9-1990
by Ord. No.
154-89]
Near Beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Pavilion Avenue
and extending 150 feet northerly
therefrom
B. There shall be no parking at any time in front of any area designated as
a bus stop.
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated bus stops as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
§ 325-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-43
322:790
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Added
3-11-1986 by Ord.
No. 1268]
South Beginning at a point 86 feet easterly
from the prolongation of Dudley Street
extending 61 feet easterly therefrom
Broadway [Added
9-25-2001 by Ord.
No. 33-01]
South 7:00
a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Beginning at a point 25 feet east from
the easterly curbline of Pearl Street
extending 57 feet easterly therefrom
Howland Place
[Added 9-10-1985
by Ord. No. 1237]
Beginning at a point 35 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Broadway and
extending to a point 50 feet southerly
therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Added
12-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 53-00]
North Beginning at a point 98 feet from the
easterly curbline of South Seventh
Avenue and extending 78 feet easterly
therefrom
Morris Avenue
[Added 7-31-1991
by Ord. No. 18-91]
North Beginning at a point 111 feet from the
westerly curbline of Westwood Avenue
and extending 50 feet westerly
therefrom (7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
Municipal Parking
Lot No. 2 [Added
5-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 20-03]
Southeast
corner
Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Branchport Avenue, extending 162 feet
into the municipal lot, extending
another 35 feet, which is located at the
rear of No. 559 Broadway
Ocean Terrace
[Added 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 19-90;
amended 3-9-1993
by Ord. No. 5-93;
repealed 3-9-1993
by Ord. No. 9-93]
Seventh Avenue
[Added 8-19-1980
by Ord. No. 990]
Beginning at a point 50 feet north of
the Seventh Avenue easterly curbline
extending 99 feet northerly thereof
Seventh Avenue
[Added 8-19-1980
by Ord. No. 990]
Beginning at a point 50 feet north of
the Seventh Avenue westerly curbline
extending 99 feet northerly thereof
Seventh Avenue
[Added 8-19-1980
by Ord. No. 990]
Beginning at a point 149 feet north of
the Seventh Avenue westerly curbline
extending 230 feet northerly thereof
§ 325-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-43
322:791
Name of Street Side Location
Sixth Avenue
[Added 8-11-1992
by Ord. No. 66-92]
East 8:00
a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Broadway and
extending 80 feet northerly therefrom
Union Avenue
[Added
11-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 31-17]
South Beginning at the southwest corner of
Union Avenue/Third Avenue and
extending 95 feet west
§ 325-44. Schedule XVIII: Restricted Parking. [Added 6-23-1981 by
Ord. No. 1028; amended 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 1302; 5-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 33-88; 8-22-1989 by Ord. No. 135-89; 1-23-1990 by Ord.
No. 1-90; 2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 5-90; 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 19-90;
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 32A-90; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 33-90;
7-23-1991 by Ord. No. 19-91; 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. 27-91;
12-12-1992 by Ord. No. 79-92; 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93; 3-9-1993
by Ord. No. 9-93; 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 31-93; 6-27-1994 by Ord.
No. 32-94; 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 41-95; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
21-96; 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 28-97; 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 41-97;
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 42-97; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98;
6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 17-98; 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 3-99; 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 12-99; 8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 36-99; 6-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 21-00; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 18-01; 8-28-2001 by Ord. No.
29-01; 10-9-2001 by Ord. No. 36-01; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3K, no person other than those
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards by the
Division of Motor Vehicles shall be permitted to park a vehicle upon any of
the streets or parts of streets. The following areas within the City of Long
Branch shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces only:
Name of Street Side Location
Arthur Avenue North Beginning at a point 64 feet from the
westerly curbline of Ocean Boulevard
and extending 22 feet westerly
therefrom
Arthur Avenue South Beginning at a point 142 feet from the
easterly curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 22 feet easterly therefrom
Atlantic Avenue (No.
245) [Added
4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 12-03]
North Beginning at a point 123 feet from the
eastern curbline of Fifth Avenue
heading east and continuing 22 feet
east from this point and ending
§ 325-43 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-44
322:792
Name of Street Side Location
Brighton Avenue South Beginning at a point 368 feet from the
easterly curbline of Ocean Avenue and
extending 45 feet easterly therefrom
Broadway North Beginning at a point 61 feet from the
westerly curbline of North Fifth Avenue
and extending 44 feet westerly
therefrom
Buttonwood Avenue
(No. 661) [Added
7-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 24-04]
North Beginning at a point 314 feet westerly
of the curbline of Grand Avenue and
continuing west for 22 feet
Chelsea Avenue North Beginning at a point 150 feet from the
easterly curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 20 feet easterly therefrom
Chelsea Avenue South Beginning at a point 140 feet from the
westerly curbline of South Seventh
Avenue and extending 20 feet westerly
therefrom
Chelsea Avenue (No.
80) [Added
12-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 17-13]
South Beginning at a point 86 feet west of the
east curbline of Ocean Boulevard and
continuing west for 21 feet
Cottage Place
[Added 7-12-2011
by Ord. No. 25-11]
North Beginning at the prolongation of Ocean
Avenue and extending west 30 feet to
the beginning point and extending 40
feet to its ending point, creating two
parking stalls
Division Street East Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
northerly curbline of Trinity Way and
extending 20 feet northerly therefrom
Emmons Street
[Added 6-14-2011
by Ord. No. 15-11]
West From Bath Avenue extending to a point
50 feet north and continuing 20 feet
north
Franklin Avenue
[Added 9-13-2011
by Ord. No. 33-11]
South Beginning at a point 290 feet west of
Second Avenue and continuing 20 feet
west
Grand Avenue (No.
20)
West Beginning at a point 251 feet from the
northern curbline of Broadway
extending 22 feet northerly therefrom
§ 325-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-44
322:793
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Avenue
[Added 8-8-2018
by Ord. No. 13-18]
West Beginning 168 feet north of the
northeast corner of Russell Court and
Grand Avenue extending 20 feet north
down the westerly curbline of Grand
Avenue
Hamilton Avenue
(No. 233) [Added
11-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 57-02]
North Beginning at a point 344 feet west of
the western curbline of Liberty Street
and continuing west for 22 feet
Hendrickson Avenue
[Added
10-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-15]
South Beginning at the point 222 feet west of
Lippincott Avenue continuing 22 feet
west, ending 244 feet west of
Lippincott Avenue along the south
curbline
Hobart Manor/James
Street (No. 27)
[Added 5-27-2003
by Ord. No. 18-03]
East Beginning at a point 189 feet from the
southern curbline of Joline Avenue
heading south, continuing 22 feet south
from that point and ending
James Street East Beginning at a point 95 feet from the
southerly curbline of Joline Avenue and
extending 22 feet southerly therefrom
Jeffrey Street
[Added 6-22-2010
by Ord. No. 7-10
North Beginning at a point 65 feet east of
Cherry Street and continuing 20 feet
east
Laird Street North Beginning at a point 110 feet from the
westerly curbline of Ocean Avenue and
extending 30 feet westerly therefrom
Lincoln Avenue South Beginning at a point 80 feet from the
prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Lincoln Court and extending 20 feet
westerly therefrom
Lippincott Avenue
(No. 119) [Added
3-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 10-03]
East Beginning at a point 435 feet from the
southern curbline of Joline Avenue
heading south, continuing 22 feet south
from this point and ending
Madison Avenue North Beginning at a point 198 feet from the
easterly terminus of Madison Avenue
and extending 22 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 325-44 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-44
322:794
Name of Street Side Location
Martin Street (No.
667) [Added
1-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 2-03; repealed
4-24-2012 by Ord.
No. 9-12]
Memorial Parkway East Beginning at a point 116 feet from the
southerly curbline of Garfield Avenue
and extending 48 feet southerly
therefrom
Memorial Parkway West Beginning at a point 45 feet from the
northerly curbline of Garfield Avenue
and extending 20 feet northerly
therefrom
Morris Avenue (No.
72) [Added
11-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 57-02]
South Beginning at a point 256 feet west of
the western curbline of Ocean
Boulevard and extending 40 feet west
therefrom (2 spaces for 2 vehicles)
Ocean Avenue East Beginning 45 feet from the northerly
curbline of Chelsea Avenue and
extending 12 feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue East Beginning 45 feet from the northerly
curbline of Franklin Terrace and
extending 12 feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Chelsea Avenue and
extending 12 feet therefrom
Ocean Avenue East Beginning 45 feet from the southerly
curbline of Laird Street and extending
12 feet therefrom
Ocean Avenue East Beginning 35 feet from the southerly
curbline of Melrose Avenue and
extending 12 feet south therefrom
Ocean Avenue North East Beginning at a point 31 feet from the
prolongation of the northerly curbline
of Avenel Boulevard extending 66 feet
northerly therefrom.
Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-25-2017
by Ord. No. 17-17]
West Beginning at a point 229 feet from the
northerly curbline of North Bath
Avenue extending 47 feet north
creating two handicap spaces.
§ 325-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-44
322:795
Name of Street Side Location
Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-25-2017
by Ord. No. 17-17]
West Beginning at a point 377 feet from the
northerly curbline of North Bath
Avenue extending 25 feet north
creating one handicap space
Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-25-2017
by Ord. No. 17-17]
West Beginning at a point 427 feet from the
northerly curbline of North Bath
Avenue extending 26 feet north
creating one handicap space
Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-25-2017
by Ord. No. 17-17]
West Beginning at a point 540 feet from the
northerly curbline of North Bath
Avenue extending 33 feet north
creating one handicap space
Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-25-2017
by Ord. No. 17-17]
West Beginning at a point 615 feet from the
northerly curbline of North Bath
Avenue extending 21 feet north
creating one handicap space
Old Ocean Avenue
[Added 7-14-2015
by Ord. No. 11-15]
East Beginning 161 feet south of Atlantic
Avenue continuing 44 feet south, to
encompass two spaces with the
furthest line of the second space
ending 205 feet south of Atlantic
Avenue
Pavilion Avenue
[Added 2-27-2018
by Ord. No. 1-18]
North Beginning 120 feet west of the
northwest corner of Pavilion Avenue
and Ocean Avenue and extending 20
feet west down the northerly curbline
of Pavilion Avenue
Pavilion Avenue North
Monday
through
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 50 feet from the
easterly curbline of Third Avenue and
extending 36 feet easterly therefrom
Poole Avenue North Beginning at a point 455 feet from the
easterly curbline of Prospect Street
and extending 20 feet easterly
therefrom.
Rockwell Avenue
(No. 235) [Added
4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 12-03]
East Beginning at a point 118 feet from the
northern curbline of Hamilton Avenue
heading north and continuing 22 feet
north from the point and ending
§ 325-44 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-44
322:796
Name of Street Side Location
Seaview Avenue
[Added 7-14-2015
by Ord. No. 11-15]
North Beginning 47 feet west of the
Promenades western curbline
continuing 44 feet west, to encompass
two spaces with the furthest line west
of the second space ending 91 feet
from the promenade
Seaview Avenue South Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
westerly curbline of Witmere Place and
extending 22 feet westerly therefrom
Second Avenue East Beginning at a point 75 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Howland
Avenue and extending 22 feet southerly
therefrom
Seventh Avenue East Beginning at a point 135 feet from the
northerly curbline of East Columbus
Place and extending 37 feet northerly
therefrom
South Fifth Avenue East Beginning at a point 220 feet northerly
from the prolongation of Slocum Place
extending 25 feet northerly therefrom
South Seventh
Avenue
West Beginning at a point 75 feet from the
northerly curbline of Morris Avenue,
extending 20 feet northerly therefrom
Third Avenue East Beginning at a point 75 feet from the
northerly curbline of Broadway and
extending 42 feet northerly therefrom
Union Avenue North Beginning at a point 172 feet from the
easterly curbline of Liberty Street and
extending 22 feet easterly therefrom
Van Dyke Place
[Repealed
10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 31-03]
Warburton Place North Beginning at a point 258 feet from the
westerly curbline of Seventh Avenue
and extending 21 feet westerly
therefrom
Wardell Place (No.
19) [Added
5-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 18-03]
East Beginning at a point 282 feet from the
southern curbline of High Street
heading south, continuing 22 feet south
from that point and ending
§ 325-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-44
322:797
Name of Street Side Location
Wardell Place
[Added 6-28-2005
by Ord. No. 17-05]
East Beginning at a point 200 feet from the
northerly curbline of West End Avenue
and extending 22 feet northerly
therefrom
Westbourne Avenue
[Added 7-14-2015
by Ord. No. 11-15]
North Beginning at the point 145 feet west of
Springdale continuing 20 feet west,
ending 165 feet west of Springdale
Avenue
West End Avenue North Beginning at a point 30 feet from the
westerly curbline of Ocean Avenue,
extending 34 feet westerly therefrom
West End Avenue
[Added 9-13-2011
by Ord. No. 32-11]
North Beginning at a poing 25 feet west of
Schultz Place and continuing 20 feet
west
Westwood Avenue
[Added 3-11-2008
by Ord. No. 5-08;
repealed
4-23-2013 by Ord.
No. 4-13]
Willow Avenue (No.
407) [Added
11-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 57-02]
East Beginning at a point 288 feet south of
the southern curbline Exchange Place
and continuing south for 22 feet
Willow Avenue North Beginning at a point 122 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Westwood
Avenue and extending 200 feet
westerly therefrom
Willow Avenue South Beginning at a point 509 feet west of
the southwesterly curbline of
Westwood Avenue and extending 20
feet westerly therefrom
Willow Avenue (No.
360) [Added
1-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 2-04]
West Beginning at a point 170 feet north of
the northern curbline of Prospect
Avenue and continuing west for 22 feet
§ 325-45. Schedule XIX: Alternate Side of the Street Parking.
[Added 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 1300]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-3H, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts of streets during the times
and on the days specified herein:
§ 325-44 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-45
322:798
Name of Street Side Hours Days Location
Brighton Avenue
[Repealed
8-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 26-91]
Morris Avenue
[Added
4-28-1998] by
Ord. No. 11-98]
North 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m.
Monday and
Wednesday
Between Second
Avenue and Third
Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added
4-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 11-98]
South 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m.
Tuesday and
Thursday
Between Second
Avenue and Third
Avenue
§ 325-46. Schedule XX: No Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-17, no passing zones shall be
established and maintained on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Avenel Boulevard
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
Both Between Florence Avenue and Ocean
Avenue north
Bath Avenue [Added
7-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 131-89]
Both Between Norwood Avenue and Second
Avenue
Chelsea Avenue
[Added 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 16-90]
Both Between Morris Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
Eastbourne Avenue
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
Both Between High Street and Westwood
Avenue
Eastbourne Avenue
Matilda Terrace
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
Both Between Indiana Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
Elberon Avenue
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
See Addendum on file in the City Clerk's
Office
Long Branch Avenue
[Added 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 16-90]
Both Between North Broadway and Atlantic
Avenue
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 16-90]
Both Between Ocean Avenue and Third
Avenue
§ 325-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-46
322:799
Name of Street Side Location
Morris Avenue
[Added 6-12-1990
by Ord. No. 16-90]
Both Between Westwood Avenue and
Broadway
Oakwood Avenue
[Added 3-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 8-93]
Both Between Broadway and Wall Street
Oakhill Avenue
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
Both Between Morford Avenue and Campbell
Avenue
Patten Avenue
[Added 6-13-1989
by Ord. No. 119-89]
Both Entire length
Seaview Avenue
[Added 5-10-1988
by Ord. No. 26-88]
Both Along Seaview Avenue between Liberty
Street and Ocean Boulevard for the
entire length of Seaview Avenue
Union Avenue/
Second Avenue
[Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. 131-89]
Both Between Rockwell Avenue and
Broadway
§ 325-47. Schedule XXI: Lane Use Reservations. [Added 11-1-1988
by Ord. No. 79-88; amended 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. 99-89]
In accordance with the provisions of § 325-18, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Branchport Avenue
and Joline [Added
12-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 48-04]
Left lane of the southerly
approach of Joline
Avenue
Left turn only
Branchport Avenue
and Joline [Added
12-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 48-04]
Right lane of the
southerly approach of
Joline Avenue
Right turn and straight
Broadway and
Norwood Avenue
[Amended
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
Left lane of the westerly
approach of Broadway
Left turns
§ 325-46 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-47
322:800
Intersection
(location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Broadway and
Norwood Avenue
[Amended
7-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-91]
Right lane of the easterly
approach of Broadway
Right turns
Franklin Avenue and
Third Avenue
Left lane of the easterly
approach of Franklin
Avenue
Left turns
§ 325-48. Schedule XXII: No Turn on Red. [Added 12-30-1976 by
Ord. No. 859; amended 12-26-1979 by Ord. No. 973; 7-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 19-91]
In accordance with § 325-19, no person shall turn a vehicle to make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop) indication whenever an official
sign is present prohibiting such a turn on the red signal:
Intersection Prohibited Turn Hours of Prohibition
Bath Avenue and
Norwood Avenue
From westbound Bath
Avenue to northbound on
Norwood Avenue
At all times
Bath Avenue and
Westwood Avenue
[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 13-10]
Eastbound and
westbound
When children are
present between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m.
Branchport Avenue
and Broadway
From southbound
Branchport Avenue to
westbound on Broadway
At all times
Broadway and
Norwood Avenue
From eastbound
Broadway to southbound
on Norwood Avenue
At all times
Westwood Avenue
and Bath Avenue
[Added 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 13-10]
Eastbound and
westbound
When children are
present between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m.
§ 325-49. Schedule XXIII: Residential Parking Program. [Added
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98; amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No.
12-19]
In accordance with § 325-24.1, the following streets or parts of streets are
designated as "Resident Permit Parking Only":
§ 325-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-49
322:801
Name of Street Side
Hours/Days/
Months Location
Arthur Avenue Both All day/all year Entire length
Marine Terrace Both All day/May 1 to
Sept. 30
Entire length
Ocean Avenue
(North)
West All day/May 1 to
Sept. 30
Between Joline Avenue
and Avenel Boulevard
Ocean Terrace Both All day/May 1 to
Sept. 30
Entire length
Seaview Avenue South All day/May 1 to
Sept. 30
Ocean Boulevard to
Promenade
§ 325-50. Schedule XXIV: Handicapped Parking Zones. [Added
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 3-02]
In accordance with § 325-24.2, the following areas within the City of Long
Branch shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces only:
Name of Street Side Location
Wertheim Place West Beginning at a point 190 feet from the
southerly curbline of Cedar Avenue and
extending 22 feet southerly therefrom
Willow Avenue
[Added
7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 11-09;
repealed
5-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 4-16]
§ 325-51. Schedule XXV: Angled Parking. [Added 10-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 46-02]
In accordance with this section, the following streets or parts of streets are
designated as locations in which angled parking shall be permitted and such
streets shall be stripped accordingly:
Street Side(s) Location
Chelsea Avenue North and south
side curblines
Starting at Ocean Boulevard
heading east, intersecting with
Ocean Avenue
Laird Street Center of road Starting at Ocean Boulevard
heading east, intersecting with
Ocean Avenue
§ 325-49 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-51
322:802
Street Side(s) Location
Ocean Avenue Center of road Starting at Melrose Terrace
heading north, intersecting with
Laird Street
§ 325-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-51
322:803

ARTICLE III
Oceanfront - Broadway Redevelopment Area
[Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 22-05]
§ 325-52. Rules and regulations established.
The following rules and regulations, as specifically set forth herein, shall
be applied to all on-street parking in the Oceanfront-Broadway
Redevelopoment Area, as established below.
§ 325-53. Establishment of on-street public parking spaces for
Beachfront North.
Name of Street Side Location Number/Type
Cooper Avenue North Between Ocean
Boulevard and Ocean
Avenue North
6 spaces parallel to
road
Cooper Avenue South Between Ocean
Boulevard and Ocean
Avenue North
9 spaces parallel to
road
Grant Street East Between Madison
Avenue and Marine
Terrace
46 spaces parallel to
road
Grant Street West Between Madison
Avenue and Marine
Terrace
45 spaces parallel to
road
Greeley Terrace North Between McKinley
Street and Ocean
Avenue North
23 spaces head in
Madison Avenue North Between Ocean
Boulevard and
McKinley Street
14 spaces parallel to
road; 9 spaces headin
Madison Avenue South Between Ocean
Boulevard and
McKinley Street
21 spaces parallel to
road
Whitman Terrace North Between McKinley
Street and Ocean
Avenue North
9 spaces parallel to
road
Whitman Terrace South Between McKinley
Street and Ocean
Avenue North
14 spaces parallel to
road
§ 325-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-54
322:805
§ 325-54. Establishment of on-street public parking spaces for Pier
Village.
Name of Street Side Location Number/Type
Centennial Drive East Entire length 13 spaces parallel to
road
Centennial Drive West Entire length 18 spaces parallel to
road
Chelsea Avenue North Between Landmark
Place and Centennial
Drive
17 spaces 45 degree
angle
Chelsea Avenue South Between Landmark
Place and Centennial
Drive
17 spaces 45 degree
angle
Laird Street Center Between Landmark
Place and the traffic
circle at Laird Street
and Ocean Avenue
58 spaces 45 degree
angle
Laird Street North Between Landmark
Place and the traffic
circle at Laird Street
and Ocean Avenue
18 spaces parallel to
road
Laird Street South Between Landmark
Place and the traffic
circle at Laird Street
and Ocean Avenue
16 spaces parallel to
street
Landmark Place East Between Chelsea
Avenue and Laird
Street
13 spaces parallel to
road
Landmark Place West Between Chelsea
Avenue and Laird
Street
11 spaces parallel to
road
Melrose Terrace North Between Landmark
Place and parking
deck entrance
7 spaces parallel to
road
Ocean Avenue Center Between Melrose
Terrace and Laird
Street
104 spaces 45
degree angle
Ocean Avenue East Between Melrose
Terrace and Laird
Street
23 spaces parallel to
road
Ocean Avenue West Between Melrose
Terrace and Laird
Street
36 spaces parallel to
road
§ 325-54 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-55
322:806
§ 325-55. (Reserved)154
§ 325-56. Establishment of residential on-street parking by permit
for Pier Village.
Name of Street Side Location Number/Type
Chelsea Avenue
[Amended
6-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
North Between Ocean
Boulevard and
Landmark Place
16 spaces 45 degree
angle
Chelsea Avenue
[Amended
6-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
South Between Ocean
Boulevard and
Landmark Place
16 spaces 45 degree
angle
Landmark Place East Between Melrose
Terrace and Chelsea
Avenue
10 spaces parallel to
road
Landmark Place
[Amended
6-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
West Between Melrose
Terrace and Chelsea
Avenue
11 spaces parallel to
road
§ 325-57. Sale of residential on-street parking permits. [Amended
6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
§ 325-58. Establishment of temporary lawn parking for special
events.
During special events that will result in overflow parking needs, temporary,
roped-off public parking may be provided on the lawns of the block bounded
A. Permits for residential on-street parking in Pier Village shall be
available for purchase only by residents of Pier Village, on a first-comefirst-
served basis and shall be limited to one permit per unit. There shall
be a total of 53 residential permit parking spaces in Pier Village.
Residential on-street parking permits may be purchased by residents
from the Long Branch Police Department and may purchase such
permits for the following prices and durations:
(1) $300 for a yearly permit.
B. To the extent that this section conflicts with § 325-24.1, this section
shall supercede the provisions of § 325.24.1, only with respect to
residential parking and permitting in Pier Village. This section shall
have no effect on any other established residential parking or
permitting in any other areas of Long Branch.
154. Editor's Note: Former § 325-55, Establishment of residential on-street parking by permit
for Beachfront North, was repealed 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19.
§ 325-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 325-58
322:807
by Ocean Avenue North to the east, McKinley Street to the west, Whitman
Terrace to the south and Greeley Terrace to the north. It is anticipated
that the temporary lawn parking will provide for approximately 100 parking
spaces. Members of the public shall be charged a flat fee of $8 per vehicle to
park in this area when the area is opened for parking during special events.
§ 325-59. Time limits for on-street parking in Pier Village.
[Amended 6-26-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
§ 325-60. Enforcement of time limits by Long Branch Parking
Authority.
Enforcement of time limits for public on-street parking within Beachfront
North and Pier Village shall be carried out by Long Branch Department of
Public Safety.
§ 325-61. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of the parking rules and regulations set forth in this
article shall be consistent with currently established penalties for similar
parking violations pursuant to Long Branch ordinance.
§ 325-62. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law, and shall remain in effect until such time as the City Council of the City
of Long Branch shall adopt an ordinance for the establishment of metered
on-street parking for the Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Area, which
is anticipated to be adopted and effective Memorial Day of 2006.
§ 325-63. (Reserved)155
A. For all public on-street parking in Pier Village there shall be no parking
in any public on-street parking spaces in Pier Village between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
155. Editor's Note: Former § 325-63, Interim parking regulations, was repealed 5-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 9-14.
§ 325-58 LONG BRANCH CODE § 325-63
322:808
Chapter 330
VEHICLES AND BOATS, SALE OF
§ 330-1. Conditions for private sale.
The private sale of motor vehicles/boats/trailers on residential properties or
in residential zone districts shall be allowed, provided that:
§ 330-2. Violations and penalties.156
The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall have been committed or shall exist or the
lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such
violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, or any other
person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation of this
chapter shall exist shall, for each and every violation, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 332
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 322. Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 330.
A. The motor vehicle/boat/trailer being sold is licensed, registered or
owned by the specific tenant or property owner of the property on
which said item is to be sold.
B. The motor vehicle/boat/trailer shall be located totally on private
property and shall not encroach in any fashion onto any city-owned
property, right-of-way, street, sidewalk or easement.
C. The motor vehicle/boat/trailer being sold must be located in either a
driveway, parking area, garage, carport, parking area or rear yard area.
D. The motor vehicle/boat/trailer being sold must not be located closer
than 10 feet to the side or rear yard setback; the motor vehicle/boat/
trailer for sale may be located in these existing areas. Exception: If the
existing driveway, garage, carport or parking area violates the ten-foot
side or rear yard setback, the motor vehicle/boat/trailer for sale may be
located in these existing areas.
E. Motor vehicles/boats/trailers shall not be displayed for sale on any front
yard lawn or landscaped area on any residential property or within any
residential zone.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-63 VEHICLES AND BOATS, SALE OF § 330-2
330:809
§ 332-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANY MOTOR VEHICLE NOT CAPABLE OF BEING USED OR OPERATED —
Any motor vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power from place
to place upon any public street or highway.
REPAIR — Any tire change, oil change, tune-up, body repair or alignment
of any vehicle as defined in Chapter 322, Vehicles, Abandoned, § 322-1,
Definitions.[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 7-95]
STORE or STORED — Keeping a motor vehicle upon any land for a period
of more than 15 days.
§ 332-2. Storage of certain vehicles prohibited; exception.
No person shall store or permit or suffer to be stored upon any lands within
the city any motor vehicle which is not capable of being used or operated
unless the motor vehicle is garaged. The foregoing shall not, however, apply
to any person holding a valid license to carry on, maintain or establish a
motor vehicle junk business or motor vehicle junkyard.
§ 332-3. Motor vehicle repair in residential areas. [Added 2-14-1995
by Ord. No. 7-95]
A motor vehicle may be repaired in any residential zone or on any
residential property, provided that:
A. The motor vehicle being repaired has a current valid New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles registration in the name of the specific
property owner or tenant of the property on which the repair is to
occur. Note: In the case of classic or collectible motor vehicles, specific
ownership documentation may be substituted for the current New
Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles registration requirement.
B. The motor vehicle being repaired must be located in a driveway,
parking area, garage, carport or rear yard area.
C. The motor vehicle being repaired must not be located closer than 10
feet to any side or rear property line. Exception: If an existing,
driveway, garage, parking area or carport violates the ten-foot setback,
the motor vehicle may be repaired in these existing areas.
D. No motor vehicle in excess of 8,000 pounds may be repaired on any
residential property or in any residential zone district.
E. No motor vehicle shall be repaired on any city-owned parking lots, cityowned
property or city-owned right-of-way. Exception: If a residential
property does not contain any on-site parking area or driveway, the
§ 330-2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 332-3
332:810
§ 332-4. Waiver; fee.
§ 332-5. Violations and penalties.157
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
owner or tenant of said property may repair his or her personal motor
vehicle in the city street directly adjacent to his or her residence,
provided that:
(1) The motor vehicle being repaired has a current valid New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles registration in the name of the
specific adjacent residential property owner or tenant.
(2) Legal parking is permitted by city ordinance on the portion of the
city street in which the repair is to take place.
(3) All repairs must be completed within a twelve-hour period, and in
no case shall a motor vehicle which is inoperable remain on any city
street for longer than 48 hours.
(4) No repair of a motor vehicle in a city street, right-of-way, city
property or on any private property shall be allowed if in the
opinion of the enforcement officials such repair or repair procedure
is deemed to be of such a nature as to pose a potential health or
safety threat to the general public.
F. All used motor vehicle parts, liquids, oils, body parts, tires, wheels, etc.,
must be disposed of in a manner compatible to all City of Long Branch
health/recycling/waste disposal ordinances.
G. The open air storage of any disassembled motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts in any residential zone or on any residential property is
prohibited.
A. A waiver from the requirements of this chapter may be obtained if in
the opinion of the enforcement officials the allowance of such a waiver
will not violate the intent of this chapter nor will it in any way impair the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Fee for a waiver shall be $20, with a written explanation and
description of the unique circumstances and specific location at which
the waiver is being granted and a specific limit of time in which the
waiver is valid.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 332-5
332:811
Chapter 345
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Building and
Development — See § 5-11.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 69.
Urban Enterprise Zone — See Ch. 94.
Beach clubs — See Ch. 114.
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 123.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Parking lots and meters — See Ch. 244.
Soil removal — See Ch. 290.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 303.
Tennis courts — See Ch. 312.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 332.
§ 332-5 LONG BRANCH CODE § 332-5
332:812
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 345-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Long Branch, 1989 Revision."
§ 345-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the most appropriate use of
land throughout the City and to conserve the value of property, with due
consideration for the character of the zones and their peculiar suitability
for particular uses, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed
to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic, flood
and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue
concentration of population and to that end to regulate the height, design,
appearance, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures;
the percentage of the area of the lot that may be occupied; the size of yards,
courts and other open spaces; the density of population and the location and
use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other
purposes; and the height, size and location of these uses within the limits of
the City.
§ 345-3. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law,158 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of the chapter or the term is otherwise
defined herein.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."[Added 7-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 14-09]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure located on the same lot and
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. See
"structure."[Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure and located on the same lot with such principal
use or structure.
ACTIVE RECREATIONAL SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY —
Any facility designed primarily for competitive or recreational sports and
athletic activities, as well as the presentation of public entertainment events
and expositions. Eating and drinking facilities, retail specialty shops and
electronic/video apparatus shall be allowed as an accessory use within said
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 345-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:813
active recreational sports and entertainment facility.[Added 2-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 8-95]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95] —
ALTERATIONS — Any change in or rearrangement of structural parts of a
building.
ARCADE — Any place of business displaying for public patronage or
keeping for operation in excess of two mechanical and/or electronic
amusement devices.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building partly underground but having less
than 1/2 of its clear height below finished grade.
Includes uses, alone or in combination, such as the following:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines and
other periodicals, novelty items, movies and/or videotapes which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
(1)
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
(2)
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
(3)
CABARET — An establishment which features go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers or employees.
(4)
A.
For the purpose of this definition, "specified sexual activities" is defined
as human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of
human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or fondling
or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or/
female breast; and "specified anatomical areas" is defined as less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock
or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola
and/or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
B.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:814
BEACH CLUB — An establishment owning and/or operating ocean beach
property as a bathing beach, whether or not additional recreational
facilities are provided, operated on a membership basis and restricted to
the use of members and their guests.159
BEDROOM — Any space or area in a building used for, but not limited to,
the following: sleeping facilities, guest room, library, game room, sun room,
private office, hobby room, den, sitting room, home gym, loft or any other
similar-type use.
BOARD — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than one person is
housed or lodged for hire with meals. A nursing, rest, or convalescent
home shall not be deemed a boardinghouse. A home for sheltered care
of adult persons as defined by N.J.S.A. 30:11A-1 shall not be considered a
boardinghouse.
BUFFER STRIP — A continuous planting strip of trees and/or shrubs
densely planted so as to restrict a clear view beyond such strip. Buffer
planting in front yard areas may not exceed four feet in height. Buffer
plantings in side or rear yards must be at least six feet in height.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual,
animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.[Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use that may be used as an accessory use
and may not be used as or converted to a separate dwelling unit, business
or principal use. See "building" and "accessory use."[Added 7-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 14-09]
BUILDING AREA (GROUND COVER) — The total of areas taken on a
horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all
accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps,
except as otherwise provided. (See § 345-11V.) Such areas shall be
computed by using outside building dimensions. For the purpose of
calculating parking requirements, fees and/or variances, the gross floor
area (see definition) and/or gross habitable floor area (see definition)
requirements shall apply.[Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at each of the corners of the
building to the highest point of the building or roof peak, whichever is
higher, exclusive of chimneys and similar structures as listed in § 345-10A.
Where terracing of roofs is involved, the vertical distance shall be measured
from the mean ground level to the highest terrace. (See also "grade,
finished.")
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 114, Beach Clubs.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:815
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the vertical projection to the ground of
the exterior surface of the building on any side. In cases of a cantilevered
section of a building or sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed
or unenclosed, but not including the steps, the vertical projection will
coincide with the surface nearest the lot lines. All yards are measured to the
building line. However, bay windows, fireplaces and cantilevered or bowed
rooms may extend beyond the foregoing, but in no event more than two
feet from the rear and front building line only, and shall not exceed 25% of
the entire building line. Open columns and roofs over front stairs may also
extend beyond the foregoing, but in no event further than six feet toward
the street and shall not exceed 12 feet in width.[Amended 8-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 31-02]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building within which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which such building is situated.
CELLAR — A story partly or completely underground and having more than
1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the finished grade at the
perimeter of the building.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Official upon completed construction, alteration or change of use of a
building. The certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et
seq., as amended. A certificate of occupancy is issued by the Fire Prevention
Bureau prior to a change of occupancy of any building. The certificate
shall acknowledge compliance with all requirements of the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, as adopted in § 262-21 of this
Code.[Amended 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 26-04; 6-12-2007 by Ord. No.
24-07; 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. 8-13]
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, designed or intended for public worship. For the
purpose of this chapter, the word "church" shall include chapels,
congregations, cathedrals, temples and similar designations, as well as
parish houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — Premises and/or buildings maintained by an
organization catering exclusively to members and their guests for social,
recreational or athletic purposes, which are not conducted primarily for
gain, provided that there are not conducted any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities except as required generally for the
membership and purposes of such club.
COMMUNITY FARMERS MARKET — An established area where several
farmers/growers gather on a regular, recurring basis to sell a variety of
fresh fruits and vegetables as well as other farm products directly to the
consumer. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:816
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community and shall include but not
be limited to group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136, (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et
al.).[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 38-98; 2-23-1999 by Ord. No.
14-99]
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.),
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
physiological welfare.[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 38-98;
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such a use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in the provisions of this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Typically a store dedicated to the selling of
foodstuffs and/or general merchandise which is specifically designed to
provide a limited stock-in-trade and which caters to quick in-and-out
shopping. A convenience store may contain a delicatessen or prepared food
section. A convenience store may contain not more than two coin-operated
amusement machines. The maximum floor area allowed for a convenience
store is 3,000 square feet.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.
CRAWL SPACE — An unfinished area of five feet or less in height between
ground level and floor joists or ceiling joists and roof rafters suitable for
storage but not habitation.
DELICATESSEN — A business venture primarily concerned with the retail
sale of groceries, cooked meats, hors d'oeuvres, prepared salads and
sandwiches. As an adjunct to such use, a delicatessen may set aside no more
than 30% of the overall area of the store for an on-site dining area.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units, which may be or are developed
per gross acre of land, including areas used for public access and/or open
space.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in § 2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448 (N.J.S.A.
30:11B-2), and "mentally ill person" means a person who is afflicted with
a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,160 but shall not include a
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:817
person who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge.[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 38-98;
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached building containing five or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-BEDROOM APARTMENT — Includes the following
separate rooms or a combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen and dining room with a separate living
room or a separate kitchen with a combined living room and dining area,
provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living room; a
bathroom with toilet and bath facilities; a bedroom; and/or outdoor patio.
No additional room shall be permitted excepting hallways and suitable
closet and storage space unless such extra room is clearly designated as an
additional bedroom.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building and dwelling unit
designed for or occupied exclusively by a reasonable number of persons (in
relation to available sleeping and bathroom facilities), living and cooking
together as a bona fide single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household
servants, and constituting a stable and permanent living unit of a distinct
domestic character, in a traditional family unit or the functional equivalent
thereof, using certain rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. This
definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie or organization which is not
a recognized religious order and shall not include boardinghouses or
dormitories.[Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00; 7-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 26-04]
DWELLINGS, STANDARDS TO BE APPLIED — For all dwellings in the
City of Long Branch, the following standards are adopted by reference: In
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, excluding Section PM-11.0, et
seq., Means of appeal, is hereby adopted as the standard governing
supplied utilities, facilities and other physical things and conditions to make
buildings and dwellings, both residential and nonresidential, safe, sanitary
and fit for human habitation, occupancy or use. A copy of the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, 1996 Edition, is attached and made a part of
this chapter without the text being included therein.161[Added 11-28-2000
by Ord. No. 48-00]
DWELLING, THREE-BEDROOM APARTMENT — Includes the following
separate rooms or a combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen with a combined living room and dining
area, provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living
160. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by P.L. 1987, c. 116, § 30. See now N.J.S.A.
30:4-27.2.
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 262, Art. II, Adoption of BOCA Standards.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:818
room; a bathroom with toilet and bath facilities; a master bedroom; a second
bedroom and third bedroom; and/or an outdoor patio.
DWELLING, TWO-BEDROOM APARTMENT — Includes the following
separate rooms or a combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen and dining room with a separate living
room; or a separate kitchen with a combined living room and dining area,
provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living room;
a bathroom with toilet and bath facilities; a master bedroom; and second
bedroom; and/or an outdoor patio. No additional room shall be permitted,
excepting hallways and suitable closet and storage space, unless such extra
room is clearly designated as an additional bedroom.
DWELLING, TWO-, THREE- OR FOUR-FAMILY — A detached building
containing two, three or four dwelling units, respectively.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof having cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities designed for or occupied by one family and which is
entirely separated from any other dwelling unit in the building by vertical
walls or horizontal floors, unpierced, except for access to the outside or a
common cellar.
EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING FACILITIES FOR MEDICAL CENTER —
Facilities used in the training, education, research and study by the
professional members, as well as the staff and students, as they are related
to the recognized medical and allied medical professions.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electric, steam, water or sewage
transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, meters, valves and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, including housing for any of the
foregoing, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — A reasonable number of persons (in relation to available sleeping
and bathroom facilities) occupying a dwelling unit and living as a bona
fide single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, living and cooking together, and
constituting a stable and permanent living unit of a distinct domestic
character, being a traditional family unit or the functional equivalent
thereof, using certain rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. This
definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie or organization which is not a
recognized religious order.[Amended 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00;
7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 26-04]
FARM MARKET — A retail outlet normally owned or operated by a producer
or farm unit, located on-farm or off-farm, selling products produced by the
farm directly to the consumer.[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:819
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured material or combination of materials
erected for the enclosure of yard areas.
FRATERNITY HOUSE, COLLEGIATE — A building rented, occupied or
owned by a general or local chapter of some regularly organized college
fraternity, or on its behalf, by a building corporation or association
composed of members of alumni thereof, and occupied by members of
a local chapter of such fraternity as a place of residence. Fraternity or
sorority houses shall not be permitted in any zone within the City.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building used as an accessory to the main building
which provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or services for profit are carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain and which is used for the storage of
automobiles or other motor vehicles, including the supply of gasoline or oil
or other fuel for vehicular propulsion.
GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more multifamily buildings designed and
erected as an integrated development with singleness of use and operation
and which utilizes such common facilities as pedestrian walks, parking
and garage areas, open space or recreation areas and utility, sanitary and
drainage systems.
GRADE, EXISTING — The existing undisturbed elevation of land, ground
and topography preexisting or existing on a lot, parcel or tract of land in the
City at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grade as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto or
as existing if no plans or designs have been approved. In the event that a
lot or lots are to be regraded in order to increase the lot height, and as
a result building height shall be increased beyond the original allowable
height and no other provision of this section requires the prior approval of
the same, then in that event, a site plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Board of the City of Long Branch. It is the intent of this section of this
provision to prohibit the increase of allowable building height by means of
the use of mounding, terracing or other devices without the appropriate
board reviewing and approving a site plan of such proposed grade changes.
However, such approval shall not be required for a single-family home with
an increase of lot height of 18 inches or less measured at the average
perimeter of the building.
A zoning permit shall be required should any portion of any property
be graded more than 18 inches over an area of 5,000 square feet or
more, or any portion of any property be graded above three feet, and
no site plan review is required. Plans drawn by an appropriate licensed
professional, showing existing and proposed evaluations and contours,
shall be submitted for review. An escrow shall be posted in a minimum
amount of $500 in order for the City Engineers to do a drainage and
grading review, to which the applicant will be bound by its conditions
A.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:820
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the
floors of a building measured between the inside face of the exterior walls
or from the center line of walls common to two dwelling units.
GROSS HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of all of the floors of a building measured between the inside face of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two units, having a clear
ceiling height of six feet or greater. Any cellar, basement, hallways, closets,
storage areas, garage space, breezeways, interior patios, enclosed porches
or accessory buildings are not to be included in computing gross habitable
floor area.
HAIR STYLING SHOP — Any establishment duly licensed by the New Jersey
Division of Consumer Affairs Board of Cosmetology and Hair Styling to
provide those services authorized under the pertinent rules and regulations
promulgated by the Office of Administrative Law. Said establishment may
also sell related supplies and accessories in such quantities reasonably
necessary to fulfill the needs of its customers.[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 8-95]
HEALTH SPA/GYM — An establishment that, by its nature, provides
apparatus and/or instruction in various aerobic and/or athletic
exercises.[Added 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character,
customarily conducted within a dwelling solely by the residents, which
occupies not more than 35% of the gross floor area of the dwelling and
does not change the character or any exterior evidence of such secondary
use, other than a permitted identification sign, and, in connection therewith,
there is not involved the keeping of stock-in-trade. Such occupations as
dressmaker, tailor, milliner, typist and instructor in violin, piano or other
individual musical instrument, which offer direct personal instruction or
services on an individual basis, shall be deemed to be a home occupation.
For the purposes of this chapter, this shall mean the accommodation of one
individual at any one time on the premises.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
learned profession as hereinafter indicated when conducted by a member
of the residential family entirely within a residential building and shall
include only the office of a doctor, lawyer, architect, engineer and similar
learned professional occupations herein restricted, provided that not more
than two persons, not resident on the premises, shall be employed upon
the premises. The offices shall not occupy more than the equivalent of 40%
of the area of the first floor of the principal building. A home professional
office shall not include the office of any person professionally engaged in
the purchase or sale of economic goods. Studios for dancing instructions,
band instrument or voice instruction in groups, tearooms, tourist homes,
beauty parlors, barbershops, hairdressing and manicuring establishments,
real estate offices, mortuary establishments, biological or other medical
or requirements. This requirement shall also apply to any development
or grading activity not requiring a site plan review which is located in a
floodplain. [Added 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 12-01]
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:821
testing laboratory and stores, trades or businesses of any kind not herein
excepted shall not be deemed to be home professional offices.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services under the supervision
of licensed physicians, primarily for human inpatients and medical and
surgical care for the sick or injured, and including related facilities, central
service facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities.
HOTEL — An establishment providing lodging and usually meals for the
general public, especially transients. It may include such uses incident to
the operation as herein defined as follows: rest rooms, offices, meeting
rooms, swimming pools, cabanas, restaurants, cocktail lounges, beauty
parlors, barbershops, men's and women's wearing apparel stores, sale of
newspapers, periodicals, souvenirs, cigars, cigarettes and novelties, jewelry
stores, drug and sundry stores and soda fountains, florist shops and stock
brokerage offices. The uses when proposed as part of and in direct support
of the above-described establishments shall be conducted within the
principal building with the exception of cabanas and swimming pools.
INSTITUTIONAL USES ABOVE GROUND-LEVEL RETAIL — Buildings with
an educational, religious or charitable use on the second floor or above a
building that contains retail on the ground floor.[Added 4-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 5-15]
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD — Any area and/or structure used or intended to
be used for selling, buying, storing or trading of used or discarded metal,
glass, paper, cordage or any used or disabled fixtures, vehicles, boats or
equipment of any kind. The premises on which the deposit or storage of any
used, wrecked or otherwise disabled vehicles, boats or other parts occurs
for a period of one month or more shall be deemed to be a junkyard.
KINDERGARTEN — An establishment where four or more children are kept
during the daytime for elementary instruction.
LODGING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse" and "rooming house."
LOT — A parcel or area of land the dimensions and extent of which are
determined by the latest official records or by the latest approved map of a
subdivision of which the lot is a part.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or
acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be
included in calculating lot area.
A.
LOT AREA RATIO — The minimum lot area in square feet which is
required for each dwelling unit.
B.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two
or more intersecting streets.
C.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:822
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw products and the
production of articles or finished products from raw or prepared materials
by giving them new forms or qualities.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the City as set forth and adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include, but not
be limited to, marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical
grab machines and any mechanical or electronic video game operation or
transaction similar thereto and under whatever name it may be indicated. It
shall not include nor shall this definition apply to jukeboxes.
MEDICAL AND ALLIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — The offices
to be utilized by a member of a recognized medical and allied medical
profession. Such office shall contain but not be limited to facilities
necessary for the treatment, examination, research and study of the
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which may be
devoted to structure area. (See "structure.") [Amended 6-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 19-93]
D.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured at right angles to the street.
E.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent with
a street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, the lot lines
shall be assumed to parallel the center line of the street at a distance of
25 feet therefrom. In the case of corner lots, the smaller of the two lot
lines coexistent with street lines shall be considered as the frontage.
F.
LOT LINE — Any line designating the extent of existing or intended
separate parcels of land according to maps and plats of record filed
with the County Recorder, regardless of ownership.
G.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to its depth and at a point which constitutes
the rear line of the required front yard space.
H.
LOT, IRREGULAR — (See also § 345-10B.) Any lot which:
Contains a lot frontage as measured at the street right-of-way line
of less than 50% of the minimum lot width requirement;
(1)
Contains any appendages or areas which will not allow for the
potential development of any conforming structure or use; or
(2)
Contains more than six sides. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93]
(3)
I.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:823
problems associated with the uses permitted in the Medical Center (M)
Zone.
MEDICAL AND ALLIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONS — Those professions
necessary for patient care, treatment, examination, study and research in
the fields, including but not limited to medical, dental and dental hygiene,
optometry, chiropractic, podiatry, psychiatric, psychological, physical
therapy and pharmacological professions.
MEDICAL AND CLINICAL LABORATORIES — Those facilities utilized by a
medical center and/or hospital in the diagnostic, prognostic and physical
care and treatment of its patients, as well as facilities used by the medical
and allied medical professions.
MEDICAL CENTERS — A complex of principal and accessory buildings and
facilities utilized in the medical and surgical treatment and care of patients,
as well as those buildings and structures used for the maintenance of these
buildings and necessary related facilities, to include, but not be limited to,
medical and allied medical professional offices, educational and training
facilities, laboratories and outpatient medical clinics.
MID-RISE APARTMENT — A group of one or more buildings of not more
than six stories of dwelling units designed and erected as a project of
dwelling units with singleness of use and operation and where joint or
communal use is to be made of open areas by the occupants, whether it
be for recreation, parking of automobiles or other communal purposes.
Parking levels below finished grade shall not be counted toward the sixstory
limitation.
MOTEL — A series of attached units for transient occupancy where each
unit has direct access to parking space for use of the unit's occupant.
The units shall include facilities for living and sleeping only and shall
include a bedroom and a separate bathroom which affords privacy to a
person within the room and which is equipped with a flush water closet,
a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower. A motel may include such uses
incident to the operation as herein defined as follows: rest rooms, offices,
meeting rooms, swimming pools, cabanas, restaurants, cocktail lounges,
beauty parlors, barbershops, men's and women's wearing apparel stores,
sale of newspapers, periodicals, souvenirs, cigars, cigarettes and novelties,
jewelry stores, drug and sundry stores and soda fountains, florist shops and
stock brokerage offices. Such uses when proposed as part of and in direct
support of the above-described establishment shall be conducted within the
principal building with the exception of cabanas and swimming pools.
MOTEL, EFFICIENCY — A series of attached units for occupancy where
each unit has direct access to parking space for use of the unit's occupant.
The units shall include a combination room for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating and shall include a bedroom and a separate bathroom which
affords privacy to a person within the room and which is equipped with
a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower. It may
include such uses incident to the operation as herein defined as follows:
rest rooms, offices, meeting rooms, swimming pools, cabanas, restaurants,
cocktail lounges, beauty parlors, barbershops, men's and women's wearing
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:824
apparel stores, sales of newspapers, periodicals, souvenirs, cigars,
cigarettes and novelties, jewelry stores, drug and sundry stores and soda
fountains, florist shops and stock brokerage offices. Such uses when
proposed as part of or in direct support of the above-described
establishment shall be conducted within the principal building with the
exception of cabanas and swimming pools.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor
vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances and which may or may
not include facilities for lubricating, washing or other minor services to
motor vehicles.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
which, in its design or location upon a lot, was lawful prior to the adoption
or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the regulations
of this chapter for the zone in which it is located by reason of such adoption
or amendment.162
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record existing which was lawful prior
to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zone in which it is located by reason of such
adoption or amendment.163
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or of land which conformed
to the lawful requirements for the zone in which it is located prior to the
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
regulations of this chapter for the zone in which it is located by reason of
such adoption or amendment.164
NURSERY — A privately operated establishment where four or more
children under six years of age are kept during the daytime while their
parent or parents are at work or otherwise engaged.
NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A health facility licensed
by the City where persons are housed and furnished with meals and
continuing nursing care in return for compensation and under the general
supervision of a licensed physician or registered nurse. A home for the
sheltered care of adult persons as defined by N.J.S.A. 30:11A-1 shall not be
considered a nursing, rest or convalescent home.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question, but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:825
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
OPEN SPACE, UNOCCUPIED — An unoccupied, grassed, wooded or
landscaped area open to the sky on the same lot with a principal and/
or accessory building. Improved sidewalks, paved paths or other
pedestrianways within an unoccupied open space area which exceed four
feet in width shall be deducted in determining the unoccupied open space
area. Parking area or traffic channelization islands which are not
landscaped or which have an area less than 350 square feet shall not be
considered as unoccupied open space.
PARKING AREA — A public or private area, designated and used for parking
motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and
legally designated areas.[Added 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-12]
PARKING LOT — An off-street, ground-level open area that provides
temporary storage for motor vehicles. See "parking area."[Added
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-12]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the rectangle parking
of a motor vehicle and which in this chapter is held to be at least nine feet in
width and 18 feet in length, exclusive of passageways appurtenant thereto
and giving access thereto.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — The owner/occupant of a one-family dwelling or
a tenant or group of tenants, the majority of whom have resided in the onefamily
dwelling for a continuous period of two years, or who have a written
lease for the premises of at least two years’ duration, or have resided in the
premises for at least one year and have a lease for at least one additional
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:826
year at the time an application is made.[Added 6-12-2007 by Ord. No.
24-07]
PIER — A structurally sound combination of materials which extends from
the westerly side of the state bulkhead for a minimum distance of 300 feet
east of the existing mean high-water mark.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — (See "church.")
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City.
PORTABLE CONTAINERIZED PROPERTY STORAGE FACILITY (PCPSF) —
A temporary portable containerized property storage facility or unit
intended to be utilized upon the exterior of residential premises for the
purpose of storing all types of items of personal and household property
either for pure storage or to facilitate the moving of persons from household
unit to household unit, with the understanding that such unit, after the
period of time as noted in § 345-11P, will be moved to commercial storage
facilities. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 40-11]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, which shall be so designated by the approving authority upon
finding by such approving authority that such occupation is professional in
character and requires licensing and training and experience as a condition
for the practice thereof, and that the practice of such occupation shall in no
way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights
in any zone to any greater extent than would the permitted uses listed in
that zone. The issuance of a state or local license for regulation of any such
occupation shall not, alone, be deemed indicative of professional standing.
When such office is combined with a residence, the conditions of home
occupation or, where applicable, home professional office shall apply.
PUBLIC AREAS —
RECYCLING PLANT — An establishment where glass, metal, aluminum and
paper waste products are brought for separation, preparation, storage and
disposal. All facets of the recycling process are to take place indoors, except
that the finished product may be stored outdoors within containment walls
that are not visible to the public.
RESTAURANT — An establishment at which prepared food is sold for
consumption by patrons seated within an enclosed building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where prepared food, soft
drinks, ice cream and/or similar confections are sold to patrons for
consumption outside the confines of the principal building or in an
automobile parked upon the premises, regardless of whether or not, in
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:827
addition thereto, seats or other accommodations are provided within the
principal building for the patrons.
ROOMING HOUSE/LODGING HOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than
one person is housed or lodged for hire without meals. A lodging house,
rooming or furnished rooming house shall be deemed a rooming house, but
a nursing, rest or convalescent home shall not be deemed a rooming house.
A home for sheltered care of adult persons as defined by N.J.S.A. 30:11A-1
shall not be considered a rooming house. The housing of outpatients from
institutions shall not be permitted.
SCREENING — A visual barrier of plant materials as described in the
definition of "buffer strip," or appropriate fencing or other materials which
may be agreed to by the Planning Board.
SEASON — No more than six continuous months in any one calendar
year.[Added 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-12]
SECONDHAND STORE — Any establishment selling used merchandise as a
significant part of its business. For the purposes of this chapter, pawn shops,
used furniture stores and thrift stores shall be considered secondhand
stores, while dealers of books, antiques, collectibles or memorabilia are not
considered secondhand stores.[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
SENIOR CITIZENS PROJECT — A residential development, including
recreation facilities and other appropriate facilities, within which residency
shall be restricted to permanent residents of the age of 60 years and over,
except for the spouse and one child 18 years or more of age of a qualifying
resident.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between a building or structure and
any front, side or rear lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot lines at
the point where the building is closest to such lot lines. See also "building
line."
SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject to the attention of others, but
not including any flag, badge or insignia of any public, quasi-public, civic,
charitable or religious groups. Such signs shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 284, Signs, where applicable.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign. Where
there is no geometric frame or edge of this sign, the area shall be
defined by a projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric
shape which most closely outlines the sign.
A.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — Any sign which shall be used to advertise
and identify the activity conducted on the premises where the sign is
located.
B.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:828
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Any development plan for one or more lots which is
(are) subject to development which:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
C. A key map.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter requiring review and approval of site plans by the Planning
Board adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
D.
A. Requires site plan approval;
In the opinion of the Board's Site Plan Committee, the submitted project
is of such a simplistic nature as to merit consideration as a minor site
plan;
B.
Meets the requirements set forth in Article IV, Zone District Use
Regulations, and contains the information reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the Board's
requirements for approval of a minor site plan have been met; and
C.
Meets the following conditions:
The construction of drainage facilities is not required either on or
off site.
(1)
The proposed development conforms to the performance standards
set forth in § 345-45.
(2)
(3) The proposed development does not involve planned development.
The proposed development will not require the issuance of a
Coastal Area Facilities Review Act165 permit.
(4)
The proposed development does not involve any new street or the
extension of any existing street.
(5)
The proposed development does not involve the extension or
construction of any off-tract improvement.
(6)
The proposed development, if new construction, requires 10
parking spaces or less or if a change of use of an existing facility
(7)
D.
165. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:829
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin that
overlies bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state, which encompasses this municipality, organized in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, N.J.S.A. (Freehold Soil Conservation
District).166
SPLIT-LEVEL DWELLING — A residential building consisting of two or more
levels of living area, on or above grade, connected by two or more flights of
stairs containing at least five steps each.
STORAGE — The act of storing goods or the state of being stored; a space
for storing goods.[Added 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 40-11]
STORY — The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a sloping roof with the exterior walls at least
two feet and not more than five feet above the floor of such story.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded
to the public for public use which has been improved in accordance with
municipal standards.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the street rights of the
public, either existing or contemplated.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction on, under
or above ground level and that is safe and stable and includes, among
other things: buildings, parking areas, driveways, walkways, patios, decks,
stadiums, platforms, radio/television towers, satellite dishes, sheds, storage
bins, garages, fences, walls, pools and display signs.[Amended 6-22-1993
by Ord. No. 19-93]
SUBDIVISION167 — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created:
or addition to an existing facility and less than five spaces are
required.
The proposed development consists of new construction or an
addition, either of which are less than 1,000 square feet.
(8)
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
166. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:830
SUPERMARKET — A full-service store which is dedicated to providing
a complete stock of foodstuffs and ancillary goods. A supermarket may
contain a delicatessen or prepared food section. The minimum floor area
allowed for a supermarket is 3,001 square feet.
SWIMMING CLUB, PUBLIC — A privately or publicly owned pool or
oceanfront beach, open to the general public and having no appurtenant
facilities other than dressing room facilities, an enclosed snack bar serving
patrons only and off-street parking facilities.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A private swimming pool associated with a
residential dwelling unit or units and located on an individual, residential
lot. Swimming pools may not be located in any front yard area and cannot
be located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear yard lot lines.
TATTOO PARLOR — Any establishment whose primary business is the
application to the human skin of permanent body art or makeup. In addition,
any establishment that may require a State of New Jersey tattoo license
to operate shall not be considered a tattoo parlor, provided that not more
than 5% of the total floor area of the establishment is dedicated for the
application to the human skin of permanent body art or makeup.[Added
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95; amended 12-26-2018 by Ord. No. 29-18]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICES/ARRAYS — See § 345-10I.[Added
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A use established for a limited duration with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.[Added 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-12]
TOWER APARTMENT — A group of one or more buildings of more than six
stories of dwelling units designed and erected as a project with singleness
of use and operation and where joint or communal use is to be made of open
areas by the occupants, whether it be for recreation, parking of automobiles
or other communal purposes. One level of parking may be below the six
stories of dwellings.
TOWNHOUSE (TOWNHOUSE DWELLING UNIT) — One of a series of
single-family dwelling units which is attached by a common fireproof and
sound-resistant wall (which wall shall start at the lowest footing line and go
to the underside of the highest roof sheathing) to one or more adjacent units
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land,
owned by the same person or persons, and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the City.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." (See
also Chapter 300, Subdivision, § 300-4, Definitions.)
E.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:831
and which has an individual, enclosed and private area, with direct access
from the interior of the dwelling unit.
TOWNHOUSE COMPLEX — A development project of one or more
townhouse structures, including individual townhouse lots and common
lands or facilities.
TOWNHOUSE LOT — The parcel of land immediately under the dwelling
unit which has been or is intended to be conveyed in fee simple to an
individual purchaser, together with a townhouse dwelling unit constructed
thereon.
TOWNHOUSE PARCEL — The entire tract upon which a townhouse complex
shall be or has been built.
TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE — A structure containing three or more
townhouse dwelling units.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of zoning
regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, Subsections 29.2b, 57 c and 57
d of Chapter 291.168
VERTICAL PARKING GARAGES — Any multilevel structure constructed for
use as a facility for vehicular parking or storage. The levels can be aboveor
below-grade or both.
VIDEO STORES, RETAIL — Any establishment that rents or sells videos,
DVDs, compact discs, or other visually viewed technology.169[Added
9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 34-01]
Any retail video store which displays or offers for rent or sale obscene
material shall display such materials in the rear of the business
premises, in a segregated room where no admission to anyone under
the age of 18 shall be permitted, which area shall be clearly denoted
and marked to indicate such prohibition, and which area shall be
constructed in such a way so as to prevent the view of any obscene
material to any person under the age of 18.
A.
Utilization of greater than 10% of the floor area of the interior of the
establishment for the display of obscene material shall be presumptive
evidence of the use of said premises being for adult entertainment
purposes.
B.
For purposes of this definition "obscene material" means any
description, narrative account, display or depiction of sexual activity
or anatomical area contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other
representation, publication, sound recording, live performance or film,
C.
168. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40 and 40:55D-70.
169. Editor's Note: For related provisions, see § 345-11BB, Adult materials in retail
establishments, and § 345-47, Adult entertainment uses.
§ 345-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-3
332:832
YARD —
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The officially established Board of
Adjustment of the City.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a building
or land is to be used is in conformity with the uses permitted and all
other requirements under this chapter for the zone district in which it is
located or is to be located or variance therefrom duly authorized pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-70 and the City Code.
video, DVD, or other recording, which by means of posing, composition,
format or animated sensual details:
Depicts or describes in a patent or offensive way ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
exploitatory functions, or lewd exhibition of genitals.
(1)
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value when
taken as a whole.
(2)
Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme, taken
as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
(3)
Any person or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with the
provisions of this definition shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
D.
This definition shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, or any designee thereof of the City of Long
Branch, or any law enforcement officer of the State of New Jersey.
E.
Display. In this definition, "display" shall be defined as the offering for
sale or rent or display of an item, good, ware, publication or product
through visible presentation of same to the general public.
F.
FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal
building, extended the full width of the lot and situated between the
street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of that lot. Setback line shall be synonymous with the rear limit of the
required front yard area.
A.
REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal building
on the same lot. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right
angles to the rear line of the lot, or if the lot is not rectangular, then in
the general direction of its side building line.
B.
SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot and
the nearest building line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, or in the absence of either side yards, to the street or rear lot
lines, as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall be measured at
right angles to the side line of the lot.
C.
§ 345-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-3
332:833

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zones
§ 345-4. Zone districts. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96;
5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 6-13]
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Long Branch is divided into the
following districts:
R-1 One-Family Residential
R-2 One-Family Residential
R-3 One-Family Residential
R-4 One-Family Residential
R-5 One- to Four-Family/Townhouse Residential
R-6 Townhouse/Professional Office
R-7 Riverfront Mixed
R-8 Boulevard Mix
RC-1 Beachfront Mixed
RC-2 Riverfront Residential/Commercial
C-1 Central Commercial
C-2 Professional Offices and Related Services
C-3 Neighborhood Commercial
C-4 Resort Commercial
I Industrial
HTLI High Technology Light Industrial
MB Manufacturing and Business
S-1 Professional Office
S-2 Oceanfront
TVD Transit Village
-- Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Zone (overlay)
§ 345-5. Zoning Map. [Amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
The boundaries of zone districts are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Long Branch," revised 7-22-1997,
which is incorporated herein by reference.170
170. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 345-4 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-6
332:835
§ 345-6. Zoning boundaries. [Amended 7-14-2015 by Ord. No.
12-15]
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the boundaries as shown on the
map or where a zoning district line or, in the case of the Oceanfront
Broadway Redevelopment Area, permitted use classifications under the
Design Guidelines, bisects a single lot or bisects two lots under common
ownership where the development of one such lot independently under
applicable development regulations would result in the elimination of
access to a public street from the other lot, the following rule shall apply:
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the
streets, railroad, rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
existed on March 15, 1989, unless such zone boundary lines are fixed
by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where boundary lines are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant therefrom, the lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. Where a zone boundary or permitted use classification under the
Design Guidelines divides a single lot or two separate lots under
common ownership where the development of one such lot
independently under applicable development regulations would result
in the elimination of access to a public street from the other lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the Map, shall be determined by the following: In the event
that the boundary line of a zone or permitted use classification under
the Design Guidelines shall divide a lot or two lots under common
ownership between the front or street line and the rear line, the use
regulations, height and area regulations of the zone in which lies the
portion of the lot or lots abutting a public street shall govern and
control the entire lot or lots. In the event that the boundary line of a
zone or permitted use classification under the Design Guidelines shall
divide a lot or two lots under common ownership between the side lines
thereof, the use regulations and height and area regulations of the zone
in which lies the greater portion of the lot or lots abutting a public
street shall govern and control the entire lot or lots. In the further event
that the boundary line of the zone or permitted use classification under
the Design Guidelines shall divide a corner lot or two corner lots under
common ownership in any manner, the property line thereof containing
the lesser distance abutting either public street shall be considered as
the front or street, line of such lot for the purpose of application of the
foregoing rules.
D. Where application of this section results in permitting a use on a lot in a
zoning district or redevelopment sector use classification area that
would not otherwise be a permitted use in such zoning district or
redevelopment area or sector use classification area, or results in
application of different bulk standards than otherwise would have been
§ 345-6 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-6
332:836
§ 345-7. Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
Lot, yard and bulk requirements for all zone districts shall be as set forth
on the schedules annexed to this chapter and entitled "Schedules of Lot,
Yard and Bulk Requirements for the City of Long Branch."171 In the event
that there shall be an inconsistency between the schedule and the written
provisions of this chapter, such written provisions of this chapter shall
control.
applicable, same shall not constitute use or bulk variances and shall
not require an ordinance amendment or, if applicable, notwithstanding
Section 345-82E hereof, an amendment to a redevelopment plan but
shall be deemed permitted uses and governing bulk standards by
application of this section.
E. Where application of this section results in any technical nonconformity
of an adjacent lot or lots owned by a party not seeking the benefit of this
section that was previously developed in accordance with any
applicable City approval, or any alterations or additions to such
properties subsequently approved by the City, same shall not be
deemed a nonconformity and the owner of such adjacent lot or lots shall
not be required to address any such technical nonconformity. For
example, if application of this section results in development of a
residential use in a commercial zone next to an existing commercial
development, the existing commercial development would not be
required to provide for a larger buffer as may otherwise have been
required between the commercial and residential uses.
F. An owner of two lots seeking to develop such lots jointly under this
section based upon common ownership and the inability to develop one
lot without eliminating a public street access to the other lot will be
required, as a precondition of the Planning Board hearing a
development application, to merge such lots.
171. Editor's Note: See Art. XI, § 345-102 et seq.
§ 345-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-7
332:837

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 345-8. Provisions of existing ordinances.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land or both
which appear in other ordinances of the City or are established by law and
which are greater than those set forth herein shall take precedence over
those herein. Otherwise the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 345-9. Applicability of regulations.
No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land be
used for any purpose other than those included among the uses listed as
permitted uses in each zone by this chapter and meeting the requirements
set forth in the Schedules; nor shall any open space contiguous to any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity to the area and bulk requirements, off-street parking
requirements and all other regulations designated in the Schedules and this
chapter for the zone district in which the building or space is located. In
the event of any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such building or
use shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and the certificate of
occupancy shall become void.
§ 345-10. Permitted modifications and exceptions.
A. Height. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy, nor
to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, similar features and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the
roofline. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve. The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to preventing the erection
above the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for
ornament (and without windows) extending above such height limit not
more than five feet. Public and quasi-public buildings, schools,
churches and other similar permitted uses shall increase the front, rear
and side yards by one foot for each foot by which such buildings exceed
the height limit established for such zone in which they are located, and
further provided that in no case shall any building have a height greater
than 50 feet unless explicitly permitted by the schedules or this chapter.
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(1) Finished grade. In the event that a lot or lots are to be regraded in
order to increase the lot height, and as a result building height
shall be increased beyond the original allowable height and no
other provision of this section requires the prior approval of the
same, then in that event, a variance shall be required. It is the
intent of this subsection to prohibit the increase of allowable
§ 345-8 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-10
332:839
building height by means of the use of mounding, terracing or other
devices without the appropriate board reviewing and approving a
variance for such proposed grade changes. However, such approval
shall not be required for a single-family home with an increase of
lot height of 18 inches or less measured at the average perimeter
of the building.
(2) In the case of existing grades with slopes the measurement for any
allowed height and/or number of stories for any proposed
structures along this slope shall be calculated along a line which
runs parallel to the existing slope and is measured at each point
along this line, provided that no increase in height and/or number
of stories shall be allowed which is greater than what each zone or
use allows at the highest point of the existing or finished grade,
whichever is less.
(3) In no case shall any below-grade level (basement, parking level,
crawl space, etc.) be counted in the number of stories allowed on
any site or for any use.
(4) Exception relating to properties located within advisory flood
hazard zones and special flood hazard areas. To comply with the
flood damage prevention requirements in City Ordinance Chapter
177, properties located within advisory flood hazard zones and
special flood hazard areas as defined in Chapter 177: [Added
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 3-13]
(a) Are allowed up to an additional three feet and/or less than tenpercent
additional height above the allowable maximum
building height in feet as defined in Zoning Ordinance Chapter
345 for the applicable zone;
(b) Must not exceed the allowable maximum building height in
stories as defined in Zoning Ordinance Chapter 345 for the
applicable zone.
(c) Must comply with § 345-17.
B. Irregularly shaped lots. In the case of existing irregularly shaped lots,
the minimum lot width specified in the Schedules may be measured at
the building line, provided that in no case shall the lot frontage
measured at the street right-of-way line be less than 50% of the
minimum lot width requirements. The creation of any new irregularly
shaped lots is prohibited.
C. Exception to front yard setback requirements. The minimum front yard
setback requirements in all residential zones shall be as indicated in the
zoning schedule, except for the following listed conditions: Buildings
shall be located a greater or lesser distance than the minimum allowed
front yard setback when the pattern of existing buildings within 300
feet of either side of the lot on the same side of the street is established
§ 345-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-10
332:840
at a greater or lesser distance. When this condition exists, then the
mean average existing setback distance shall control.
D. Exception relating to industrial use. Within the Industrial Zone, use
boundaries which were designated on the Zoning Map dated August 2,
1977. Industrial uses shall remain as permitted uses; provided,
however, that any expansion is limited to the maximum lot coverage
established for the current Industrial Zone use.
E. Exception relating to alterations to existing nonconforming structures.
(1) Alterations, as applied to a nonconforming structure, shall only
include a change or rearrangement in the structural supports or a
change in the exterior appearance of a structure.
(2) A nonconforming structure may be altered, provided that the cost
of alterations does not exceed, in the aggregate, 50% of the
assessed value of the structure as recorded in the records of the
Tax Assessor. More substantial alterations are not permitted unless
the structure is changed to conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
(3) A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged, extended,
increased in height, width or depth or moved, relocated or modified
in such a way so as to increase habitable or usable space, number
of dwelling units or number of bedrooms unless such structure is
changed to a structure conforming to the requirements of this
chapter, except that an existing one-family structure (principal or
accessory) may be enlarged, extended or added to, provided that:
(a) 172The enlargement, extension or addition conforms to all yard
requirements;
(b) The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which
does not conform to yard requirements consists entirely of the
enclosure of existing side or rear porches; [Amended
11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 39-97]
(c) (c) The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which
does not conform to yard requirements consists entirely of a
second floor addition located above an existing first floor area
or existing foundation; or [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
39-97]
(d) The proposed enlargement, extension or addition consists of an
area no greater than 300 square feet, which shall be located in
such a manner as to square off an irregular building layout and
does not decrease the existing principal structure setback.
[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 39-97]
172. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 20-5.3e3(a), regarding location of a structure on a lot
meeting minimum lot area requirements, which immediately preceded this subsection,
was repealed 8-25-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98.
§ 345-10 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-10
332:841
(e) The enclosure of any front porch area shall maintain a
minimum of at least 60% of the vertical surfaces as something
other than solid walls. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
39-97]
(f) All exterior finishes for any enlargement, extension or addition
must be uniform and match that which is applied to the
existing structure. [Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 39-97]
(4) Accessory structures may not be constructed on nonconforming
lots and/or on lots which contain a nonconforming principal
structure unless:
(a) The lot conforms to minimum lot area requirements.
(b) A single- or two-family principal residential building exists on
the lot.
(c) The new accessory structure conforms to all requirements of
this chapter for accessory buildings and uses. (See § 345-11P.)
F. Finished grade. In the event that a lot or lots are to be regraded in order
to increase the lot height, and as a result building height shall be
increased beyond the original allowable height and no other provision
of this section requires the prior approval of the same, then in that
event, a site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board of the City of
Long Branch. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the increase
of allowable building height by means of the use of mounding, terracing
or other devices without the appropriate board reviewing and
approving a site plan of such proposed grade changes. However, such
approval shall not be required for a single-family home with an increase
of lot height of 18 inches or less measured at the average perimeter of
the building.
G. One-family principal buildings shall be allowed a modification from
existing height limitations of this chapter, provided that for each one
foot of building elevation, an additional five feet of setback for each
front, side and rear yard shall also be provided. In addition, this
modification shall not exceed a maximum of 38 feet or three stories in
heights. [Added 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 25-99]
H. Exception relating to single-family dwellings. Should the enlargement,
extension or addition of single-family dwellings include bedrooms as
defined in § 345-3, each bedroom over four bedrooms shall require that
an additional parking space be provided in an appropriate yard space as
per § 345-42, and that not more than 20% of the front yard area be used
for parking or driveways and that total lot coverage maximums not be
exceeded. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 25-00; amended
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 18-08]
I. Telecommunications devices/arrays telecommunications receiving/
transmitting/repeater devices shall be allowed as an accessory use in
§ 345-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-10
332:842
the C-1, C-4, RC-1, M, MB, I and HC Zoning Districts, provided that the
following criteria and procedures by complied with: [Added 5-8-2001
by Ord. No. 17-01]
(1) The proposed telecommunications device/array is only to be
installed upon an existing tower or building (the construction of
any new towers or poles is prohibited).
(2) A telecommunication device/array permit application must be filed
with the Planning Department. As part of the application,
appropriate documentation (survey/site plan showing location of
array/device, structural support details, telecommunications data,
etc.) must be submitted)
(3) Payment of a $500 technical review/escrow application fee.
(4) Review and approval by the City's designated technical expert
concerning structural support/location/FCC safety requirements.
(5) Upon approval by the City's designated technical expert, obtain
proper zoning permit.
(6) Obtain any required construction permits.
J. Exceptions concerning site plan approvals within the Oceanfront-
Broadway Redevelopment Zone. Any project or proposal located within
the Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Zone shall be exempt from
the redevelopment design guideline requirements, provided that they
comply with all of the following conditions: [Added 3-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 2-09]
(1) The project/proposal received formal site plan approval from either
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(2) The project/proposal received site plan approval between May 17,
1996 (date of adoption of the Oceanfront/Broadway Master Plan),
and October 22, 2002 (date of adoption of the design guidelines);
(3) The project/proposal has not received formal redevelopment
project approval from the City of Long Branch Redevelopment
Agency prior to October 22, 2002;
(4) The project/proposal has obtained and maintained valid zoning/
construction permits based upon the formal site plan approval; and
(5) The project/proposal is consistent with and in compliance with the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan and the proposed use is
permitted under the Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan.
K. Farm markets and/or community farmers’ markets as outlined in §
345-3 shall be allowed as a permitted use in the C-1, C-2, and C-3
Zoning Districts, provided that the following criteria and procedures
are complied with: [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09173]
§ 345-10 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-10
332:843
§ 345-11. Additional provisions.
(1) A farm market permit application must be filed with the Planning
and Zoning Department. As part of the application, appropriate
documentation (survey/site plan showing location of farmers/
growers, types of produce, tables, parking, signs, data, etc.) must
be submitted. All items as outlined in § 345-47.1A and B above must
be documented and provided for review and approval.
(2) Obtain approval by the City Council and/or Special Events
Committee and/or designated technical expert(s) as required.
(3) Obtain required health, public works, construction, food vendor,
recycling and waste management approvals and permits.
(4) Farm markets and/or community farmers’ markets are permitted
on a seasonal basis for one year from the date of issuance.
L. Exception relating to permanent generators. In the case of a permanent
generator, a generator is permitted in a side or rear yard. [Added
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 3-13]
(1) A generator less than 100 square feet in size is permitted to be a
minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines.
(2) In the case of preexisting nonconforming air-conditioning
condensers in a side or rear yard, the generator may be located in
alignment with the preexisting nonconforming air-conditioning
condensers.
(3) All generators must comply with building and fire code
requirements, including but not limited to distance from windows,
walls and doors.
A. Preservation of natural features. No structure shall be built within 100
feet of the top of the bank of a flowing body of water. No building shall
be constructed on land subject to periodic overflow or on land which
has an average water table within two feet of the ground surface. No
person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or
other use other than on the premises from which taken, except in
connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises and excavating or grading incidental thereto, or except as
hereinafter specified. Existing natural features such as trees, brooks,
drainage channels and view shall be retained. Whenever such features
interfere with the proposed use of such property, a retention of the
maximum amount of such features consistent with the use of the
property shall be required, whenever possible, at the discretion of the
Planning Board.
173. Editor’s Note: This subsection was added as Subsection J and was renumbered as
Subsection K 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 16-09.
§ 345-10 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-11
332:844
B. Waste disposal. The dumping of refuse, waste material or other
substances is prohibited in all districts within the City with the
exception of designated sanitary landfill operated by the City. Only
inorganic matter may be used for the purpose of fill in order to establish
grades, and a permit must be obtained by the owner from the City
Council prior to such action.
C. Storage of materials. No person shall store materials of any kind on the
premises in any district except in conjunction with bona fide
warehouses and the construction of a structure to be erected on the
premises upon which the materials are stored for a period of one year
from the date of the commencement of storage unless a permit is
granted by the City Council.
D. Exterior design and appearance of residential buildings. The exterior
design and appearance of buildings erected in the same residential
neighborhood shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 128,
Buildings, Design of.
E. No lot in a residential zone other than a townhouse parcel developed in
accordance with an approved site plan shall have erected upon it more
than one principal, one-family residential building. No yard or other
open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to provide a yard
or open space for any other building.
F. At the intersection of two or more streets, no hedge, fence or wall, other
than a single post or tree not exceeding one square foot in crosssection,
which is higher than three feet above curb level, nor any
obstruction to vision shall be permitted in the triangular area formed by
the intersecting street lines and a line joining points each 25 feet
distant from the intersection along the street lines.
G. Every principal building other than a townhouse structure within a
complex constructed in accordance with an approved site plan shall be
built upon a lot with frontage upon a public street improved to meet the
City's requirements or for which such improvements have been ensured
by the posting of a performance guaranty pursuant to Chapter 300,
Subdivision of Land.
H. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and
shall conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in
which they are located. Corner lots shall provide the minimum front
yard requirements for the respective zone for both intersecting streets,
for both principal and accessory buildings.
I. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the development
plan or the Official Map indicates is proposed for right-of-way widening,
the required front yard area shall be measured from such proposed
right-of-way line.
§ 345-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-11
332:845
J. No front yard shall be used for open storage of boats, vehicles or any
other equipment except for vehicular parking on driveways, but not to
include parking lots. All open storage areas which have secured permits
from the City Council shall be properly landscaped. None of the
aforesaid vehicles, boats or any other equipment shall be stored less
than 10 feet from the rear or side lines of the principal building, nor
shall any such boats, recreation vehicles or other equipment be stored
in a public street.
K. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes or
coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which
would infringe upon the required yard areas specified in this chapter.
L. All yards, open space, off-street parking and required landscaping must
be contained within the zone in which this use is permitted.
M. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the City Council, the zoning district shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacated public way, and all that are
included in the vacated area in question shall be subject to all
appropriate regulations of the extended district.
N. When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part
of a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the
subdivision must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe
upon any of the provisions of this chapter either with respect to any
existing structures of use and any proposed structures or use.
O. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary local utility
distribution or collection lines for water, gas, telephone or electric
service. All facilities such as pumping stations, repeater stations and
electric substations which require a structure above-grade shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter with respect to other uses
requiring conditional use permit application as indicated in each of the
respective districts and subject to §§ 345-57 and 345-61.
P. Any accessory structure or use attached to a principal building shall
comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building. Detached accessory structures or uses shall be
located in other than a front yard, and if located in a side yard area,
shall conform to side yard requirements of the schedules (§ 345-102 et
seq.) for the appropriate zone and shall observe a rear yard setback of
not less than 10 feet, except where otherwise stated. [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95; 8-25-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98;
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 16-07]
(1) In the case of a shed, a shed under 100 square feet is permitted in a
rear yard area to be a minimum of five feet from the property line,
with a maximum number allowed to be two.
(2) On all properties located within the R-1 Residential Zone, which
either meet or exceed the minimum lot frontage, lot depth, and lot
§ 345-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-11
332:846
area requirements for the R-1 Zone, a minimum side and rear
setback of 20 feet is required for any accessory structure or use.
(3) Any accessory structure proposed within any residential zone
district or for any residential use in any other district must conform
to the following:
(a) Any proposed accessory structure must match as close as
feasible the architectural styling/design as that of the principal
structure located on the property (exception: sheds of 100
square feet or less).
(b) Any proposed accessory structure must use as close as is
practicable the same exterior architectural materials and
colors as that which the principal structure is constructed
(exception: sheds of 100 square feet or less).
(c) The roof pitch of any accessory structure must match the roof
pitch of the principal structure located on the property. This
provision will allow an exception to the fifteen-foot maximum
height for accessory structures, provided that in no case shall
an accessory structure be taller than 25 feet or higher than the
principal structure located on the property, whichever is less
(exception: sheds of 100 square feet or less).
(d) The increased attic area/volume created within accessory
structures subject to the roof pitch/height allowance shall not
be used for any use other than storage of personal items owned
by the occupant residing in the principal structure on the
property. The creation of any "finished" second floor room or
use other than open lofted storage in any accessory structure
is prohibited.
(e) On properties where the principal structure contains a flat
roof, all accessory structures may have a peaked roof provided
that in no case shall an accessory structure contain a height of
greater than 15 feet.
(4) Sport courts. The minimum setback for any sport court located in
all zone districts shall be 20 feet. Exception: Any basketball play
area located upon a legal paved driveway is excepted from this
requirement.
(5) No detached accessory structure shall be converted to or used as
habitable space or a habitable dwelling unit.
(6) In Residential Zones R-1 through R-8, or with regard to any singlefamily
property in any other zone, any accessory building, such as
but not limited to detached garages, cabanas, outbuildings, sheds,
workshops, greenhouses, pool houses, animal shelters, etc., shall
conform to the following: [Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
§ 345-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-11
332:847
(a) Shall not be greater in floor area than 50% of the footprint of
the principal structure or use located on the property and shall
not exceed a total combined size of 700 square feet;
(b) Shall not have more than two accessory buildings per property;
(c) Shall not be used for office space in which no occupation,
business or service for profit is carried on, and no stock-intrade
materials are permitted to be stored; and
(d) Shall include at least one parking space if a garage is not
present on site.
(7) Temporary outdoor storage; storage of certain items prohibited on
residential property. In areas zoned residential, it shall be unlawful
to allow outside storage of any of the following: [Added
12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 40-11]
(a) Any bulk household items such as appliances or nonoutdoor
furniture, except in a fully enclosed structure as permitted by
the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Construction material and equipment, including, but not
limited to, ladders, scaffolding, cement, concrete, building
blocks, sheetrock, plywood, studs or beams, plywood, sand and
aggregate piles, fuel storage devices, pipes, cement mixers,
excavating equipment, etc., for more than 60 days unless there
is a valid building permit issued.
(c) Landscaping equipment and supplies, including, but not
limited to, mowers, chippers, shredders, pavers, mulch in bags
or piles for more than 60 days.
(d) Fuels, flammable liquids, tires and other motor vehicle
equipment and parts.
(8) Temporary outdoor storage units. PCPSFs in all R Residential
Zones or on residential uses in other zones. [Added 12-27-2011
by Ord. No. 40-11]
(a) Zoning permit. A zoning permit is required for the placement
of any PCPSF lasting longer than two weeks.
(b) Location.
[1] Front yard. No PCPSF shall be located within a front yard
unless located on an existing driveway.
[2] Side and rear yards. PCPSF must be located at least 10
feet from side and rear property lines.
(c) Time limit.
§ 345-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-11
332:848
[1] No PCPSF shall be located on specific residential premises
for a total of more than six months (180 days).
[2] Extension. One consecutive six-month extension of the
PCPSF zoning permit may be applied for. The granting of
any requested extension shall be based upon a review
conducted by the appropriate City officials. Unless
otherwise determined, no additional extensions shall be
permitted, and the approved extension shall not exceed
one consecutive six-month one-hundred-eighty-day time
period. No PCPSF shall be located on a specific residential
use for a total of more than one year (12 months).
[3] If more than one PCPSF is utilized:
[a] The allowable time period shall commence at the time
the first PCPSF is physically situated on the property.
[b] A maximum of two PCPSFs are permitted on any
property.
[4] If located on an existing driveway in a front or side yard
after the allowable six-month time period, a one-time
application to relocate in the rear yard is permitted as per
the time limit extension section of this subsection.
[5] If a PCPSF is used for construction purposes only and the
construction lasts longer than the one-year time period,
one additional one-year time period may be permitted
pending a new zoning permit application and City official
review.
(d) Other requirements. The following requirements shall be met
by the owner and/or occupier of the residential premises with
respect to a PCPSF:
[1] The PCPSF situated on residential property shall only be
used for the storage of personal property, furniture and
household items normally located on or in a residential
dwelling or premises.
[2] All PCPSFs shall not be used for storage of any type of
business equipment, fuels or flammable liquids.
[3] All such PCPSFs shall:
[a] Not exceed seven feet in height, 16 feet in length and
eight feet in width.
[b] All access doors shall be secured with locks.
§ 345-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-11
332:849
Q. No proposed development within 50 feet of Ocean Boulevard shall be
permitted to have any structure designed with either the rear elevation
or side elevations facing Ocean Boulevard.
R. A minimum thirty-foot front yard setback to all new buildings shall be
required for all properties fronting on Ocean Boulevard in the area
located between Morris Avenue and the Monmouth Beach boundary
line. No new parking facilities shall be permitted in this area in any
front or side yards abutting Ocean Boulevard.
S. In the event that any section, subsection or definition in this chapter
shall conflict with any provisions of the BOCA Code, the State Uniform
Construction Code or any other state or federal statute, rule or
regulation, and the municipality is prohibited by said statute, rule or
regulation from adopting stricter standards, then, in that case, the
Planning Board shall exercise its jurisdiction in reviewing the
application or applications before it is based on the applicable state or
federal statute, rule or regulation.
T. When a request is made to construct or add on to a single-family home
in a zone which does not permit the same, then, in that event, the
structure must comply with the least restrictive residential bulk
requirements.
U. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the
maximum height of any structure located on a lot, parcel or site within a
nonresidential zone, which lot, parcel or site is adjacent to a residential
zone (not including RC zones), shall be four stories. The minimum
setbacks for side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be as
follows:
(1) One to two stories: Must equal the minimum required for the
abutting residential zone.
(2) Three to four stories: fifty-foot minimum.
V. Decks and patios shall be permitted in any residential zone or in
conjunction with any residential use, as an accessory use, provided that
the following criteria be met:
(1) One-family.
(a) Ground level decks and patios located in the front yard must
meet the front yard setbacks of the particular residential zone
in which they are located.
(b) Any deck or patio located in a side or rear yard must be at least
10 feet from any side or rear property line.
(c) Elevated decks shall not be permitted in a front yard area.
§ 345-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-11
332:850
(d) Elevated decks located in a side or rear yard must meet the
side or rear yard setback requirement for buildings of the
particular residential zone in which they are located.
(e) Decks/patio areas shall be included with the building footprint
in determining maximum allowable lot coverage of all
buildings.
(2) Two-family and multifamily.
(a) Ten-foot minimum side/rear yard setback.
(b) Not permitted in front yard area of tract.
(c) Deck/patio cannot extend greater than 10 feet from structure.
(d) Architectural design, styling, use of materials and color must
be consistent and similar for any and all other decks/patios to
be constructed in the same multifamily use.
(e) All deck/patio areas shall be included within the building
footprint in determining maximum allowable lot coverage of all
buildings.
(f) All elevated decks shall be considered as balconies and must
be included in the building footprint when determining side
and rear yard setbacks.
(g) Guidelines for deck construction, materials and regulations
must be included in any homeowners' association/
condominium association rules and controls.
W. Principal permitted use or principal building.
(1) Unless otherwise permitted in a specific zone as set forth in Article
IV, Zone District Use Regulations, or as permitted in Subsection E,
no lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal permitted
use or one principal building.
(2) An exception to this is that there shall be no limit as to the number
of permitted principal commercial/professional uses allowed in one
principal building in the following zones: C-1, C-2, C-3, RC-1, RC-2,
R-8 and MB. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
X. Open space and recreation. In all major subdivisions and residential
site plans of six units or greater, the developer shall reserve an area as
specified in § 345-18 for recreational purposes. The developer shall
improve this area for active and passive recreation. Plans for the
improvements of this recreation area shall be an integral element of any
preliminary plat and final construction drawings for any major
subdivision or residential site plan of six units or greater, including the
requirements of §§ 345-9 through 345-18. The developer shall have the
option to post an off-tract assessment in the amount of $750 per lot or
§ 345-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-11
332:851
unit to be used for the construction of recreational facilities within the
City or provide services or property equal to said amount.
Y. Circular driveways. Circular driveways shall be permitted in the front
yard of a one-family dwelling located in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zones
subject to the following criteria:
(1) The driveway shall not be closer than 10 feet to any side or rear
property line.
(2) A separate parking area/garage entrance area must be provided in
any yard area, except the front yard, and cannot be located closer
than 10 feet to any property line.
(3) The maximum allowable width of any circular driveway shall be 10
feet. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 18-08]
Z. Outdoor dining. In those zones where outdoor dining is permitted, the
following regulations and conditions shall apply over and above any
others stated in this chapter:
(1) One additional parking space for every four outdoor seats
established shall be provided, unless there is no actual increase in
the seating capacity of the establishment (e.g., number of inside
seats reduced by number placed outside).
(2) Obtaining minor site plan approval.
(3) Obtaining Health Department approval.
(4) The entire outside area must be thoroughly cleaned at the end of
each night.
AA. Any handicapped ramps for single-family homes shall be allowed based
on the same standards as sidewalks or walkways for single-family
homes. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 28-00]
BB. Adult materials in retail establishments.174 [Added 9-25-2001 by Ord.
No. 35-01]
(1) No person who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession or
similar business with unimpeded access for persons under 18 years
of age or who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or
other publications, at retail, containing pictures, drawings or
photographs, shall display or permit to be displayed at his/her
business premises any obscene material at a location other than
behind the counter of the business establishment, in an area under
employee control. The public display of the obscene materials shall
constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made
or permitted this display. For the purpose of this section, "obscene
174. Editor's Note: For related provisions, see the definition of "video stores, retail" in § 345-3
and § 345-47, Adult entertainment uses.
§ 345-11 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-11
332:852
§ 345-12. Prohibited uses.
Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by this
chapter is hereby expressly prohibited from that district, and further
provided that the following uses and activities shall be specifically
prohibited in any zone in the City:
material" means any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in, or
consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound
recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details:
(a) Depicts or describes in a patent or offensive way ultimate
sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
masturbation, exploitatory functions, or lewd exhibition of
genitals.
(b) Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value when
taken as a whole.
(c) Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme
taken as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
(2) Any person or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with
the provisions of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
(3) This subsection shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, or any designee thereof of the City of Long
Branch, or any law enforcement officer of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Display. In this subsection, "display" shall be defined as the offering
for sale of an item, good, ware, publication or product through
visible presentation of same to the general public.
(5) The utilization of greater than 2% of the floor area of the interior of
the establishment for the display of obscene material shall be
presumptive evidence of the use of said premises being for adult
entertainment purposes.
A. All billboards, signboards, advertising signs or devices not expressly
related to the business being conducted on the premises or otherwise
specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Auction markets.
C. Junkyards and automobile wrecking or disassembly yards.
§ 345-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-12
332:853
§ 345-13. Application for use variance.
D. The keeping and raising of any animals other than dogs or cats or other
animals licensed by the Health Department. [Amended 4-24-2018 by
Ord. No. 9-18]
E. Trailer courts and trailer coaches used as dwelling or commercial
activities related to the outdoor storage or display of trailer coaches.
F. Privately operated dumps for the disposal of garbage, trash, junk,
refuse and similar materials.
G. Any use of any building or premises in such a manner that the health,
morals, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered.
H. Any use which emits excessive and objectionable amounts of dust,
fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products. (See
§ 345-45.)
I. The manufacture of concrete and bituminous materials.
J. The use of any premises for the public sale of sex paraphernalia
(excepting birth control devices) or for the exhibition of motion pictures
by individual viewing machines.
K. The sorting, baling or storage of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap
or waste material, except that such sorting, baling or storage may take
place in conjunction with a permitted recycling plant as set forth in
§ 345-34A(12).
L. Any use of public or private property as a location for trucks, wagons,
carts or any other mobile means of vending merchandise, foodstuffs or
other wares of any kind.
M. Automobile repair or automobile body centers, shops or businesses.
N. Boardinghouse, rooming house or lodging house.
A. An application for a building permit for a use not permitted by this
chapter must be submitted to the Board of Adjustment for a variance in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The applicant shall file with
the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment 22 copies of an application for
a hearing before the Board of Adjustment. Such application shall also
include 22 copies of the plan which conforms to the requirements of
§ 345-76B(1) through (6). See the checklist and application form at the
end of this chapter.175
B. Any use variance granted by the Board of Adjustment shall require site
plan review and approval as hereinafter set forth in this chapter, except
for applications for single-family or two-family homes. The Zoning
175. Editor's Note: The application form and checklist may be found on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 345-12 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-13
332:854
§ 345-14. Site plan review.
Board may refer the site plan to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation prior to final action thereon. Such reference shall not
extend the time for action by the Zoning Board, whether or not the
Planning Board has submitted its report.
C. In connection with any use variance application, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may also require an opinion from the Planning Board as to
whether or not the proposed use will be compatible with the Master
Plan and whether or not the proposed use will adversely affect the
overall zoning plan.
D. In connection with a site plan approval portion of a use variance
application, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall distribute one set of
building and landscaping and site plans to the departments listed in
§ 345-14. Each of those departments shall prepare a written report
containing their department's recommendations concerning the site
plan application and present it to the Zoning Board no later than 10
working days prior to the meeting at which the site plan application is
to be discussed before the entire Board.
A. Any application for a building permit for other than a single- or twofamily
home for new construction or for a change, addition or expansion
of a new or existing use shall require site plan approval. The application
(three copies) shall be accompanied by 14 copies of the building,
landscaping and site plans for the portion of the project to be developed
and such other information as shall be required. See the checklist and
application form at the end of this chapter.176
(1) It shall be filed at least 31 days prior to the Planning Board meeting
at which the site plan application is to be discussed before the
entire Board. The Planning Department shall transmit copies of the
plans and information to the City Planning Board or a committee
thereof for review and recommendations to assure that the plans
comply with the area and design requirements set forth in this
chapter and to permit the applicant to make such changes as may
be necessary to bring his plans into conformance with the
requirements.
(2) The Secretary of the City Planning Board shall distribute one set of
building and landscaping and site plans to the agencies or
departments listed in Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land,
§ 300-7B(3). Each of these departments shall prepare a written
report containing their department's recommendations concerning
the site plan application and present it to the Planning Board no
later than five working days prior to the Planning Board meeting at
176. Editor's Note: The application form and checklist may be found on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 345-13 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:855
which the site plan application is to be discussed before the entire
Board.
(3) If the applicant proposes to develop the property in successive
stages, similar detailed plans shall be submitted to the City
Planning Board for each portion of the applicant's property prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(4) Plans and information to be submitted shall include the following:
(a) A written description of the existing use of the site and any
buildings on the site. The description shall contain a written
description of the proposed operations of the building(s),
including the number of employees or members of
nonresidential buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be
worked and the maximum number of employees on each shift;
expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic, emission of noise,
glare, air and water pollution; safety hazards; and anticipated
expansion plans incorporated into the building design.
(b) A statement of compliance contained on the site plan, signed
by the applicant and signed and sealed by the architect or
engineer responsible for the preparation of the site plan as
follows: "I hereby certify that this document complies with all
Long Branch codes and ordinances."
(c) Certified building plans for all new structures or existing
structures to be structurally modified, including floor plans and
building elevations.
(d) A map, known as the "site plan," signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or architect, containing the following
information:
[1] The existing boundaries of the site as certified by a
professional engineer or licensed surveyor, showing all
structures and physical features, including all existing and
proposed on-site grading.
[2] The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways
and location, size and capacity of all areas to be used for
off-street parking, loading and unloading and streetlights.
[3] The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways and
all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
[4] The design and treatment of buffer areas and screening
devices to be maintained and including dimensions of all
areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees or other
landscaping devices.
[5] Provisions for water supply, fire hydrants, storm drainage
and sewer disposal.
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-14
332:856
[6] Sufficient data to indicate the effect of the proposed
development in producing traffic congestion and safety
hazards and sufficient additional data to enable the
Planning Board and the Construction Code Official to
determine compliance with the design requirements set
forth in this chapter.
[7] The size, shape and location of any area reserved for
public use or any area of open space to be set aside for the
use and benefit of the residents of the development.
[8] Designation of any land subject to flooding and
information on such measures as will be taken to protect
and conserve soil from erosion.
[9] Sufficient information to show that the proposed
development will be in conformity with the Air Safety and
Zoning Act of 1983.177
[10] Sufficient information to show that the proposed
development will be in conformity with Chapter 293, Solid
Waste.
[11] Sufficient information to determine that the proposed
development will be in conformity with the State Highway
Access Management Code with respect to any state
highways within the municipality, any access management
code adopted by Monmouth County with respect to any
county roads and any municipal access management code
with respect to municipal streets.
[12] Sufficient information to determine that the proposed
development will not endanger potable water supply
reservoirs as a result of pollution or other degradation of
water quality and that such provisions for protection shall
be in accordance with any siting, performance or other
standards or guidelines adopted for that purpose by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(e) The Green Checklist178 must be completed and submitted with
any application for site plan or Board approval. While
completion of the Green Checklist is mandatory, it is for
information purposes only, and compliance with the items
found therein will not become a condition of approval. [Added
5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14]
B. No application for development shall be acted upon unless and until it is
determined to be complete in every respect, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3, including but not limited to necessary supporting data,
177. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.
178. Editor's Note: The Green Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 345-14 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:857
papers, certificates, plans and fees and all other items set forth in
the Long Branch development application checklists dated February 1,
2006, incorporated herein by reference.179 [Amended 4-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 9-06]
(1) Any applicant for development shall be given a copy of the
aforesaid checklists upon request for a development application.
He may seek waiver of any of the aforesaid provisions pursuant to
the aforesaid statute.
(2) In the case of a change of use, expansion of use or addition of use to
an existing structure when no structural changes are necessary,
only Subsection A(4)(a) through (d) as above are specifically
required. In that case the applicant will only need to show sufficient
attention has been paid to all items on the checklist and include
adequate details so as to answer all questions as to the safety and
desirability of the proposed use.
C. Preliminary site plan approval. Site plan approval of 10 acres or less or
10 dwelling units or less:
(1) Upon submission to the City Administrative Office of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and 10
dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
(2) If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended application for development
shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the
original application for development. The Planning Board shall, if
the proposed development complies with the chapter, grant
preliminary site plan approval.
(3) As a condition of preliminary approval, it shall be solely the
applicant's responsibility to submit proof of compliance to any
subject conditions of preliminary approval in one document and
one complete submission to the Planning Department. This
submission must be provided to the Planning Department prior to
any application being scheduled for final approval and must be
submitted a minimum of 10 days prior to any Planning Board
Meeting. [Added 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
D. Final site plan approval.
179. Editor's Note: The application checklists may be found on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-14
332:858
(1) The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the above standards and the conditions of
preliminary approval.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Construction Code
Official or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of the
Planning Board Secretary as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval, herein required, and the Construction Code Official shall
issue the required building permit.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the site plan application by the
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the City
Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
(4) Bonds and fees. Prior to final approval of the application, the
subdivider, where required, shall post with the City Clerk a
performance guaranty as required by Chapter 300, Subdivision of
Land, § 300-11, Required improvements, and shall post with the
Director of Finance a fee for engineering inspections equal to 5% of
the estimated cost of the improvements, as determined by the City
Engineer. This fee shall be in addition to the amount of the
performance guaranty and all application fees. Upon completion of
the development and all inspections, and at the request of the
developer, the developer shall receive an accounting of the
expended funds, and any unspent funds shall be returned to the
developer. Should the initial deposit be insufficient to cover
inspection costs, the developer shall deposit additional sums upon
notice from the Director of Finance. Each additional deposit shall
be in amounts not to exceed 50% of the initial deposit. The City
Clerk and Finance Director shall provide the subdivider with a
certificate indicating compliance with the requirements for
submission to the Planning Board for attachment to the application.
(5) As a condition of final approval, it shall be solely the applicant's
responsibility to submit proof of compliance to any conditions of
final approval in one document and in one complete submission to
the Planning Department prior to applying for any zoning and
construction permits. [Added 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
E. Stamp of approval.
§ 345-14 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:859
(1) The approved site plan shall be impressed with a stamp showing
Planning Board approval and signed by the Chairperson of the
Planning Board and the Secretary of the Planning Board. Said
signatures shall be dated.
(2) Upon receipt by the Construction Code Official of the report of the
Planning Board showing the conditions set forth in this chapter
have been complied with and receipt of the site plan stamped and
signed as above, and upon compliance with the standards set forth
in the building code,180 the Construction Code Official may issue
the required building permit. In the event that the Planning Board
shall not make a finding that the conditions set forth in this chapter
have been complied with or shall not stamp and sign the site plan,
the Construction Code Official shall refuse to issue a building
permit, except as in the case of Subsection D(4), Bonds and fees,
and the reasons for such refusal shall be set forth in writing.
F. If the Construction Code Official, acting upon the recommendations of
the Planning Board, issues or denies the permit, then in either case any
person aggrieved by such determination and action by the Construction
Code Official may appeal such decision as permitted under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
G. Site plan review and approval shall not be required for individual lot
applications for detached one-family homes.
H. Improvements required. Prior to the granting of final approval, the
applicant shall have furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate
installation of the following improvements. All of the listed
improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the City
Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least five days prior
to the start of construction. No underground installation shall be
covered until approved and inspected by the City Engineer. The
performance guaranties required herein shall comply with and be
administered pursuant to the conditions set forth in Subsection I.
(1) Topsoil protection. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed as to provide at least six inches of cover to all
areas of the site and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting and
shall be governed by the ordinance of the City relative thereto.
(2) Monuments. To be of the size and shape required by N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.181
(3) Sewers. Sanitary sewers designed in accordance with the
regulations of the Sewage Authority shall be installed in a manner
adequate to handle all present and probable future development.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Construction Codes, Uniform.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-14
332:860
(4) Sidewalks. All streets shall be provided with concrete sidewalks at
least four feet in width and four inches in thickness, except at
driveways, where the sidewalk shall be at least six inches in
thickness. Where a site adjoins an existing street on one side only,
the sidewalk shall be constructed only on that side. Where existing
sidewalks are in disrepair, the applicant shall be required to repair,
reconstruct or replace the same as directed by the Board.
(5) Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed on both sides of all streets, shall
be not less than 18 inches deep and six inches in width at the top
and eight inches in width at the bottom and shall be constructed of
a minimum concrete mixture of one part cement, two parts washed
sand and three parts washed gravel, or other suitable aggregate.
The concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds
per square inch after 28 days. The minimum length of blocks shall
be 10 feet, with a preformed bituminous expansion joint filler onehalf-
inch thick, installed every 40 feet. The finish shall be a float
finish with corners rounded. Where existing curbs are in disrepair,
the applicant shall be required to repair, reconstruct or replace the
same as directed by the Board.
(6) Streets. All streets shall be improved with a two-and-one-half-inch
two-course-type S.M. bituminous concrete pavement in accordance
with current New Jersey State Highway Department specifications
on a five-and-one-half-inch thick, two-and-one-half-inch size broken
stone base. Where subbase conditions of the proposed street are
wet, springy or of such a nature in the opinion of the City Engineer
that paving would be inadvisable without first treating the subbase,
the subbase shall be prepared by the installation of suitable
subsurface drainage or other means as may be required to meet the
special condition. The method employed to stabilize the base must
be approved by the City Engineer.
(7) Drainage. All streets shall be provided with catch basins and pipes
which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are necessary for proper
surface drainage. The requirements of this section shall not be
satisfied by the construction of dry wells.
(a) Catch basins shall be designed in accordance with New Jersey
Highway Department standard plans and specifications.
Frames and grates shall be Campbell Foundry Co. Pattern No.
2541 or No. 2548 stream flow grating with eight-inch curb
face, or equal.
(b) Storm drain pipes shall be reinforced concrete culvert pipe
extra strength, conforming to A.S.T.M. specifications C76-55
when installed in streets, and may be reinforced concrete
sewer pipe, standard strength conforming to A.S.T.M.
specifications C75-55 when installed off streets. Joints shall be
Bell and Spigot, properly caulked with jute or oakum and filled
with cement mortar, or shall be provided with a suitable rubber
§ 345-14 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:861
gasket of a type approved by the Municipal Engineer and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(c) Manholes shall be designed in accordance with New Jersey
State Highway Department standard plans and specifications.
Frames and covers shall be Campbell Foundry Co. Pattern
1203 or equal.
(d) Poured concrete headwalls shall be constructed at the point of
discharge of all storm drains in accordance with New Jersey
State Highway Department standard plans and specifications.
(e) At through intersections, where it is necessary to carry surface
water across a street, it shall be accomplished by the use of a
minimum of a twelve-inch diameter cast-iron culvert pipe. At
other than through intersections, water may be carried across
streets in dished gutters constructed of portland cement
concrete or bituminous concrete type S.M.
(f) Storm drains shall be located within the curblines of streets,
with catch basins located at the end of curb returns wherever
possible.
(g) Where drainage water from the streets shown on the plat
discharges on the property of either the owner or others,
proper easements shall be obtained by the applicant and be
furnished to the City governing the rights to discharge such
drainage water.
(8) Water mains. All streets shall have water mains not less than six
inches in diameter installed therein for the entire length thereof if
the site is located within the area served by a water company
unless the requirements hereof are expressly waived in whole or in
part by the Planning Board.
I. Performance guaranty.
(1) No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
applicant shall have filed with the City Clerk a performance
guaranty sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such
improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the
City Engineer and assuring the installation of such uncompleted
improvements on or before an agreed date. The performance
guaranty may be in the form of a performance bond which shall be
issued by a bonding or surety company after full compliance or any
other type of surety approved by the City Attorney, so long as a
minimum of 10% of the sum of the total performance guaranty shall
be in cash or certified check. All such guaranties shall run to and be
in favor of the City.
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-14
332:862
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in any redevelopment zone of
the City of Long Branch the Redevelopment Agency may, in its
sole discretion, waive the requirement for the posting of a cash
portion of a performance guarantee. Such waiver will be based
upon the extent of the project and the circumstances thereof.
Should the Redevelopment Agency deem it appropriate at any
time during a project's completion, it shall, in its sole
discretion, have the right to impose cash bond requirements in
the event of any changed circumstances which would compel
the need for cash bonds; and [Added 12-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 61-02]
(b) Said circumstances include but are not limited to slow downs
in construction, failure of bond companies to pay promptly all
invoices, insolvency of bond company or failure of developer to
comply with all terms of the redeveloper agreement's
requirements. [Added 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 61-02]
(2) The performance guaranty shall be approved by the City Attorney
as to form, sufficiency and execution. The performance guaranty
shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board, but in no
case for a term more than three years.
(a) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for
which the performance guaranty has been provided may be
extended by the governing body by resolution, but such
additional period shall not exceed three years. As a condition
or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as the
case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation as determined as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
(b) A developer wishing to reduce the amount of the performance
guaranty after portions of the required improvements have
been installed shall make application by letter to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall direct the City Engineer to
inspect the applicant's improvements and report to the Board
the condition and status of the improvements. If the Planning
Board decides to recommend a release of all or part of the
performance guaranty, it shall advise the City Council and the
Mayor of its decision. The City Council may instruct the City
Treasurer by resolution to release all or part of the
performance guaranty.
(3) If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be
liable to the City for the reasonable costs of the expenses incurred.
The City may take any and all legal steps available to obtain the
installation of such improvements.
§ 345-14 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:863
(4) A maintenance bond shall be furnished by the subdivider upon
acceptance of the streets and public improvements by the City. The
maintenance bond, which shall be issued by a bonding or surety
company approved by the Council, shall be in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the original estimated cost of construction of the
required improvements and shall run to and be in favor of the City
for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvements. The bond shall be approved by the City Attorney as
to form, sufficiency and execution.
(5) Disposition of guaranties.
(a) The City Clerk shall hold the instrument of performance
guaranty. Duplicate copies of that instrument shall be held by
the Planning Board.
(b) The comptroller shall hold all of the cash portions of
performance guaranties and deposit them in interest-bearing
accounts.
(6) Release of guaranties.
(a) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of the same to the public
system, the obligor may notify the governing body, in writing,
by certified mail addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of
the completion or substantial completion of improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. Thereupon
the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements of
which such notice has been given and shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the governing body, indicating its
approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements,
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
(b) The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the
Municipal Engineer and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by
certified mail, of the contents of the report and the action of
the approving authority with relation thereto, no later than 65
days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of improvements. Where partial approval is
granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant
to its performance guaranty, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the governing body to send or
provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be
deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability,
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-14
332:864
pursuant to such performance guaranty for such
improvements.
(c) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
(d) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right
of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any
determination of the governing body or the Municipal
Engineer.
(e) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing
inspection improvements, provided that the municipality shall
require of the developer a deposit for all reasonably
anticipated fees to be paid to the Municipal Engineer for such
inspection.
(f) In the event that the inspection fees required to be posted
pursuant to the provisions set forth herein are not sufficient to
cover the reasonable inspection fees paid to the City Engineer
for the foregoing inspection of improvements, the developer
shall be required to deposit additional funds with the Finance
Director to cover the fees paid to the City Engineer for such
inspection.
(7) This section shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53,
as amended, and any portion of this section that is inconsistent
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, as amended, be and in the same is hereby
revoked. [Added 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 4-18]
J. Waiver of site plan approval. The Planning Board may waive the
requirement for the submission of a site plan or minor site plan for its
review and approval where, in the opinion of the Board, formal approval
and additional data are unnecessary to protect and advance the
purposes of Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, and this chapter;
provided, however, that the Board may impose reasonable restrictions
as to styles, design and like matters, notwithstanding the grant of such
waiver. The Board may, in lieu of a formal site plan, require an applicant
to submit such sketches, drawings and/or renderings as it deems
necessary. The Planning Board shall only grant such a waiver if it finds,
on the basis of an on-site inspection and any other documentation
presented, that the existing conditions on the premises involved are
satisfactory for the proposed use. Application for a waiver of site plan
approval shall be submitted, in writing, to the Secretary of the Planning
Board with a fee of $50 payable to the City of Long Branch. The
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application at its first
regular meeting that follows by 31 days of the submission to the
Secretary, as in the case of an application for site plan approval
§ 345-14 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-14
332:865
§ 345-15. Minor site plan.
Any applicant meeting the definitional requirements of a minor site plan
who applies for such approval may, at the discretion of the governing board
(Planning Board or Zoning Board, where appropriate), submit plans which
have not been prepared by licensed professionals. Such site plans, floor plan
layouts and/or exterior sketches must be legibly drawn and contain enough
information to enable the Board to make an intelligent decision concerning
the project in question, but in no event shall they be required to contain
more detail than required for a construction permit. All such plans must be
superimposed on a currently valid survey plat. Any applicant who receives
minor site plan approval, however, will be required to meet any additional
plan requirements of the Health Department and Building Department of
the City of Long Branch prior to applying for and obtaining any necessary
permits.
§ 345-16. Extension of approvals.
Any request for extension of approvals must provide the following and
conform to the specific criteria for extensions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-52a and 40:55D-52b, where applicable:
specified in this section. The Planning Board shall act on the application
for a waiver at its meeting during which it holds the public hearing or
within such additional time as may be agreeable to the applicant. Any
waiver of site plan approval shall be valid for the same period of time
as an approval of a site plan would have been valid.
K. Off-tract/off-site improvements. The approving authority shall comply
with the procedures and provisions of Chapter 300, Subdivision of
Land, § 300-13, Off-tract/off-site contributions, in granting final site
plan approval.
A. File completed extension request form.
B. Provide appropriate fee as prescribed in Chapter 69, Land Use
Procedures, § 69-29, Fees.
C. Provide six copies of the most recent architectural elevations and floor
plans, along with six copies of the most recent site plan, landscaping
plan, lighting plan, grading/drainage plan and soil sediment control
plan.
D. Public notice shall be given pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, where
applicable.
E. Any request for an approval extension must be filed at least 30 days
prior to the project's previously recorded day of expiration.
§ 345-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17
332:866
§ 345-17. Floodplain flood hazard area regulations.182 [Amended
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 3-13]
A. Purpose and policy. It has been established that since floodplain
developments and encroachments aggravate flood conditions, the most
appropriate method of alleviating such conditions is through regulation
of such developments and encroachments. It is therefore determined
that the special and paramount public interest in the floodplain justifies
the regulation of property located therein as provided in this section for
the protection of the persons and property of the inhabitants and for the
preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Applicability. The restrictions of this section are applicable to areas in
the City subject to flooding in areas known as the "floodplain" or the
"flood hazard area" as defined in this section. These restrictions shall be
in addition to the controls of the applicable zoning district covered by
the flood hazard area as defined as follows:
(1) "Floodplain" shall mean the areas, usually a relatively flat or low
land area adjoining a river, street, watercourse, ocean, bay or lake,
including the floodway and flood fringe areas, as identified as a
flood hazard area per this section;
(2) "Flood hazard area" shall mean the maximum area of the floodplain
which is likely to be flooded once every 100 years. For the purposes
of this section, it is the area identified in accordance with Section
1360 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and delineated as
advisory flood hazard zones and special flood hazard areas on the
Official FEMA Advisory Flood Map and Insurance Rate Map as
defined in Ordinance Chapter 177.
C. Regulations. The following regulations shall govern development in the
floodplain and the flood hazard area:
(1) All conditions set forth in the following chapters and sections of the
City Ordinance:
(a) Flood Damage Prevention: Chapter 177;
(b) Height: § 345-10A(4);
(c) Flood hazard permit requirements: § 345-17D;
(d) Stream corridor protection: § 345-17.1.
(2) Flood zone determination. Written confirmation as to the flood zone
determination for a particular property within the City of Long
Branch may be requested from the floodplain manager.
D. Flood hazard requirements.
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 177, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 345-17 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-17
332:867
§ 345-17.1. Stream corridor protection. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-12]
(1) Advisory flood hazard zones and special flood hazard areas.
Properties located within advisory flood hazard zones and special
flood hazard areas as defined in City Ordinance Chapter 177, Flood
Damage Prevention, are required to comply with this section.
(2) Applications. All applications require:
(a) Elevation certificate;
(b) Zoning and/or grading permits;
(c) Construction permits as required by the Building Department;
(d) Compliance with NJDEP flood hazard area rules;
(e) Compliance with City Ordinance Chapter 177 and Zoning
Ordinance §§ 345-10A(4), 345-17, and 345-17.1.
(3) The following activities do not require a zoning or grading permit:
(a) The repair or maintenance of a building such as replacing
siding, windows or roofs in the same location;
(b) The repair, renovation or reconstruction of any structure
destroyed in a storm as long as the structure is replaced within
the same footprint, in the same location and size as measured
in three dimensions (length, width and height), is not enlarged,
does not increase the use, number of units, bedrooms and
parking spaces, and does not change the existing grade;
(c) The repair, renovation or reconstruction of any accessory
structure (i.e., detached garage, shed, patio, fence, deck, etc.)
destroyed in a storm as long as the structure is replaced within
the same footprint, in the same location and size as measured
in three dimensions (length, width and height), is not enlarged,
does not increase the use, and does not change the existing
grade;
(d) Debris removal and clean up;
(e) The grading of the property less than 18 inches to alleviate
flooding or ponding problems and without increasing runoff or
drainage to neighboring properties.
A. Purpose.
(1) The governing body of the City of Long Branch finds that properly
vegetated riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes or other surface
water bodies (referred to as "stream corridors" or "riparian areas")
provide important environmental protection and resource
management benefits. It is necessary to protect and maintain the
§ 345-17 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17.1
332:868
beneficial character of riparian areas by implementing
specifications for the establishment, protection, and maintenance
of vegetation along surface water bodies within Long Branch,
consistent with the interest of landowners in making reasonable
economic use of parcels of land that include such designated areas.
(2) The purpose of this section is to designate riparian zones and to
establish minimal acceptable requirements for the design of buffers
to protect riparian areas; to protect the water quality of
watercourses, lakes and other significant water resources; to
protect riparian and aquatic ecosystems; and to provide for the
environmentally sound use of Long Branch's land resources.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Construction Office or Zoning Office with all of the
powers delegated, assigned, or assumed by them according to
statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other
legal entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment,
Construction Office, or Zoning Office to engage in an activity that
is regulated by the provisions of this section and that would be
located, in whole or in part, within a regulated riparian zone.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies, including, but not limited to,
lakes, ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up
to and including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs,
as shown on the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), Category One
waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Map or in the County
Soil Surveys. There is no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean
or along any man-made lagoon or oceanfront barrier island, spit or
peninsula.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by
a landscape architect, professional engineer or other qualified
professional that evaluates the effects of any proposed activity
or use on any riparian zone. The plan shall identify existing
conditions, all proposed activities, and all proposed management
techniques, including any measures necessary to offset
disturbances to any affected riparian zone.
§ 345-17.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-17.1
332:869
(2) All other words and/or terms utilized in this section shall be as
defined or described in the Water Quality Management Planning
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:15, the Stormwater Management rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8, and/or Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, as
they exist as of the effective date of this section and as they may be
amended over time.
C. Establishment of riparian zones.
(1) Applicability. Except as provided in Subsections D, F and G below,
riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be
protected from avoidable disturbance. Riparian zones shall be
delineated along all surface water bodies in the City of Long
Branch as defined in this section, including but not limited to the
following: Branchport Creek, Manahassett Creek, Troutman's
Creek, Poplar Brook, Shrewsbury River, Whale Pond Brook, and
Takanassee Lake.
(2) Applicant's responsibility. The applicant or designated
representative shall be responsible for the initial determination of
the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for identifying the
area of the riparian zone on any plan submitted to the City of Long
Branch in conjunction with an application for a construction
permit, subdivision, land development, or other improvement that
requires plan submissions or permits. This initial determination
shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer and,
where required by state regulation, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(3) Mapping standards. Riparian zones shall be delineated as follows:
(a) There is no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean or along any
man-made lagoon, stormwater management basin, or
oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
(b) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed. (There are no C1
waters in Long Branch.)
(c) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters.
[1] Any trout production water and all upstream waters,
including tributaries (none in Long Branch);
[2] Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water (none in Long
Branch);
§ 345-17.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17.1
332:870
[3] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal as identified in the
City's 2011 Environmental Resource Inventory, which is
critically dependent on the surface water body for survival,
and all upstream waters (including tributaries) within one
linear mile as measured along the length of the regulated
water; and
[4] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains acid-producing soils (none in Long Branch).
(d) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet
wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
(e) If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body,
the portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body
is measured landward as follows:
[1] Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center
line;
[2] Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
[3] Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the mean high
water line; and
[4] Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland
complex, through which water flows but which lacks a
discernible channel, the riparian zone is measured
landward of the feature's center line.
D. Permitted uses. Unless otherwise provided for by this section, riparian
zones shall remain in or be restored to their natural, indigenous state,
with no clearing or cutting of trees and brush, altering of watercourses,
regrading or construction. For riparian zones in C1 waters, permitted
uses are governed by the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13,
unless otherwise exempt. The following shall be permitted uses or
activities in all other riparian zones, provided that they do not disturb
the indigenous character of the area:
(1) Public and private parkland and open space uses that are primarily
passive in character, provided near-stream vegetation is preserved.
These uses do not require approval by the Zoning Officer or
compliance with an approved riparian zone management plan.
Such uses include wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves, and fishing areas operated for the protection and
§ 345-17.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-17.1
332:871
propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures. Such uses also
include swimming and fishing areas, boat launches, unpaved
hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, provided that said trails have been
stabilized with pervious materials.
(2) Open fences for which a permit has been issued to the extent
required by local ordinance.
(3) Crossings by recreational trails, roads, railroads, stormwater lines,
sanitary sewer lines, water lines and public utility transmission
lines, subject to approval by the Zoning Officer, provided that the
land disturbance is the minimum required to accomplish the
permitted use, that any applicable state permits are acquired, that
any disturbance is offset by buffer improvements in compliance
with an approved riparian zone management plan, and that the
area of the crossing is stabilized against significant erosion due to
its use as a crossing.
(4) Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conforms
to the guidelines of an approved riparian zone management plan,
or wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, subject to
approval by the Zoning Officer and subject to compliance with an
approved riparian zone management plan.
(5) Maintenance of landscaping, including removal of dead vegetation,
fallen trees and in-channel debris; pruning for reasons of imminent
public safety; removal of invasive species as noted on a list that will
be kept and updated by the City Environmental Commission.
(6) Reconstruction of a structure that predates the adoption of this
section in the event of damage or destruction by fire or natural
hazards, provided the reconstruction does not have a greater
footprint or total area than that of the damaged structure and no
change in land use occurs. Any such reconstruction shall be
performed in accordance with current state and federal
construction standards within floodplains.
E. Prohibited uses. Any use or activity not specifically authorized in
Subsection D, F or G of this section shall be prohibited within the
riparian zone. By way of example, the following activities and facilities
are prohibited:
(1) Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation
removal for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization or
restoration projects that require vegetation removal or grading
prior to implementation.
(2) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
§ 345-17.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17.1
332:872
(3) Alteration of watercourses, regrading, dumping of trash, soil, dirt,
fill, vegetative or other debris.
(4) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of
the Soil Conservation District.
(5) Roads, driveways, or motor vehicle traffic except where otherwise
permitted by this section.
(6) Parking lots.
F. Variances. To the extent allowed by the Stormwater Management rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules (N.J.A.C.
7:13), new disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this section may be granted by the Board of Adjustment
in accordance with § 40:55D-70 of the Municipal Land Use Law,
provided that:
(1) The disturbance is proposed to be located on a preexisting lot
(existing as of the effective date of this section) and there is
insufficient room outside the riparian zone for the proposed use
otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning; and
(2) There is no other reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in
the riparian zone, including obtaining variances from setback or
other requirements that would allow conformance with the riparian
zone requirements.
G. Exceptions. To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management
rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:13), and subject to review and approval by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to the extent required by
those rules, the following disturbances for projects or activities in the
riparian zone established by this section are allowed:
(1) Reconstruction within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
(2) Linear development with no feasible alternative route;
(3) Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor
restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or project approved
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection;
(4) Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or
water-dependent recreation that meets the requirements of the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
(5) Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or federal oversight
§ 345-17.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-17.1
332:873
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq., or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C.
§ 9601 et seq.
H. Performance standards. All encroachments proposed into riparian
zones in C1 waters shall comply with the requirements of the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and shall be subject to
review and approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, unless exempt. As noted, no C1 waters exist in Long Branch.
The following conditions shall apply to all other riparian zones:
(1) All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be
designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the riparian zone to
accommodate primary structures, any normal accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
(2) Any lands proposed for development which include all or a portion
of a riparian zone shall, as a condition of any major subdivision or
major site plan approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation
of any portions of the riparian zone which are not vegetated at the
time of the application or which were disturbed by prior land uses,
including agricultural use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize native
and noninvasive tree and plant species to the maximum extent
practicable in accordance with an approved riparian zone
management plan.
(3) For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this
section, but for which a building permit or a preliminary site plan
approval has not been obtained or is no longer valid, the required
minimum front, side, and rear setbacks may extend into the
riparian zone, provided that a deed restriction and/or conservation
easement is applied which prohibits clearing or construction in the
riparian zone.
(4) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow through
a riparian zone and shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (See N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.) If
stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a riparian
zone cannot comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability, then
the proposed stabilization measures must meet the requirements of
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et
seq., and have an approved flood hazard area permit.
I. Riparian zone management plan. Unless otherwise exempt under this
section, a landowner, applicant, or developer proposing any activities
regulated by this section and requiring major subdivision or site plan
approval shall submit a riparian zone management plan to the City
§ 345-17.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17.1
332:874
Engineer as described in this section. The riparian zone management
plan shall be prepared by an environmental professional, professional
engineer or other qualified professional and fully evaluate the effects of
any proposed uses on the riparian zone. A riparian zone management
plan is not required where the riparian zone is not being disturbed and
conservation easements/deed restrictions are applied to ensure there
will be no future clearing or disturbance of the riparian zone.
(1) The management plan shall identify existing conditions, including:
(a) Vegetation;
(b) Field delineated surface water bodies;
(c) Field delineated wetlands;
(d) One-hundred-year floodplain;
(e) Flood hazard areas, including floodway and flood-fringe areas,
as delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
(f) Soil classifications as found on soil surveys;
(g) Existing subdrainage areas with HUC-14 (Hydrologic Unit
Code) designations; and
(h) Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of
slopes that are less than 15%, above 15% but less that 20%,
and greater than 20%.
(2) The management plan shall describe all proposed uses and
activities and fully evaluate the effects of those uses and activities
in a riparian zone; and describe all proposed management
techniques, including proposed vegetation and any other measures
necessary to offset disturbances or enhance the riparian zone.
(3) The management plan shall include provisions in narrative and/or
graphic form specifying:
(a) The manner in which the area within the riparian zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
(b) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the riparian
zone.
(c) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to
be necessary to maintain and manage the riparian zone.
(d) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground
cover, understory shrubs, and trees that form an overhead
canopy. Vegetation selected must be native, noninvasive
§ 345-17.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-17.1
332:875
species, consistent with the soil, slope and moisture conditions
of the site. Dominant vegetation in the riparian zone
management plan shall consist of plant species that are suited
to the riparian zone environment. The City Engineer may
require species' suitability to be verified by qualified experts
from the Soil Conservation District, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, US Fish and Wildlife Service and/or
state or federal forest agencies.
(4) The management plan shall be reviewed by the City Engineer in
consultation with the Environmental Commission. The City
Engineer shall prepare and submit a report with recommendations
to the applicable administrative authority prior to the authority
rendering a decision.
(5) The applicable administrative authority may require performance
guarantees to ensure implementation of the management plan
covering a period of not less than two years in the form of a bond,
cash or letter of credit, which shall be provided to the City prior to
the issuance of any permits.
J. Appeals. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone
boundary determination under this section may appeal to the City
Engineer. The party contesting the location of the riparian zone
boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal. Any
party wishing to appeal the determination of the City Engineer shall file
a notice of appeal with the Long Branch City Council within 20 days of
receipt of the City Engineer's decision. The party contesting the
location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of proof in
case of any such appeal.
K. Inspections. Lands within or adjacent to an identified riparian zone may
be inspected by an authorized municipal representative as part of the
normal review process under the following circumstances:
(1) A subdivision or land development plan is submitted.
(2) A construction permit is requested for new construction which
results in a net increase in lot coverage.
(3) A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is proposed.
(4) Excessive or potentially problematic erosion is present, other
problems are discovered, or at any time when the presence of an
unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the attention of
municipal officials or when the downstream surface waters are
indicating reduction in quality.
L. Enforcement. When a riparian zone has been altered in violation of this
section, all ongoing development work shall stop and the riparian zone
shall be restored. The City shall have the authority to issue a stop-work
§ 345-17.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-17.1
332:876
§ 345-18. Open space and recreation.
order to cease all ongoing development work and order restoration,
rehabilitation or replacement measures at the expense of the owner
or other responsible party, as appropriate, in order to compensate for
violation of the provisions of this section.
A. All major subdivisions and residential site plans of six units or greater
shall be required to provide open space. Developed open space is
designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents
of the development. Undeveloped open space is designed to preserve
important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas.
B. Minimum requirements.
(1) Amount of open space required. Ten percent of the buildable area
of the tract proposed for development shall be set aside for
undeveloped and developed open space.
(2) Size of open space parcels. The area of each parcel of open space
designed for active recreational purposes shall be of such minimum
dimensions as to be functionally usable and meet or exceed
minimums set by the NRPA, National Recreation and Parks
Association, or other standards acceptable to the approving
authority.
(3) Location of open space parcels. Open space parcels should be
convenient to the dwelling units they are intended to serve.
However, because of noise generation, they should be sited with
sensitivity to surrounding development.
C. Improvement of open space parcels.
(1) Developed open space. The Board or other approving authority may
require the installation of recreational facilities and site
improvements, taking into consideration:
(a) The character of the open space land.
(b) The estimated age and the recreation needs of persons likely to
reside in the development.
(c) The proximity of municipal recreation facilities.
(d) The cost of the recreational facilities.
(e) The landscape requirements set forth in this chapter.
(2) Undeveloped open space. As a general principle, undeveloped open
space should be left in its natural state. A developer may make
certain improvements, such as the cutting of trails for walking or
jogging or the provision of picnic areas, etc. In addition, the
Planning Board may require a development to make other
§ 345-17.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-18
332:877
improvements, such as the removal of dead or diseased trees and
thinning of trees or other vegetation, to encourage more desirable
growth, planting, grading and seeding.
D. Exceptions to the standards. The Planning Board may permit minor
deviations from open space standards when it can be determined that:
(1) The objectives underlying these standards can be met without
strict adherence to them; and
(2) Because of peculiarities in the tract of land or the facilities
proposed, it would be unreasonable to require strict adherence to
these standards.
E. Deed restrictions. All lands dedicated for open space purposes shall
contain appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the
Municipal Attorney that ensure that:
(1) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future.
(2) The open space area will continue in perpetuity for the purpose
specified.
(3) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the open
space.
(4) Common undeveloped open space shall not be turned into a
commercial enterprise admitting the general public at a fee.
F. Open space ownership. The type of ownership of land dedicated for
open space purposes shall be selected by the owner, developer or
subdivider, subject to the approval of the Board. The type of ownership
may include but is not necessarily limited to the following:
(1) The municipality, subject to acceptance by the governing body of
the municipality.
(2) Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance.
(3) Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance.
(4) Homeowners', condominium or cooperative associations or
organizations.
(5) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the
subdivision.
G. Homeowners' association. If the open space is owned and maintained
by a homeowners' or condominium association, the developer shall file
a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the
association, to be submitted with the application for the preliminary
approval. The provisions shall include but are not necessarily limited to
the following:
§ 345-18 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-18
332:878
(1) The homeowners' association must be established before homes
are sold.
(2) Membership must be mandatory for each home buyer and any
successive buyer.
(3) The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a
period of years.
(4) The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities.
(5) Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the
property if allowed in the master deed establishing the
homeowners' association.
(6) The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
H. Maintenance of open space areas.
(1) In the event that a nonmunicipal organization with the
responsibility for the open space fails to maintain it in reasonable
order and condition, the Mayor and Council or Administrator may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of
the development, setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be remedied within 35 days thereof
and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon, which shall
be held within 15 days of the notice.
(2) At such hearing, the Mayor and Council or Administrator may
modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may
give a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within
which they shall be remedied. If the deficiencies set forth in the
original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be remedied
within said 35 days or any permitted extension thereof, the
municipality, in order to preserve the open space and maintain the
same, may enter and maintain such land for a period of one year.
Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights
to use the open space, except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration date of
said year, the Mayor and Council or Administrator shall, upon their
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the open space, call a public
hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such organization and to
the owners of the development, to be held by the Mayor and
Council or Administrator, at which hearing such organization and
the owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the municipality shall not, at the election of the
§ 345-18 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-18
332:879
§ 345-19. Commercial facade regulations. [Added 3-24-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-98]
municipality, continue for a succeeding year. If the Mayor and
Council or Administrator shall determine that such organization
is ready and able to maintain said open space in a reasonable
condition, the municipality shall cease to maintain said open space
at the end of said year. If the Mayor and Council or Administrator
shall determine that such organization is not ready and able to
maintain said open space in a reasonable condition, the
municipality may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said open
space during the next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing
and determination in each year thereafter. The decision of the
municipal body or officer in any such case shall constitute a final
administrative decision, subject to judicial review.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the municipality shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with the
assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall
become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and be a
part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and shall be
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes.
A. The Planning Board of the City of Long Branch shall utilize the
Commercial Facade Design Kit,183 a four-part pamphlet series on file
with the Planning Department of the City of Long Branch, in overseeing
and requiring new development and renovations of existing structures
in all commercial areas of the City of Long Branch.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall utilize the Commercial Facade
Design Kit, a four-part pamphlet series on file with the Planning
Department of the City of Long Branch, in overseeing and requiring
new development and renovations of existing structures in all
commercial areas of the City of Long Branch.
C. The concepts and regulations contained in the four-part Commercial
Facade Design Kit shall be followed by the appropriate Boards for all
new development and renovations of existing buildings in all
commercial zones of the City in order to ensure aesthetically pleasing
and architecturally consistent design throughout the City of Long
Branch.
D. The references in the Commercial Facade Design Kit to the Broadway
Corridor shall not limit the application of the designs, comments and
regulations in the design kit to that area solely and that the City
specifically desires the information and standards contained in the
183. Editor's Note: The kit is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 345-18 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-19
332:880
Commercial Facade Design Kit to apply to all commercial zones in the
City of Long Branch.
§ 345-19 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-19
332:881

ARTICLE IV
Zone District Use Regulations
§ 345-20. R-1 Residential District.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Municipal buildings, community centers and public parks and
playgrounds, exclusive of schools.
(3) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be a permitted use in all residential
districts. The requirements for such residences shall be the same
as for single-family dwelling units located within such districts.
[Added 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
[Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 284, Signs.
(4) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 345-41.
(5) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of § 345-42.
(6) Television antenna not exceeding 35 feet in height.
(7) Other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and building.
(8) In Residential Zones R-1 through R-8, or with regard to any singlefamily
property in any other zone, any accessory building such as,
but not limited to, detached garages, cabanas, outbuildings, sheds,
workshops, greenhouses, pool houses, animal shelters, etc., shall
conform to the following: [Added 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(a) Shall not be greater in floor area than 50% of the footprint of
the principal structure or use located on the property;
(b) Shall not exceed a total combined size of 700 square feet;
(c) Shall comply with § 345-11P(6).
§ 345-20 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-20
332:883
§ 345-21. R-2 Residential District.
§ 345-22. R-3 Residential District.
C. Area and bulk requirements. As specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches and places of worship.
(2) Beach clubs.184
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be all uses permitted in the R-1
Residential District, § 345-20A.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Public, parochial and private schools.
(2) Churches and places of worship.185
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20A.
(2) Home occupation.
(3) Home professional office.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) As specified in the R-2 Residential District, § 345-21D.
184. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 15-99.
185. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 15-99.
§ 345-20 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-23
332:884
§ 345-23. R-4 Residential District.
§ 345-24. R-5 Residential District.
§ 345-25. R-6 Residential District.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-3 Residential District, § 345-22A.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) As specified in the R-2 Residential District, § 345-21D.
(2) Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-3 Residential District, § 345-22A.
(2) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of 12 units per acre. [Amended 9-24-1996 by
Ord. No. 31-96]
(3) Two- to four-family dwellings subject to § 345-49.
(4) Scattered site housing, subject to the provisions of § 345-56.
[Added 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 4-99]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in §§ 345-7, 345-49, 345-53 and 345-56. [Amended
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 4-99]
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) As specified in the R-2 Residential District, § 345-21D.
(2) Garden apartment projects of 20 or more units, subject to the
provisions of §§ 345-48 and 345-51.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 345-23 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-25
332:885
§ 345-26. R-7 Riverfront Mixed Residential District. [Amended
2-27-1996 by Ord. No. 5-96]
(1) All uses permitted in the R-5 Residential District, § 345-24.
Townhouses shall be restricted, however, to a maximum density of
10 units per acre. [Amended 8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 37-99]
(2) Professional offices.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses.
(2) (Reserved)186
(3) Senior citizen housing.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Municipal buildings, community centers, public parks, playgrounds
and parking lots, exclusive of schools.
(3) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(4) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of six units per acre.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7 and § 345-53.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches and places of worship.
(2) Marinas.187
186. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, was repealed
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99.
§ 345-25 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-27
332:886
§ 345-27. R-8 Boulevard Mix District.
§ 345-28. RC-1 Beachfront Mixed. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93; 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98;
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
40-00;3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 6-06]
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of six units per acre.
(2) Office buildings, no taller than six stories, for professional,
executive or administrative purposes.
(3) One-family dwellings. [Added 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 39-00;
amended 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(4) Two- to four-family dwellings, subject to § 345-49. [Added
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the R-1 Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7 and Article VI, Supplementary Regulations.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. Uses requiring a conditional
use permit shall be as follows: [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93]
(1) Senior citizen housing. (See Article VI, Supplementary Regulations,
and Article VII, Conditional Uses.)
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Waterfront mixed residential units subject to the provisions of
§ 345-55.
(2) Townhouses, subject to the requirements of § 345-53 and at a
minimum density of six units per acre.
(3) Beachfront commercial.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments. Such establishments may sell
retail foods, including fish, meat and poultry, provided that the
waste from such retail food operation shall be kept from public
view, in secured containers, and disposed of each day by the owner
of such establishment.
187. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 15-99.
§ 345-27 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-28
332:887
§ 345-29. RC-2 Riverfront Residential Commercial Zone.
(5) Professional offices.
(6) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(7) Outdoor dining subject to § 345-11Z.
(8) Bakery.
(9) Health spa/gym. (See § 345-3, Definitions.)
(10) Barbershop/beauty salon/tanning salon.
(11) One-family dwellings, subject to bulk requirements of the R-1 Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in §§ 345-7, 345-55 and 345-53.
D. (Reserved)
E. Additional requirements. Additional requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Townhouses. See § 345-53.
(2) The establishment of any new stand-alone commercial/retail/food
uses shall be prohibited unless they are located adjacent to and
abutting an existing stand-alone commercial use. [Added
9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 15-09]
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of six units per acre.
(2) Neighborhood commercial as specified in § 345-32.
(3) Waterfront mixed residential units subject to the provisions of
§ 345-55.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in §§ 345-7, 345-55 and 345-53.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. Uses requiring a conditional
use permit shall be as follows:
(1) Marinas.
(2) Senior citizen high-rise housing. (See Article VI, Supplementary
Regulations.)
§ 345-28 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-29
332:888
§ 345-30. C-1 Central Commercial District. [Amended 6-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 19-93]
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Motor vehicle service stations.
E. Additional requirements. Additional requirements shall be as specified
in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-11E; as to townhouses, see
§ 345-53.188
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Retail trade stores, as follows:
(a) New or previously unused general merchandise. [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(b) Food.
(c) New automobile showrooms of authorized automobile
dealerships, and new and used car lots only in conjunction
therewith; automobile and marine accessories; new boat
showrooms of authorized boat dealerships; and new and used
boat lots or used car lots in conjunction therewith.
(d) Apparel and accessories.
(e) New or previously unused furniture, home furnishings and
equipment. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(f) Restaurants and eating and drinking places, but not drive-in
restaurants.
(g) Variety stores, drug stores, florists or other retail trade stores,
but not including fuel.
(h) Delicatessens.
(i) Antique, used book, memorabilia and collectible dealers.
[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(j) Tattoo parlors, except that no tattoo parlor may be located
within 1,000 feet of another tattoo parlor. [Added 2-14-1995
by Ord. No. 8-95]
(2) Service uses, as follows: [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(a) Finance, insurance, real estate, legal, personnel and business
consulting services.
188. Editor's Note: Original Section 20-6.11, RC-3 Waterfront Mix District, and Section 20-6.12,
RC-4 Ocean Promenade Waterfront Mix, as amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed effective with the adoption of the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan on 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96.
§ 345-29 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-30
332:889
(b) Governmental services.
(c) Educational services and colleges, but excluding primary and
secondary.
(d) Publication of newspapers and periodicals.
(e) Professional office/services. [Added 2-27-1996 by Ord. No.
6-96; amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 20-96]
(3) Assembly hall, bowling alley and motion-picture theater, provided
that it is carried on within a building.
(4) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(5) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(6) High Technology Light Industrial. (See § 345-35 for specifics.)
(7) Health spa/gym. (See § 345-3, Definitions.)
(8) Barbershop/beauty salon/tanning salon.
(9) Farm markets/community farmers’ markets (see §§ 345-10K and
345-3). [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
[Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(1) Signs subject to provisions of Chapter 284, Signs.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 345-41.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Private garages.
(5) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of § 345-42.
(6) Parking lots, subject to § 345-42 and all other applicable general
regulations of Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, and this chapter.
(7) Satellite and/or microwave broadcasting appurtenances
(applicable to commercial properties only, and excluding
residential properties).
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses: [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
8-95]
(1) Public utilities.
§ 345-30 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-30
332:890
§ 345-31. C-2 Professional Office and Related Services District.
§ 345-32. C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District. [Amended
6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
(2) Motor vehicle service stations.
(3) Senior citizen housing. (See Article VI, Supplementary Regulations,
and Article VII, Conditional Uses.)
(4) Secondhand stores.
E. Additional requirements. Where the property line of a proposed
commercial lot abuts a residential use or zone, a strip of land at least 10
feet in width adjacent to the abutting property line shall be kept free of
any building development, except for landscaping which shall include a
buffer strip as defined by this chapter. Wherever these provisions apply,
10 feet shall be added to the required building setback line standard.
(See § 345-11U.)
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the S-1 Professional Office District.
(2) Related services, including but not limited to the following:
printing, business machines and office supplies.
(3) Farm markets/community farmers’ markets (see §§ 345-10K and
345-3). [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted uses shall be as specified in the
C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. Uses requiring a conditional
use permit shall be as follows:
(1) (Reserved)189
(2) Churches and places of worship.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be retail uses of a neighborhood
convenience nature of the following types:
(1) Retail trade stores in new or previously unused general
merchandise. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(2) Retail trade stores in food.
189. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, was repealed
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99.
§ 345-30 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32
332:891
(3) Retail trade stores in apparel and accessories.
(4) Retail trade eating and drinking establishments.
(5) Variety stores.
(6) Drugstores.
(7) Liquor stores.
(8) Florists.
(9) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(10) Professional services.
(11) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(12) Temporary buildings, for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(13) Delicatessens.
(14)Railroad stations and/or yard and associated facilities.
(15) Outdoor dining, subject to § 345-11Z.
(16) Convenience store.
(17) Hair styling shop/tanning salon. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 8-95]
(18) Health spa/gym. (See § 345-3, Definitions.)
(19) Antique, used book, memorabilia and collectible dealers. [Added
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(20) Dry cleaners. [Added 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 15-01; amended
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(21) Tailors. [Added 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 15-01; amended
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(22) Laundromats. [Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(23) The following additional uses shall also be permitted within the
existing C-3 Neighborhood Commercial Zone area bounded by Bath
Avenue, Westwood Avenue and the New Jersey Transit railroad
tracks. [Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(a) Food preparation corporations, both retail and wholesale.
(b) Fuel oil distributors/heating repair services.
(c) Warehouse/self-storage facilities.
§ 345-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32
332:892
(24) Farm markets/community farmers’ markets (see §§ 345-10K and
345-3). [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) As specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30D.
E. Conditional uses; conditions. [Added 4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 5-15]
(1) Mixed-use multifamily units above ground-level retail buildings on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater shall conform
to the following additional conditions:
(a) Functional entries for upper-floor residential or office units
shall be consolidated into an entry lobby located in such a way
that it does not interrupt ground-level retail functional entries.
(b) Any street-level retail facade facing a public street or sidewalk
shall have clear glass on at least 60% of the facade between
three and eight feet above grade.
(c) No more than 40% of the length of any facade, or 50 feet,
whichever is less, may be blank (without doors or windows).
(2) Mixed-use institutional uses above ground-level retail buildings on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater shall conform
to the following additional conditions:
(a) Institutional uses shall be limited to educational, religious or
charitable uses.
(b) The ground-level facade and ground-floor lobby area of the
upper-level conditional use shall not be greater than 25% of
the total ground-level floor area of the building, with not more
than 20% of the ground-floor level of the upper-level
conditional use with an exterior wall that fronts on Ocean
Avenue. The ground-level lobby area may include a reception
area, administrative offices and one conference room for
meetings or small group assembly for a maximum of 25
persons, but all rooms used or intended for large group
assembly shall only be located on the second floor or above.
(c) Any street-level retail facade facing a public street, sidewalk or
park shall have clear glass on at least 60% of the facade
between three and eight feet above grade.
§ 345-32 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32
332:893
§ 345-32.1. West End Design Overlay (WEDO) District regulations.
(d) No more than 40% of the length of any street-level facade, or
50 feet, whichever is less, may be blank (without doors or
windows).
(e) Functional entries for upper floor institutional uses shall be
consolidated into an entry lobby located at the end or at a
corner of the building in such a way that it does not interrupt
ground-level retail functional entries. Buildings on corner lots
or with frontage on public spaces (sidewalk, plaza, park, etc.)
shall have the functional entry at the corner of the building.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the West End Design Overlay District is to
establish a framework for infill development with a greater diversity of
uses than are generally permitted in the C-3 Neighborhood Commercial
District and to recognize the unique architectural and cultural
character of the West End C-3 District as more of a "village" within the
City of Long Branch.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
INSTITUTIONAL USES ABOVE GROUND-LEVEL RETAIL — Buildings
with an educational, religious or charitable use on the second floor or
above a building that contains retail on the ground floor.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) All uses permitted in § 345-32, C-3 Neighborhood Commercial (C-3)
Zone, except that supermarkets are also permitted.
(2) Multifamily units and/or offices above ground-level retail (mixed
use) on development parcels less than 20,000 square feet).
(3) Parking structures, subject to the design standards herein.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Multifamily units above ground-level retail (mixed use) on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater.
(2) Institutional uses above ground-level retail (mixed use) on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater.
§ 345-32 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:894
(3) Adaptive reuse of the West End School for one of the following
uses:
(a) Visual and/or performing arts educational and performance
facility.
[1] Performing arts theater, inclusive of performance venues
of varying sizes, such as cabaret or dinner theatre, cafe,
intermission concessions and space for receptions before
or after performances or for fundraising events, but
excluding independent full-service restaurants.
[2] Instruction in performing arts, inclusive of dance,
instrumental, vocal, composition, drama, playwriting,
musical theater, set design and construction, audio
engineering and recording or related arts.
[3] Instruction in the visual arts, inclusive of illustration and
rendering, sculpture, filmmaking, screenplay and related
arts, as well as display space or galleries for students,
faculty and artists-in-residence.
[4] Temporary living accommodations for professional or
student performers and artists during periods of
performances or special programs, such as performing
and visual arts "camps."
(b) Specialty education, such as culinary schools, computer
training, secretarial schools, cosmetology schools or similar
professional, business or vocational schools.
(c) Professional offices.
E. Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted
that are customarily incidental and subordinate to, and located on the
same lot, or within the same building in the case of mixed use buildings,
as a principal permitted use.
F. Height and bulk standards.
(1) Lot and bulk requirements shall be the same as for the C3
Neighborhood Commercial Zone District pursuant § 345-114
except that building height may be permitted to three stories and
35 feet.
G. Conditional uses; conditions.
(1) Mixed-use multifamily units above ground-level retail buildings on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater shall conform
to the following additional conditions:
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:895
(a) Functional entries for upper-floor residential or office units
shall be consolidated into an entry lobby located in such a way
that it does not interrupt ground-level retail functional entries.
(b) Any street-level retail facade facing a public street or sidewalk
shall have clear glass on at least 60% of the facade between
three and eight feet above grade.
(c) No more than 40% of the length of any facade, or 50 feet,
whichever is less, may be blank (without doors or windows).
(2) Mixed-use institutional uses above ground-level retail buildings on
development parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater shall conform
to the following additional conditions:
(a) Institutional uses shall be limited to educational, religious or
charitable uses.
(b) The ground-level facade and ground-floor lobby area of the
upper-level conditional use shall not be greater than 25% of
the total ground-level floor area of the building, with not more
than 20% of the ground-floor level of the upper-level
conditional use with an exterior wall that fronts on Ocean
Avenue. The ground-level lobby area may include a reception
area, administrative offices and one conference room for
meetings or small group assembly for a maximum of 25
persons, but all rooms used or intended for large group
assembly shall only be located on the second floor or above.
(c) Any street-level retail facade facing a public street sidewalk or
park shall have clear glass on at least 60% of the facade
between three and eight feet above grade.
(d) No more than 40% of the length of any street-level facade, or
50 feet, whichever is less, may be blank (without doors or
windows).
(e) Functional entries for upper floor institutional uses shall be
consolidated into an entry lobby located at the end or at a
corner of the building in such a way that it does not interrupt
ground-level retail functional entries. Buildings on corner lots
or with frontage on public spaces (sidewalk, plaza, park, etc.)
shall have the functional entry at the corner of the building.
(f) Institutional uses may utilize up to 35% of the basement area of
the building for storage and/or accessory uses connected with
the operation and/or function of the institutional use. [Added
12-26-2018 by Ord. No. 29-18]
H. Supplementary parking requirements for all uses. In addition to the
requirements in § 345-42, the following standards shall also be applied
in the WEDO District:
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:896
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the
use which they are intended to serve or on an adjacent lot in
common ownership or secured by a long term instrument, such as a
lease, acceptable to the Zoning Officer.
(2) Parking areas may be located in any yard other than the required
front yard, but shall be visually screened from adjoining public
streets and properties, and shall comply with all other
requirements of the parking regulations applicable to all zones as
provided in this chapter.
(3) Shared parking arrangements among adjacent properties not
under common ownership may be permitted if the owners
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
supply of parking spaces will be adequate to service the aggregate
demand of the uses sharing the parking based on such factors as
alternating peak hours.
(4) Irrespective of any contrary provisions of § 345-42, parking
requirements for any adaptive reuse of the West End School and for
conditional use institutional over ground-level retail mixed use
buildings shall be calculated based an overall ratio of one parking
space for 400 square feet of floor area, inclusive of all uses, except
that enclosed parking, covered parking, unenclosed rooftop space,
and first floor space devoted to educational, religious or charitable
uses in accordance with Subsection G(2) above, are exempt from
floor area calculation. Additional parking equal to 20% of the
parking required for the conditional institutional use shall be
provided to allow for occasional assembly demand that exceeds the
ratio of one space per 400 square feet for institutional uses. Such
additional parking shall be designated and marked for public use
when not needed for assembly demands.
(5) No parking space shall impede pedestrian access to any functional
entryway.
(6) In no case shall the number of parking spaces exceed the minimum
requirements by more than 5%, except as provided in Subsection
H(3) above.
I. Design standards. The following design standards are intended to
reinforce the West End "village" as a compact, walkable center with
active street life and a cohesive built environment where existing and
proposed commercial, residential and institutional developments are
integrated. These design standards are intended to maximize flexibility
of the design to sustain the character and charm of the district. All
standards set forth in Chapter 345 of the Code of the City of Long
Branch shall continue to apply except when inconsistent with the
design standards set forth below.
(1) Pedestrian circulation, bicycle parking and storage.
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:897
(a) Off-street parking and service access shall be designed to avoid
the backing in and out of streets.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided to connect new development with
the public pedestrian circulation system within the WEDO
District. All sidewalks should be durably paved and smoothly
surfaced to provide for the free movement of pedestrians. All
sidewalks and pathways must be designed to provide access
for the physically disabled. Access ramps shall be conveniently
placed and sloped to provide easy connection to streets and
sidewalks, in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(c) Structured parking may be contained within, under or
attached to buildings. Parking structures or podium-type
parking under buildings may not front toward the public space
or Brighton Avenue. Where parking structures front on public
streets, such may feature liner buildings or ground floor space
along the sidewalk designed as retail, commercial or office
space.
(d) Every development shall be provided with garbage and refuse
storage and collection areas suitable for containerized
collection, screened from view by a solid fence on three sides
and located away from the fronts of buildings.
(e) Provide at least one secured, enclosed bicycle storage space
per residential unit.
(f) Bike racks shall be provided at a rate of one multiloop bike
rack per every 20 on-site parking spaces, but not less than the
greater of one bicycle space per business or four bicycle
spaces per project site for retail or four bicycle spaces per
building for nonretail uses.
(g) For office uses, a minimum of one space per 20 off-street
parking spaces provided per project will be reserved for
parking for shared car services (such as "zip car") or car pool
vehicles and be located near functional entryways.
(2) Landscape treatments.
(a) All plants, trees and shrubs shall be installed in accordance
with a landscape plan and schedule provided by the developer,
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(b) Landscape shall be provided throughout the infill development
project to create spatial definition or separation, shade, visual
interest, seasonal color, visual buffering, microclimatic
enhancement, and habitat and to improve safety.
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:898
(c) Indigenous (native) plant species shall be primarily specified
for planting and invasive exotic species shall be avoided. Any
landscaping which is not resistant to the environment, or that
dies within two years of planting, shall be replaced by the
developer.
(d) In landscaped spaces, passive systems such as cisterns or rain
barrels and water gardens that collect rainwater for irrigation
or recharge shall be utilized to the extent feasible.
(e) Only soil moisture-sensing irrigation systems using nonpotable
water shall be permitted, except that where irrigation is not
used, all plant materials shall be drought-tolerant species.
(3) Building orientation, massing and facade composition.
(a) New buildings should be designed to be an integral part of the
West End building mix and be developed with appropriate
consideration for both proposed and existing buildings with
respect to height, mass, location, materials, orientation, signs,
lighting and use.
(b) Buildings shall front on and public streets to provide form and
function to the streetscape. The streetscape should be
continuous and varied through the use of street furniture,
landscaping, building articulation, building frontage setbacks
and changes in sidewalk types and textures. Long buildings
should be divided at a scale comparable to that of other
buildings on the rest of the block or adjacent blocks, with a
building offset (stepback, bump-out) of at least four feet at
least every 75 feet. Driveway intersections with the public
street should be minimized to avoid excessive interruptions in
the streetwall and conflicts with pedestrians.
(c) Buildings shall be designed so as to present an articulated
facade from all vantage points. Parking structures shall not
front on the public street unless architecturally integrated into
the principal building using techniques such as an exterior clad
in a vine-covered trellis, graphic panels, solar panels, a
window-like facade treatment, liner building or ground floor
space along the sidewalk designed as retail, commercial or
office space.
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:899
Figure 1: Example of parking structure with integrated
architectural treatments and with ground-level retail space.
(d) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building with the exception of parking structures or that
portion of a building containing a parking structure. All sides of
a building shall be architecturally designed to be consistent
with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Blank wall or
service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations visible
from public view shall be avoided.
(e) New or renovated commercial and residential, and the
residential and commercial portions of the buildings that
include institutional uses permitted by this section, should be
designed utilizing base, middle and top forms as the primary
method relating buildings to each other.
(f) The base shall be considered the first story of the facade facing
a public street, depending on the overall heights of the
building. The design of the base, as well as the quality and
durability of its materials, should be emphasized to create
visual interest and support pedestrian activity. The building's
base should be presented to the Planning Board at a larger
scale of drawing and greater detail than the remainder of the
facade to ensure it meets the building design objectives.
(g) In addition to the base, the exterior design shall include a
middle field section and a cap on the top. The middle of the
building shall be differentiated from the base by a horizontal
transition line. The transition line's specific location shall be
determined primarily by the overall height of the building and
that of any adjacent buildings. If adjacent buildings are lower
than the proposed building, then the transition line should
relate to such adjacent building. A horizontal transition line
should also be established separating the middle field from the
cap or top of the buildings.
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:900
(h) The base transition line should range from one-fifth to onequarter
of the overall height. The upper transition line,
articulating the cap, should be placed approximately oneeighth
of the overall height from the top. Transition lines may
consist of a continuous, shallow balcony, a shallow recess, an
articulated trim course cornice, fenestration or other
appropriate means. The transition should be supported by a
change of window rhythm or size and a change in material,
color or texture.
(i) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets
to create visual breaks on the exterior. Long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided. Building
wall offsets, including projections such as balconies, canopies,
awnings, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level shall
be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall (see Figure 2).
Similarly, roofline offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided
in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the
massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single, long
roof.
Figure 2: Example of block front elevation with horizontal
and vertical offsets to add visual interest.
(j) The front doors of all buildings shall be visible from the street.
If located more than 10 feet from the front building line, their
location must be reinforced with additional graphics, lighting,
marquees or canopies.
(k) Functional building entrances shall be provided at an average
of at least every 75 feet (see Figure 3, taken from LEED-ND
Rating System NPD Credit 1). All entrances to a building,
except service and emergency egress doors, shall be defined
and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels,
pediments, pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs,
railings, balustrades and other elements, where appropriate.
Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible
with the style, materials, colors and details of the building as a
whole, as shall the doors. The main entrance shall face the
street on which the property fronts.
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:901
Figure 3: Example of functional building entries at minimum
average distances along blocks.
(l) A minimum of one facade element shall align horizontally with
adjacent buildings. Facade elements include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, cornices, signs, storefront windows,
windows above the first floor and awnings. Awnings are
encouraged. There should be a balance between variety and
harmony of building facades. Maintain the similarity in the
building width. New or larger buildings on parcels shall
incorporate architectural elements which reflect the width of
adjacent buildings. Successful methods for achieving this
include, but are not limited to, window pattern and detail
placement.
(m) In general, it is preferred to keep the street facade built to the
property line in alignment with adjacent buildings.
(n) Windows shall be primarily vertically proportioned. Large
areas of glass curtain walls or strip windows of more than 15
feet in length are discouraged, as are tinted and highly
reflective glass. Window openings shall have sills and heads of
masonry or stone. These may be of precast concrete,
limestone, granite, brick soldier courses, or slabs exposed only
for the length of the window. Masonry units may be turned at
the wall opening to visually create a thick wall and should be
used in the design of balconies, loggias and larger openings.
(o) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have
large transparent windows. Such windows shall be framed by
the surrounding wall and shall be a minimum of 60% of the
total ground-level facade area adjoining the sidewalk (see
Figure 4, taken from NPD Credit 1 of the LEED-ND Rating
System of the USGBC). The window wall facade area may be
reduced if, due to a particular use or settings, the provision of
windows will present concerns for aesthetic design or security.
However, the facade design should employ an arrangement of
materials that reflects the required window area and/or lines to
be compatible with the intent of these guidelines.
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:902
Figure 4: Example of ground-level retail and service uses
with minimum amounts of clear glass facades.
(p) All buildings shall provide scale-defining architectural
elements or details at the first two floor levels minimum, such
as windows, spandrels, awnings, porticos, pediments, cornices,
pilasters, columns and balconies.
(q) The predominant material of all street walls on primary and
secondary streets shall be brick, precast, cement-board siding,
wood and finished masonry block, or curtain wall. Stucco may
be used as an accent. All materials and colors shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
(r) Shop fronts should have a kick plate that ranges in height from
18 inches to 42 inches running continuously beneath the
required fenestration.
(s) Public access to commercial and governmental buildings shall
be provided at sidewalk grade. The primary floor of and access
to mixed use buildings may be elevated.
(t) Awnings, which add visual richness to the commercial corridor
while enhancing the quality of public walkways, are
encouraged for all storefronts. Awnings shall have fixed or
retractable metal framework, with vinyl laminated polyester
base scrim awning fabric to blend with storefront paint colors.
(u) Canopies, unlike awnings, are nonretractable. They shall be
constructed of wood or metal framing, standing-seam metal
roof, plywood and molded millwork trim. Canopies shall
incorporate signage and down lighting. Security shall be
implemented so that it cannot be seen, and security grille
housing is specifically prohibited.
(v) All awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the
building so that the lowest part of the awning or canopy is
mounted a minimum of eight feet and a maximum of 12 feet
above the sidewalk at the storefront.
(w) In conjunction with Figure 5, appropriate design of the corner
of a block shall include one of the following patterns:
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:903
[1] Opening the space at ground level for people to walk
across the corner, with the building mass above redefining
the corner.
[2] A recessed entry at the corner such as the familiar angled
wall with an entry door.
[3] A corner window with an important view into the building.
[4] Balconies or bay windows that wrap the corner.
[5] A tower element to emphasize the corner.
Figure 5: Example of architectural corner treatment.
(x) Multistory buildings with flat roofs shall provide light color
roof surfaces with a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of 78 or
greater (LEED-NC Rating System - Sustainable Sites (SS)
Credit 7.2) for at least 75% of the roof area. Green roof
plantings and solar photovoltaic systems on roofs and parking
decks shall be permitted and shall not be counted in the area
required for highly reflective roof surfaces above.
(4) Design guidelines for institutional uses.
(a) Buildings, or portions of buildings, intended for institutional
uses permitted in the West End District shall be integrated in
the neighborhood using appropriate scale with respect to
height, mass and location and shall meet the bulk
requirements specified herein. The portions of such buildings
devoted to permitted institutional uses shall be subject to the
design standards set forth in Subsection I(4)(b) through (e)
below.
(b) Institutional buildings, or portions of buildings devoted to
institutional uses, shall be designed with a strong sense of
place with architecture that is readily identifiable as to its use.
The use of traditional familiar design elements, icons or
symbols associated with institutional uses such as places of
worship (arched or gothic windows, steeples, towers, domes,
colored or decorative glass windows, stars, crosses, permanent
signs, etc.) may be included in the facade designs of buildings
for institutional uses.
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:904
(c) Building facades for institutional buildings or portions of
buildings devoted to institutional uses, may include enduring
materials such as brick, stone masonry and metals that are
usually incorporated into institutional buildings.
(d) Entrances for institutional uses shall be at the street level.
Main and accessory entrances shall be readily identifiable. In
the case of institutional assembly occupancies, interior lobby
spaces shall be designed with sufficient capacity to
accommodate ingressing and egressing users without
crowding or obstructing the public sidewalk.
(e) In mixed use structures, horizontal building elements of
institutional uses above other first floor permitted uses may be
designed to architecturally match the attendant structures that
are provided to allow entry or egress into the facility. The first
floor of such mixed use structure, other than the limited
portion devoted to the institutional use, shall comply with the
standards stated in Subsection G(2) above.
(f) Not more than 50% of the entire length of any upper-level
facade wall devoted to an institutional use, measured in a
linear manner along the street, shall be devoid of windows,
except that where such a wall is necessary for the operation of
the institutional use, the mass of such a facade shall be visually
broken up by vertical and horizontal architectural elements,
such as building breaks, architectural details (such as
cornices, quoins, or columns), or variations in materials,
patterns, colors or texture.
(5) Antennas.
(a) Excepting the antenna itself, all parts and components of
personal communications antennas, satellite dishes, and
television and radio antennas shall be screened from view
regardless of elevation, or shall be disguised within an
enclosed structure. The screening shall be designed as part of
the overall design theme of the building to which it is
associated.
(b) Dish antennas may not exceed three feet in diameter.
Mechanical equipment located on building roofs shall be
screened so as not to be visible from the ground level from
adjacent developments and from public streets and spaces.
Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened and in
the rear.
(6) Lighting.
(a) Lighting levels along paved portions of public walks shall be an
average of no less than one foot candle for commercial areas
and 0.5 foot candle for residential areas.
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-32.1
332:905
(b) New fixtures serving to light streets shall be the same as
existing decorative street lights within the West End District
and installed in accordance with the same specifications. The
fixtures may include attachments to accommodate such
amenities as banners and flower pots.
(c) The design for a proposed facade must consider the
appearance of the building in the evening and develop an
exterior lighting plan that includes display window lighting,
building lighting, and pedestrian-scaled lighting for both
buildings and pedestrian areas within the site. Lighting shall
be warm in color, with control of glare for the pedestrian and
minimization of light pollution.
(7) Streetscape.
(a) Site furnishings may include elements such as benches,
gazebos, trash and recycling receptacles, bicycle racks,
drinking fountains, kiosks, sculptural elements, decorative
fountains, bollards, decorative fences, seat walls, and
pedestrian-scale lighting, subject to the review and approval of
the Long Branch Planning Board.
(b) Freestanding newspaper and advertising dispensers shall not
be permitted in the right-of-way of primary streets and shall be
incorporated into approved buildings or pavilions.
(c) Outdoor cafes may extend onto the public right-of-way upon
issuance of a sidewalk cafe license pursuant to § 181-15,
License required.
(d) Any new or renovated public sidewalk shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the City of Long Branch West
End Streetscape Standards.
(8) Signage.
(a) The temporary display of signs, banners, flags, pennants and
similar devices, in connection with special events or activities
of a public or nonprofit nature, or upon the occasion of the
opening of a new business use, shall be permitted, provided
such display shall not exceed 14 days and shall not occur more
than four times per calendar year.
(b) All signs within the project area shall conform to the Design
Guidelines Handbook (EN238) unless otherwise approved by
the Long Branch Planning Board as part of a development
approval in keeping with the architectural character of West
End.
(9) Design Review Committee. All major development applications and
all Conditional Use approvals must be reviewed by the Design
§ 345-32.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-32.1
332:906
§ 345-33. C-4 Resort Commercial District.
Review Committee as appointed by the Mayor. The Planning Board
shall refer applications to the Design Review Committee for
comments on any such major development review application or
Conditional Use approval.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Hotels, subject to the provisions of Article VI, Supplementary
Regulations. [Amended 9-26-2017 by Ord. No. 23-17]
(2) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(3) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(4) One-family dwellings, subject to the bulk requirements for the R-1
Residential District as they are specified in § 345-7.
(5) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of six units per acre.
(6) Waterfront mixed residential units, subject to the provisions of
§ 345-55. [Added 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 32-99]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B, and the R-1
Residential District, § 345-20B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in §§ 345-7 and 345-53.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses: [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
8-95]
(1) Beach clubs.
(2) (Reserved)190
(3) Churches and places of worship.
(4) Senior citizens project.
E. Additional requirements. Additional requirements shall be as specified
in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30E.191
190. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, was repealed
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99.
191. Editor's Note: Original Section 20-6.17, C-5 Commercial Recreation District, and Section
20-6.18, C-6 Boulevard Commercial, as amended by Ord. Nos. 8-95 and 19-93, which
§ 345-32.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-34
332:907
§ 345-34. I - Industrial Zone District.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Manufacturing uses of light machinery, comprising any of the
following: carburetors and small machine parts, cash registers,
sewing machines and typewriters, calculators, printing and other
office machines.
(2) Fabrication of metal products, comprising any of the following:
baby carriages, bicycles and other similar vehicles, metal foil-tin,
aluminum, gold, etc.; and metal furniture, musical instruments,
sheet metal products and toys.
(3) Fabrication of wood products, comprising any of the following:
boats, boxes, cabinets and woodworking; furniture; and toys.
(4) Food and associated industries, comprising any of the following:
bakeries, bottling of food and beverages; food and cereal mixing
and milling food processing; food sundry manufacturing; ice cream
manufacturing; and manufacturing of spirituous liquor.
(5) Laboratories, comprising any of the following: biological, chemical,
dental, electronic, pharmaceutical and general.
(6) The warehousing or storage of goods and products and associated
wholesaling uses.
(7) Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
(8) Other permissible industry, comprising any of the following: brush
and broom manufacturing; electric light and power and other
utility company installations; electronic products; farm machine
sales and service; glass and glass products manufacturing; jewelry
manufacturing, except curing, tanning and finishing of hides;
motion picture exchange; pharmaceutical products and
manufacturing; photo finishing; pottery and ceramic products
manufacturing; printing plants; sporting goods manufacturing; and
thread and yarn manufacturing.
(9) Lumber yards and fuel dealers.
(10) Municipal functions conducted in the public interest.
(11) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
(12) Recycling plant for indoor sorting, preparation, storage and
disposal of glass, metal, aluminum and paper waste products and
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed effective with the adoption of the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan on 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96.
§ 345-34 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-34
332:908
outdoor storage of the finished product, so long as it is confined
within containment walls not visible to the public.
(13) Retail sales associated with one of the above uses.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. Uses requiring a conditional
use permit shall be as follows:
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Public, parochial and private schools. [Added 8-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 34-00]
E. Other requirements for industrial uses.
(1) No residential use shall be permitted in the Industrial Zone
District, except the following: [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
15-96; 2-9-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
(a) Hotels/motels, subject to the provisions of § 345-52.
(b) Any use which by its nature would have a tendency to create
objectionable conditions due to the emission of smoke, noise or
odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area and the general community. (See § 345-45.)
(c) Any exclusively retail use.
(2) Buffering and landscaping. Where the property line of a proposed
industrial lot abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, a
strip of land 50 feet in width adjacent to the abutting property line
shall be kept free from any building, development or improvement,
except for landscaping which shall include a buffer strip or fence as
defined by this chapter. Wherever these provisions apply, 50 feet
shall be added to the required building setback line standard.
(3) A site plan conforming to the requirements established under
§ 345-14 shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its approval.
(4) A detailed description of the proposed industrial process and its
product.
(5) Reports prepared by competent technical experts showing
compliance with environmental standards, § 345-45.
(6) All industrial uses must stay within the tolerance standards set
forth in § 345-45, and the user shall furnish proof of this when
asked to do so by the appropriate authorities.
§ 345-34 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-35
332:909
§ 345-35. HTLI High Technology Light Industrial.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows: [Amended
6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
(1) Laboratories, comprising any of the following: biological, chemical,
dental, electronic, pharmaceutical and general.
(2) Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
(3) Fabrication of video, radio, computer hardware and software items.
(4) Any other light industry, which is hereby defined as any industry
which manufactures, processes, assembles or otherwise treats
products the manufacture, assembly or treatment of which does
not cause or result in or will not tend to cause or result in toxic or
objectionable or corrosive fumes, vapors, odors, effluent, gas,
smoke, dust, glare, flashes or excessive noise or vibration,
including buildings and structure for offices and distribution
purposes incidental to the light industry herein defined. Any and all
such manufacturing, processing, assembling or treatment shall be
carried on within and confined to an enclosed structure or
structures. (See § 345-45.)
(5) Warehouse/storage facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 284, Signs.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 345-41.
(3) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of § 345-42.
(4) Satellite and/or microwave broadcasting appurtenances. [Added
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring conditional use permit. Use requiring a conditional use
permit shall be as follows:
(1) Public utilities.
E. Other requirements for HTLI uses.
(1) Additional prohibited uses in the HTLI District shall include, but
shall not be necessarily limited to the following uses:
(a) Any residential use.
(b) Any use which by its nature would have a tendency to create
objectionable conditions due to the emission of smoke, noise or
odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
§ 345-35 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-35
332:910
§ 345-36. MB Manufacturing and Business District.
surrounding area and the general community. (See subsection
§ 345-45.)
(2) Buffering and landscaping. Where the property line of a proposed
HTLI lot abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, a strip
of land 50 feet in width adjacent to the abutting property line shall
be kept free from any building, development or improvement,
except for landscaping which shall include a buffer strip or fence as
defined by this chapter. Wherever these provisions apply, 50 feet
shall be added to the required building setback line standard. All
HTLI uses must stay within the tolerant standards set forth in
§ 345-45, and the user shall furnish proof of this when asked to do
so by the appropriate authorities. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord.
No. 19-93]
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the I-Industrial District.
(2) All uses permitted in the C-1 Commercial District.
(3) Convenience store.
(4) Adult entertainment uses; subject to the provisions of § 345-47.
[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Public utilities.
E. Other requirements for MB uses. These uses shall be as follows:
(1) Any use is prohibited which by its nature would have a tendency to
create objectionable conditions due to the emission of smoke, noise
or odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area and the general community. (See § 345-45.)
(2) Buffering and landscaping. Where the property line of a proposed
industrial lot abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, a
strip of land 50 feet in width adjacent to the abutting property line
shall be kept free from any building, development or improvement,
except for landscaping which shall include a buffer strip or fence as
defined by this chapter. Wherever these provisions apply, 50 feet
shall be added to the required building setback line standard.
§ 345-35 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-36
332:911
§ 345-37. S-1 Professional Office District.
§ 345-38. S-2 Oceanfront District.
(3) All industrial uses must stay within the tolerance standards set
forth in § 345-54, and the user shall furnish proof of this when
asked to do so by the appropriate authorities.
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family homes in accordance with the regulations of the R-4
District regulations.
(2) Home professional offices.
(3) Professional offices.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Funeral home.
(6) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(7) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion and
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as
specified in the C-1 Commercial District, § 345-30B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.192
A. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Piers, seawalls, bulkheads, boardwalks, docks or fences for beach
maintenance or protection.
(2) Public beaches and buildings, such as rest rooms, lockers or
dressing room facilities and snack bars, as deemed necessary to
serve the patrons of the beach.
(3) Buildings accessory to parks, playgrounds and other public beach
facilities.
(4) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(5) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
192. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Uses requiring a conditional use permit, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 39-98 and
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99.
§ 345-36 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-38
332:912
§ 345-39. Transit Village District (TVD). [Amended 5-14-2013 by
Ord. No. 6-13; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
B. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 284, Signs.
(2) Fences, subject to the provisions of § 345-41.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of § 345-42.
C. Area and bulk requirements. Area and bulk requirements shall be as
specified in § 345-7.
D. Uses requiring a conditional use permit. These uses shall be subject to
Article VII, Conditional Uses:
(1) Beach clubs.
(2) Commercial/recreational piers, to include fishing/crabbing, eating
and drinking establishments, recreational arcades, beachfront
commercial, apparel stores, florists, gift shops, bookstores, antique
shops, recreational equipment/sports stores and health spas and
gyms. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
A. Purpose. The Transit Village District (TVD) replaces the Medical-
Hospital (M) District regulations in the Long Branch Code (Chapter
345, Section 39). The general purpose of the TVD is to implement the
Transit Oriented recommendations of the 2009 Long Branch Master
Plan by Integrating the existing M District and S-1 Professional Office
Districts with the existing C-3 Neighborhood Commercial node along
Third Avenue and adjoining residential blocks that contain a variety of
housing types such as one- and two-family homes, multi-unit homes,
townhouses and multifamily apartment buildings, into a cohesive
Transit Village. The specific purposes are:
(1) To provide for land uses and facilities beneficial to both the
community and to transit users;
(2) To increase use of the rail station;
(3) To concentrate a mix of retail, office, residential, public, and open
space uses within walking distance of each other and the rail
station, in order to enhance the convenience for residents,
shoppers, commuters and employees and to reduce auto traffic by
providing an environment conducive to pedestrians, bicyclists, and
transit users;
(4) To provide for land uses that will generate and encourage transit
ridership and that advance the principles of sustainable
development as articulated in the LEED for Neighborhood
§ 345-38 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:913
Development (LEED-ND) Rating System of the U.S. Green Building
Council;
(5) To revitalize the areas in the vicinity of the transit station,
strengthen the synergy between the train station and the
Monmouth Medical Center campus, and enhance economic vitality
through zoning incentives;
(6) To provide for the safe and efficient flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, emphasizing a pedestrian-oriented environment;
(7) To provide for visual amenity, and to reinforce a sense of place or
center with neighborhood services within walking distance of the
train station, the Monmouth Medical Center campus and a variety
of new higher density residential and mixed use development;
(8) To maintain and/or increase existing commuter parking capacity.
B. Boundaries of TVD Zone. The boundaries of the TVD are delineated on
the amended Zoning Map of the City which accompanies, and is hereby
made part of this section. The TVD is generally described as follows:
Beginning on Chelsea Avenue at S. Fifth Avenue and including
properties fronting both sides of Chelsea Avenue easterly to Second
Avenue. Then including the properties fronting the south side of
Second Avenue east to Ocean Boulevard. Then following Ocean
Boulevard south to Pavilion Avenue and Pavilion Avenue west to
Second Avenue. Then following Second Avenue south to Bath Avenue
and Bath Avenue west to Prospect Street. Then following Prospect
Street northeasterly to Morris Avenue. Then following Morris Avenue
one block southeasterly to S. Seventh Avenue. Then including
properties fronting both sides of Morris Avenue southeasterly to
Westwood Avenue. Then following Westwood Avenue and including
properties on both sides to the NJ Transit New Jersey Coastline Rail
ROW. Then following the rall ROW northwesterly to its intersection
with S. Fifth Avenue and following S. Fifth Avenue northerly to Chelsea
Avenue and the point of beginning.
C. Definitions. As used in this section:
ARTISAN LOFT BUILDINGS — Buildings, such as former commercial,
industrial or institutional buildings, with open floor plans in a loft style
that are adaptable for live-work use by artisans, craftsmen, artist work
spaces, studios, etc., of various sizes and configurations and where
support facilities are shared by various commercial tenants or unit
owners in a fashion similar to a business "incubator" in order to keep
costs affordable for start-up enterprises.
HOTEL — A building containing seven or more living or sleeping rooms
designed to be occupied by individuals or groups for compensation.
LIVE-WORK UNITS — Any dwelling unit that includes attached work
space, whether shared in common with other dwelling units as a
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:914
"limited common element" of a condominium or used exclusively by the
occupant of the dwelling unit. Such attached work space may include
a kitchen and recreational space to facilitate live-work activities, but
shall not constitute a separate dwelling unit.
PROJECT — One or more contiguous parcels on the same block or
fronting on the same street, developed in accordance with this section
and designed to function as a single development.
TRANSIT SUPPORT FACILITIES — Buildings or structures designed
and intended to support the use of mass transit and that are owned
or leased by New Jersey Transit, including but not limited to the Long
Branch Train Station. "Transit support facilities" shall include public
or privately owned surface and structured parking facilities on Block
492 or Block 157 that are used in whole or in part by transit users and
commuters, whether or not by permit.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) Mixed-use Core Subdistrict:
(a) All uses permitted in § 345-32, C-3 Neighborhood Commercial
(C-3) Zone, except that only existing uses under § 345-32A(23)
are permitted, and supermarkets and hotels are also
permitted. No stand-alone retail use other than a supermarket
may exceed 15,000 square feet and drive-up and drive-through
facilities will be prohibited in any new development in the TVD.
(b) Office mixed with street-level retail (see Figure 4). Street-level
retail would only be permitted in buildings with frontage on
Third Avenue, West Bath Avenue or Pavilion Avenue.
(c) Clinics and medical support uses.
(d) Multifamily units above ground-level retail (mixed-use).
(e) Multifamily residential buildings west of West Avenue and west
of Westwood Avenue.
(f) Live-work dwelling units.
(g) Artisan loft buildings.
(h) Transit support facilities and parking structures and facilities
owned and/or operated by a public agency or authority are
permitted as a principal use on any lot. All other parking
structures and facilities must be accessory to one or more
permitted uses. Parking structures of no greater than six levels
are permitted, provided that the following conditions are met:
[1] At least 25% of the spaces are reserved for commuters;
[2] The parking structure is not located within 20 feet of a
street;
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:915
[3] Where a parking structure faces a street, an evergreen
landscaped buffer at least eight feet in height shall be
provided;
[4] The facade of the parking structure shall be brick or a
material acceptable to the Planning Board and the
architectural design shall be compatible with the historic
character of areas;
[5] The six levels are contained within a height of 55 feet.
[6] Transit support facilities are exempt from the height and
setback restrictions of this subsection and Table 1.
(2) Medical Village Subdistrict:
(a) Medical centers, hospitals, clinics and medical support uses.
(b) Home professional offices.
(c) Professional offices.
(d) Office mixed with street-level retail (see Figure 4). Street-level
retail would only be permitted in buildings with frontage on
Third Avenue, West Bath Avenue or Pavilion Avenue.
(e) Surface or structured parking facilities.
(f) Wellness-fitness centers and physical therapy.
(g) Medical diagnostics and laboratory facilities.
(h) Townhouses subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of 12 units per acre.
(i) Garden apartments, subject to the provisions of § 345-48.
(3) Higher-Density Medical-Residential Transition Subdistrict:
(a) Uses permitted in the R6 Zoning District subject to the
requirements of § 345-25.
(b) Townhouses subject to the provisions of § 345-53 and at a
maximum density of 12 units per acre.
(c) Multifamily residential buildings at a base density of 40
dwelling units per acre, with the potential for an increase to 50
dwelling units per acre with density bonuses approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with the formula set forth
herein.
(d) Office mixed with residential is permitted in buildings within
the block where properties front on Pavilion Avenue.
(4) Low-Density Residential Fringe Subdistrict:
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:916
(a) Uses permitted in the R5 Zoning District subject to the
requirements of § 345-24.
(b) Garden apartments pursuant to § 345-48 and a height of not
more than 40 feet.
E. Permitted conditional uses.
(1) In the Mixed-use Core Subdistrict, Higher-Density Medical-
Residential Transition Subdistrict and Lower-Density Residential
Fringe Subdistrict:
(a) Churches and places of worship, subject to § 345-59.
(b) Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses, subject to § 345-62.
(2) In the Medical Village Subdistrict:
(a) Nursing, rest and convalescent homes, subject to § 345-63.
(b) Philanthropic and eleemosynary uses, subject to § 345-62.
(c) Churches and places of worship, subject to § 345-59.
F. Permitted accessory uses. Uses customarily accessory and incidental to
any permitted use shall be permitted; provided, however, that no
outdoor storage shall be permitted. Specific permitted accessory uses
include:
(1) Service-related support activities within a medical center, such as:
(a) Gift shop.
(b) Florist.
(c) Barbershop.
(d) Cafeteria.
(2) Off-street parking facilities, subject to § 345-42.
(3) Vertical parking structures, subject to § 345-42.
(4) Private residential garages.
G. Lot and bulk regulations. In the TVD, lot and bulk regulations are as
follows and shown in Table 1.193
(1) Mixed-use Core Subdistrict: Lot and bulk requirements shall be the
same as for the C3 Neighborhood Commercial Zone District
pursuant § 345-114 except as otherwise provided herein.
193. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:917
(2) Medical Village Subdistrict: Lot and bulk requirements shall be the
same as for the M Medical Hospital Zone District pursuant
§ 345-121 except as otherwise provided herein.
(3) Higher-Density Medical-Residential Transition Subdistrict: Lot and
bulk requirements shall be the same as for the R-5 One- to Four-
Family Residential Zone District pursuant § 345-106 except as
otherwise provided herein.
(4) Low-Density Residential Fringe Subdistrict: Lot and bulk
requirements shall be the same as for the R-5 One- to Four-Family
Residential Zone District pursuant § 345-106, § 345-48 and
§ 345-51 except as otherwise provided herein.
(5) All new structures must be a minimum of two stories and 30 feet
high.
(6) All hotels must be a minimum of four stories and 45 feet high and
meet the requirements of § 345-52, except as otherwise specified
herein. No guest rooms are permitted on the street level.
(7) Mixed-use buildings shall conform to the following additional
standards.
(a) Parking areas may be located in any yard other than the
required front yard, but not closer than 15 feet to any property
line unless fully enclosed within a building, and shall comply
with all other requirements of the parking regulations
applicable to all zones as provided in this chapter.
(b) Every development shall be provided with garbage and refuse
storage and collection areas suitable for containerized
collection, screened from view by a solid fence on three sides
and located away from the fronts of buildings.
(c) Walls of a structure or parallel walls of adjacent structures
shall not continue in the same plane for a length of more than
75 feet without an offset of at least four feet.
H. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. The parking requirements set forth in Table 2
shall be considered to be the minimum number of parking spaces
required in the TVD for residential uses. See the "Parking
Reduction Schedule" in Subsection H(3) following, for parking
reductions recommended by type of use located within the TVD.
(2) Parking requirements for nonresidential uses. All nonresidential
uses shall comply with the standards contained in § 345-42. The
Board shall be guided by the Institution of Transportation
Engineers Standards for those uses not included in § 345-42.
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:918
TABLE 2
PARKING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
Use Minimum Off-Street Spaces
Multifamily (3+ units)
residential building
1 bedroom 1.8 per unit
2 bedroom 2.0 per unit
3 bedroom 2.1 per unit
(3) Reduction of spaces. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the
minimum parking requirements set forth in Subsection H(1) above
may be reduced within the TVD Zone in accordance with Table 3,
the Parking Reduction Schedule. These reductions are based on
standards which reflect the importance of a linkage between land
use planning and transit planning.
TABLE 3
PARKING REDUCTION SCHEDULE
Permitted Percentage Reduction
Public Use Office Use
Nonresidential
(non-office)
Use Residential Use
10% 15% 20% 25%
(4) Shared parking. For mixed-use developments, a shared parking
approach to the provision of off-street parking shall be required
where feasible, as determined by the approving agency. The
methodology used by the developer to calculate the number of
parking spaces required shall take into consideration the methods
recommended in Shared Parking, published by the Urban Land
Institute (1984) or other recognized standards, acceptable to the
approving agency.
(5) Any developer of a place of employment or public assembly shall
undertake a study, conducted by a transportation planner or
engineer, to determine the modal split for travel by its employees
and/or visitors. Based on the expected distribution of travel modes,
a parking requirement shall be determined and approved by the
appropriate municipal agency. The agency shall require the
applicant to construct or pave only the number of parking spaces
determined to be necessary, based on the agreed-upon results of
the modal split study. From time to time, the Zoning Officer may
conduct site visits to confirm that the amount of parking provided is
being utilized by the development, and, in fact, that the parking
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:919
remains sufficient to meet the needs of the development. If at any
time it is determined that this is no longer the case, construction of
additional parking spaces may be required to meet the demand.
(6) Supplemental parking requirements. The following standards shall
also be applied in the TVD District:
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the use which they are intended to serve in the subareas west
of the rail line. Elsewhere in the TVD, parking may also be
provided on an adjacent lot in common ownership or secured
by a long-term instrument, such as a lease, acceptable to the
Zoning Officer.
(b) Shared parking arrangements among adjacent properties not
under common ownership may be permitted if the owners
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
supply of parking spaces will be adequate to service the
aggregate demand of the uses sharing the parking based on
such factors as alternating peak hours.
(c) No parking space shall be closer than 10 feet to any functional
entryway to allow for safe pedestrian circulation to and
between stores.
(d) In no case shall the number of parking spaces exceed the
minimum requirements by more than 5%.
(e) Up to 50% of a parking requirement for a project on a parcel
that is insufficient in size to accommodate sufficient parking as
required for the proposed uses may be satisfied through the
payment of $15,000 per required parking space into a fund to
be used by the City of Long Branch to construct public parking.
I. General requirements.
(1) Residential component.
(a) Any new or renovated multistory structure, other than a transit
support facility, that is located within the Mixed-use Core
Subdistrict of the TVD must have a residential component that
comprises at least 60% of the net floor area of the structure,
unless waived by the Planning Board. A hotel shall be
considered a residential use for the purposes of this section
only. Furthermore, any portion of a structure utilized for
parking purposes shall not be included in the calculation used
to determine the percentage requirements.
(b) Affordable housing requirement: All residential developments
within a mixed-use building, townhouse development, garden
apartment development, or multifamily residential building
containing 10 or more dwelling units shall set aside not less
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:920
than 10% and not more than 20% of the base density specified
herein as affordable and deed-restricted for occupancy by
qualifying households pursuant to COAH or other applicable
state regulations.
(c) Density bonuses: A developer may propose a "density bonus,"
valued at $25,000 per additional dwelling unit, to increase the
base density limitation to the maximum density limitation by
either making a payment in lieu or constructing a project of
equal value, based on a cost estimate prepared by a licensed
engineer or landscape architect. Projects qualifying for
consideration for approval by the Planning Board of a density
bonus shall include the following:
[1] Neighborhood facility, such as a neighborhood community
center, open to the public with or without a fee;
[2] Neighborhood gardens for the production of fruits and
vegetables for consumption by residents of the new
development and the TVD, consistent with the provisions
of LEED for Neighborhood Development (LEED-ND),
Neighborhood Pattern and Design (NPD) Credit 13 (Local
Food Production);
[3] Enhanced design for persons with disabilities consistent
with LEED-ND NPD Credit 11 (Visitability and Universal
Design);
[4] One or more buildings within the proposed development,
or the entire project certified under the LEED for New
Construction and Major Renovation (LEED-NC) Rating
System, LEED for Existing Buildings (LEED-EB) or LEED
for Core and Shell (LEED-CS) Rating System;
[5] Creation or enhancement of a public park or plaza within
the TVD, inclusive of elements such as landscaped sitting
areas, fountains, sculpture or other public art, formal
gardens, picnic pavilions, etc.;
[6] Provision of "affordable" rental residential units of 20% of
the base density specified herein. Such units shall be
subject to all of the requirements of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), and the developer
shall enter into a developer's agreement with the City
confirming the developer's voluntary agreement to qualify
the units for certification by the NJDCA or the court of
jurisdiction as "affordable" units. The agreement shall
include requirements for the filing of an irrevocable deed
restriction securing the units as affordable units, in
accordance with NJDCA regulations, and such other
requirements to which the City might be subjected at such
time as its affordable housing plan is certified by NJDCA or
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:921
the court of jurisdiction. In addition to the density
requirements, the Planning Board may waive some or all
the lot and bulk requirements, as appropriate, as are
directly related to the utilization of the density bonus;
[7] Pedestrian improvement that provides a safe and efficient
linkage between the west side of the rail line and the Long
Branch Train Station.
(2) Retail/service commercial component. At least 60% of the net
ground floor area of any new or renovated structure, other than a
transit support facility, within the Mixed-use Core Subdistrict must
be utilized for retail or service commercial purposes, unless waived
by the Planning Board.
J. General development plan.
(1) Purpose. A general development plan for the entirety or a portion
of a TVD subdistrict may be submitted for approval by the Planning
Board. The general development plan is intended to establish a
conceptual frame work for the development/redevelopment of TVD
properties. The general development plan, once approved, shall be
binding upon all property owners until such time as the plan may
be revised or amended. The general development plan must have
the full concurrence of all of the owners whose properties are the
subject of the plan.
(2) General provisions. The general development plan shall be guided
by the procedures and requirements established in the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law194 for such a plan. The general
development plan shall identify the location of all existing and new
structures, surface parking facilities and structures, a
comprehensive pedestrian network, landscaping, bicycle facilities
and paths and such other features as may be warranted to
implement the goals and objectives of a transit village.
(3) Approval procedures. A general development plan at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted in sufficient detail for
review and approval by the Planning Board. All of the standard
requirements normally associated with a site plan application shall
apply unless waived by the Board. An application fee of $1,500 and
an escrow deposit of $3,000 shall be submitted by the applicant.
K. Design standards. The following design standards are intended to
reinforce the Transit Village District as a compact, walkable center with
active street life and a cohesive built environment where existing and
proposed commercial and residential development are integrated.
These design standards are intended to maximize flexibility of the
design to sustain the character and charm of the district. All standards
set forth in Chapter 345 of the Code of the City of Long Branch shall
194. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:922
continue to apply except when inconsistent with the design standards
set forth below.
(1) Pedestrian circulation, bicycle parking and storage.
(a) Off-street parking and service access shall be designed to avoid
the backing in and out of streets.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided to connect new development with
the public pedestrian circulation system within the TVD
District. All sidewalks should be durably paved and smoothly
surfaced to provide for the free movement of pedestrians. All
sidewalks and pathways must be designed to provide access
for the physically disabled. Access ramps shall be conveniently
placed and sloped to provide easy connection to streets and
sidewalks, in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(c) Structured parking may be contained within, under or
attached to buildings. Parking structures or podium-type
parking under buildings may not front toward the public space,
Third Avenue or Morris Avenue. Where parking structures
front on public streets, such may feature liner buildings or
ground floor space along the sidewalk designed as retail,
commercial or office space.
(d) Provide at least one secured, enclosed bicycle storage space
per residential unit.
(e) Bike racks shall be provided at a rate of one multi-loop bike
rack per every 20 on-site parking spaces, but not less than the
greater of one bicycle space per business or four bicycle
spaces per project site for retail or four bicycle spaces per
building for nonretail uses.
(f) A minimum of one space per 20 off-street parking spaces
provided per project will be reserved for parking for shared car
services and be located near functional entryways.
(2) Landscape treatments.
(a) A landscape architect, licensed in the State of New Jersey, shall
prepare a detailed landscape plan for each project. The
landscape plan shall utilize a variety of trees, shrubs and other
plant material plus other design features appropriate for an
urban setting to create spatial definition or separation, shade,
visual interest, seasonal color, visual buffering, microclimatic
enhancement, and to improve safety. Finally, each project shall
employ a variety of amenities such as benches and bike racks
that are intended to enhance the visual approach of the project
and/or encourage intermodal transportation.
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:923
(b) Indigenous (native) plant species shall be primarily specified
for planting and invasive exotic species shall be avoided. Any
landscaping which is not resistant to the environment, or that
dies within two years of planting, shall be replaced by the
developer.
(c) In landscaped spaces, passive systems such as cisterns or rain
barrels and water gardens that collect rainwater for irrigation
or recharge shall be utilized to the extent feasible.
(d) Only soil moisture-sensing irrigation systems using nonpotable
water shall be permitted, except that where irrigation is not
used, all plant materials shall be drought-tolerant species.
(3) Building orientation, massing and facade composition.
(a) Townhome. Townhomes are permitted in the Medical Village,
Lower-Density Residential Fringe and Higher-Density Medical-
Residential Transition Subdistricts, subject to the provisions of
§ 345-53 and at a base density of 12 units per acre with density
bonuses to a maximum of 17 dwelling units per acre.
Townhouses will be arranged to face the street. Roofs should
be either gable or hip; dormers are encouraged. Each
townhome will have a porch or stoop defining the entry, which
may be located within the required front yard.
(b) Multifamily. Multifamily development is permitted in the
Higher-Density Medical-Residential Transition Subdistrict and
the portion of the Mixed-use Core Subdistrict west of West
Avenue and west of Westwood Avenue. Multifamily
development will follow a building form that keeps the building
close to the public sidewalk with breaks in the front facades
and a variety of architectural styles as illustrated in Figure 2.
Building height will be limited to five stories. The base density
for multifamily development is 50 dwelling units per acre, with
density bonuses to 60 dwelling units per acre. For a project on
two noncontiguous parcels fronting on the same street, the
density may be applied as an average between the two sites.
(c) Live/work. Live/Work building types include living quarters
with attached work space, whether shared in common with
other dwelling units as a "limited common element" of a
condominium (also known as "co-housing"), or used exclusively
by the occupant of the dwelling unit. Such attached work space
may include a kitchen and recreational space to facilitate livework
activities, but shall not constitute a separate dwelling
unit. They shall be oriented close to the public sidewalk. The
base density shall be 10 dwelling units per acre, with density
bonuses to a maximum allowable density to 15 dwelling units
per acre.
(d) Office.
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:924
[1] The section provides for the integration of offices within
the Medical Village Subdistrict of the TVD, either as a
stand-alone building or mixed with street-level retail as
shown in Figure 4. Street-level retail would only be
permitted in buildings with frontage on Third Avenue,
West Bath Avenue or Pavilion Avenue.
[2] Solitary or mixed-use office buildings will be built to the
right-of-way lines to establish a traditional "Main Street"
streetwall. In a multitenant building, each shop will have
its own shopfront. The shopfronts may either have
identical designs to reinforce the building design or varied
designs to express the different businesses. A shop front
should be separated from the roofline or a second floor by
a horizontal architectural element such as a sash, cornice,
frieze, molding, etc.
[3] First floor facades shall have large, clear storefront glass
areas (50 to 70% of the street-facing building facade) to
display the nature of the business and produce an
interesting streetscape. Storefront windows may be either
typical large, single pane or multiple smaller panes
separated by mullions.
[4] All buildings are required to have entrances accessed
directly from a sidewalk or plaza. Upper floors are to be
provided with separate exterior entrances unless a large
common lobby or atrium is provided.
(e) Retail. Stand-alone retail buildings shall be permitted only in
the Mixed-use Core. Buildings with more than 50 feet of
sidewalk frontage shall be designed so that front facades have
architectural breaks resembling individual storefronts.
Building heights must be two stories. Street level facades must
contain storefront windows covering at least 50% of the
surface area.
(f) Mixed-use multifamily. Buildings with street-level retail and
residential apartments on the upper floors shall use a variety of
design techniques to differentiate the retail and residential
elements of the building, including the use of sash and frieze
elements between the street level and upper levels. Buildings
with multifamily above retail should be oriented towards public
open spaces whenever possible. Density parameters shall
follow those of buildings that are solely multifamily with a base
density of 50 dwelling units per acre, with density bonuses to
60 dwelling units per acre.
(g) New buildings should be designed to be an integral part of the
TVD building mix and be developed with appropriate
consideration for both proposed and existing buildings with
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:925
respect to height, mass, location, materials, orientation, signs,
lighting and use.
(h) Buildings shall front on public streets to provide form and
function to the streetscape. The streetscape should be
continuous and varied through the use of street furniture,
landscaping, building articulation, building frontage setbacks
and changes in sidewalk types and textures. Long buildings
should be divided at a scale comparable to that of other
buildings on the rest of the block or adjacent blocks. Driveway
intersections with the public street should be minimized to
avoid excessive interruptions in the streetwall and conflicts
with pedestrians.
(i) Buildings shall be designed so as to present an articulated
facade from all vantage points. Parking structures or that
portion of a building containing a parking structure visible
from a public street shall have an exterior clad in a vinecovered
trellis, graphic panels, solar panels, a window-like
facade treatment, liner building or ground floor space along
the sidewalk designed as retail, commercial or office space.
(j) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building with the exception of parking structures or that
portion of a building containing a parking structure. All sides of
a building shall be architecturally designed to be consistent
with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Blank wall or
service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations visible
from public view shall be avoided.
(k) Unless the developer proposes a specific use that requires a
unique building, buildings should be designed utilizing base,
middle and top forms as the primary method relating buildings
to each other.
(l) The base shall be considered the first story of the facade facing
a public street, depending on the overall heights of the
building. The design of the base, as well as the quality and
durability of its materials, should be emphasized to create
visual interest and support pedestrian activity. The building's
base should be presented to the Planning Board at a larger
scale of drawing and greater detail than the remainder of the
facade to ensure it meets the building design objectives.
(m) In addition to the base, the exterior design shall include a
middle field section and a cap on the top. The middle of the
building shall be differentiated from the base by a horizontal
transition line. The transition line's specific location shall be
determined primarily by the overall height of the building and
that of any adjacent buildings. If adjacent buildings are lower
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:926
than the proposed building, then the transition line should
relate to such adjacent building. A horizontal transition line
should also be established separating the middle field from the
cap or top of the buildings.
(n) The base transition line should range from 1/5 to 1/4 of the
overall height. The upper transition line, articulating the cap,
should be placed approximately 1/8 of the overall height from
the top. Transition lines may consist of a continuous, shallow
balcony, a shallow recess, an articulated trim course cornice,
fenestration or other appropriate means. The transition should
be supported by a change of window rhythm or size and a
change in material, color or texture.
(o) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets
to create visual breaks on the exterior. Long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided. Building
wall offsets, including projections such as balconies, canopies,
awnings, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level shall
be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall (see Figure 7).
Similarly, roofline offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided
in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the
massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single, long
roof.
(p) The front doors of all buildings shall be visible from the street.
If located more than 10 feet from the front building line, their
location must be reinforced with additional graphics, lighting,
marquees or canopies.
(q) Functional building entrances shall be provided at an average
of at least every 75 feet (see Figure 8, taken from LEED-ND
Rating System NPD Credit 1). All entrances to a building,
except service and emergency egress doors, shall be defined
and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels,
pediments, pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs,
railings, balustrades and other elements, where appropriate.
Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible
with the style, materials, colors and details of the building as a
whole, as shall the doors. The main entrance shall face the
street on which the property fronts.
(r) A minimum of one facade element shall align horizontally with
adjacent buildings. Facade elements include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, cornices, signs, storefront windows,
windows above the first floor and awnings. Awnings are
encouraged. There should be a balance between variety and
harmony of building facades. Maintain the similarity in the
building width. New or larger buildings on parcels shall
incorporate architectural elements which reflect the width of
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:927
adjacent buildings. Successful methods for achieving this
include, but are not limited to, window pattern and detail
placement.
(s) In general, it is preferred to keep the street facade built to the
property line in alignment with adjacent buildings.
(t) Windows shall be primarily vertically proportioned. Large
areas of glass curtain walls or strip windows of more than 15
feet in length are discouraged, as are tinted and highly
reflective glass. Window openings shall have sills and heads of
masonry or stone. These may be of precast concrete,
limestone, granite, brick soldier courses, or slabs exposed only
for the length of the window. Masonry units may be turned at
the wall opening to visually create a thick wall and should be
used in the design of balconies, loggias and larger openings.
(u) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have
large transparent windows, preferably divided-light. Such
windows shall be framed by the surrounding wall and shall be a
minimum of 60% of the total ground-level facade area
adjoining the sidewalk (see Figure 9, taken from NPD Credit 1
of the LEED-ND Rating System of the USGBC). The window
wall facade area may be reduced if, due to a particular use or
settings, the provision of windows will present concerns for
aesthetic design or security. However, the facade design should
employ an arrangement of materials that reflects the required
window area and/or lines to be compatible with the intent of
these guidelines.
(v) Blank walls in excess of 25% or 10 continuous feet of the
frontage of the property shall not be used at the street level
(see Figure 10 taken from NPD Credit 1 of the LEED-ND
Rating System of the USGBC). Blank walls must contain
architectural relief such as expressive details, blind windows,
murals, etc.
(w) All buildings shall provide scale-defining architectural
elements or details at the first two floor levels minimum, such
as windows, spandrels, awnings, porticos, pediments, cornices,
pilasters, columns and balconies.
(x) The predominant material of all street walls on primary and
secondary streets shall be brick, precast, cement-board siding,
wood and finished masonry block, or curtain wall. Stucco may
be used as an accent. All materials and colors shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
(y) Shop fronts should have a kick plate that ranges in height from
18 inches to 42 inches running continuously beneath the
required fenestration.
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:928
(z) Public access to commercial and governmental buildings shall
be provided at sidewalk grade. The primary floor of and access
to mixed-use buildings may be elevated.
(aa) Awnings, which add visual richness to the commercial corridor
while enhancing the quality of public walkways, are
encouraged for all storefronts. Awnings shall have fixed or
retractable metal framework, with vinyl laminated polyester
base scrim awning fabric to blend with storefront paint colors.
(bb) Canopies, unlike awnings, are nonretractable. They shall be
constructed of wood or metal framing, standing-seam metal
roof, plywood and molded millwork trim. Canopies shall
incorporate signage and down lighting. Security shall be
implemented so that it cannot be seen, and security grille
housing is specifically prohibited.
(cc) All awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the
building so that the lowest part of the awning or canopy is
mounted a minimum of eight feet and a maximum of 12 feet
above the sidewalk at the storefront.
(dd) In conjunction with Figure 11, appropriate design of the corner
of a block shall include one of the following patterns:
[1] Opening the space at ground level for people to walk
across the corner, with the building mass above redefining
the corner.
[2] A recessed entry at the corner such as the familiar angled
wall with an entry door.
[3] A corner window with an important view into the building.
[4] Balconies or bay windows that wrap the corner.
[5] A tower element to emphasize the corner.
(ee) Multistory buildings with flat roofs shall provide light color
roof surfaces with a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of 78 or
greater (LEED-NC Rating System - Sustainable Sites (SS)
Credit 7.2) for at least 75% of the roof area. Green roof
plantings and solar photovoltaic systems on roofs and parking
decks shall be permitted and shall not be counted in the area
required for highly reflective roof surfaces above.
(ff) Excepting the antenna itself, all parts and components of
personal communications antennas, satellite dishes, and
television and radio antennas shall be screened from view
regardless of elevation, or shall be disguised within an
enclosed structure. The screening shall be designed as part of
the overall design theme of the building to which it is
associated.
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:929
(gg) Dish antennas may not exceed three feet in diameter.
(hh) Mechanical equipment located on building roofs shall be
screened so as not to be visible from the ground level from
adjacent developments and from public streets and spaces.
Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened and in
the rear.
(4) Lighting.
(a) Lighting levels along paved portions of public walks shall be an
average of no less than one foot candle for commercial areas
and 0.5 foot candle for residential areas.
(b) New fixtures serving to light streets shall be decorative street
lights approved by the City's planning professionals for use
throughout the TVD. The fixtures may include attachments to
accommodate such amenities as banners and flower pots.
(c) The design for a proposed facade must consider the
appearance of the building in the evening and develop an
exterior lighting plan that includes display window lighting,
building accent lighting, and pedestrian-scaled lighting for
both buildings and pedestrian areas within the site. Lighting
shall be warm in color, with control of glare for the pedestrian
and minimization of light pollution.
(5) Streetscape.
(a) Site furnishings may include elements such as benches,
gazebos, trash and recycling receptacles, bicycle racks,
drinking fountains, kiosks, sculptural elements, decorative
fountains, bollards, decorative fences, seat walls, and
pedestrian-scale lighting, subject to the review and approval of
the Long Branch Planning Board.
(b) Freestanding newspaper and advertising dispensers shall not
be permitted in the right-of-way of primary streets and shall be
incorporated into approved buildings or pavilions.
(c) Outdoor cafes may extend onto the public right-of-way upon
issuance of a zoning permit. Such encroachment shall convey
no rights beyond those enumerated in the permit. Outdoor
cafes shall be delineated from the public way by planters and
metal fencing with no more than two entrances to the cafe
seating area. A clear width of at least four feet shall be
maintained between any outward portion of the cafe and the
closest street furniture and equipment.
(6) Signage.
(a) The temporary display of signs, banners, flags, pennants and
similar devices, in connection with special events or activities
§ 345-39 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-39
332:930
of a public or nonprofit nature, or upon the occasion of the
opening of a new business use, shall be permitted, provided
such display shall not exceed 14 days and shall not occur more
than four times per calendar year.
(b) All signs within the project area shall be part of the overall
total design scheme approved by the Long Branch Planning
Board at the time of application for site plan review.
(c) Signs for project not requiring site plan review and approval by
the Planning Board shall conform to the requirements of
§ 284-9 for nonresidential signs and § 284-6 for residential
signs.
§ 345-39 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-39
332:931

ARTICLE V
Special Regulations
§ 345-40. Signs.
Signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of an ordinance duly adopted to regulate and license the erection of signs
within the City.195
§ 345-41. Fences.
A. No fence hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in any zone in the
City may exceed three feet in height above the curb level when located
within 25 feet of the intersection of two street lines.
B. No fence hereinafter erected, altered or reconstructed in any
residential zone or on lots of any other zone on which residential
buildings are erected shall exceed four feet in height above ground
level within a front yard area, or more than six feet in height above
ground level on any other side. This regulation shall not preclude the
erection of a fence in accordance with Chapter 312, Tennis Court, in
conjunction with a tennis court or Chapter 303, Swimming Pools,
Article II, Public Recreational Bathing Places, in conjunction with a
swimming pool. In the case of a corner lot, and in conjunction with a
single family home, a five-foot fence would be permitted following
toward the rear yard from the rear line of the house, continuing a
maximum of 30 feet, and across the rear line, if located a minimum of
10 feet off the front property line. [Amended 8-25-1998 by Ord. No.
28-98]
C. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and
in accordance with the approved plan on file with the Construction
Code Official.
D. All fences and/or walls must be erected within property lines, and no
fence or wall shall be erected which will encroach upon a public rightof-
way. The finished side of a fence shall face outward from the property
on which it is erected, unless determined otherwise by the Aesthetic
Committee of the Planning Board.
E. The foregoing restrictions shall not be applied so as to prevent the
erection of an open wire fence not exceeding eight feet in height above
ground level anywhere within a public park, public playground or
public school properties. These restrictions shall not be applied so as to
restrict the erection of a wall for the purpose of retaining space,
provided that such wall does not exceed such height to be measured
from the ground level of the highest adjacent grade.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 284, Signs.
§ 345-40 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-41
332:933
§ 345-42. Off-street parking regulations.196
F. The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
barbed-wire fences, sharp-pointed fences, canvas, cloth, electrically
charged fences and temporary fences, such as snow fences, expandable
fences and collapsible fences, at any location on the lot upon which a
dwelling or structure is situated.
A. General provisions.
(1) Off-street parking space shall be provided with each and every new
use created as further specified in this chapter and shall be
furnished with necessary passageways and driveways. All such
space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on which it is
situated and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner.
(2) None of the off-street parking facilities that are required in this
chapter shall be required for any existing building or use, unless
the building or use shall be enlarged, in which case the provisions
of this chapter shall apply only to the enlarged portion of the
building or use.
(3) The collective provision of off-street parking area by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided
that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum
required of the various buildings or uses computed separately, and
further provided that the land upon which the collective facilities
are located is owned or leased by one or more of the collective
users.
(4) Parking areas, driveways and access aisles may be located in any
yard space, but shall not be closer than 10 feet to any street line or
property line.
(5) A site plan shall be filed with the zoning permit application where
off-street parking facilities are required or permitted under the
provisions of this chapter in connection with the use or uses for
which application is being made.
(6) All parking areas, passageways and driveways, except when
provided in connection with one-family residences, shall be
surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather pavement, clearly
marked for car spaces, and shall be adequately drained, all subject
to the approval of the City Engineer.
(7) No display vehicles or trailer device for commercial purposes shall
remain in any district for longer than a twenty-four-hour period.
196. Editor's Note: For additional supplementary parking requirements in the West End Design
Overlay (WEDO) District, see § 345-32.1H.
§ 345-41 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-42
332:934
(8) For additional parking requirements on Ocean Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard, See § 345-11Q and R.
B. Parking areas in commercial and industrial districts. Every parcel of
land hereafter used as a public or private parking area in any
commercial or industrial zone shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Screening.
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any
side which adjoins or faces premises situated in any residence
zone district or institutional premises, as required in
Subsection A.
(b) In addition to such buffer planting, the owner of the
commercial property shall erect on the buffer a fence at least
four feet in height for the purpose of protecting the residential
property from litter, debris and light glare and such other
nuisances that would disturb peaceful possession. The fence
shall be of closed post picket solid fence, containing no more
than 25% open space. The responsibility of maintenance of the
commercial property referred to herein shall be joint and/or
shared between the owner of the property and any other
tenants who are in possession. No part of any parking area
shall be closer than 10 feet to any school, hospital or other
institutional building unless screened by an unpierced masonry
wall.
(2) Not more than two driveways of not less than 20 feet or more than
30 feet in width, used as a means of ingress or egress for
nonresidential off-street parking areas, shall be submitted for each
200 feet of frontage on a public street, nor shall any driveway be
located closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two public streets.
(3) Landscaping consisting of attractive trees, shrubs, plants and grass
lawns shall be required and planted in accordance with the site
plans. Special buffer planting shall be provided along the side and
rear property lines so as to provide protection to adjacent
properties when such lot lines abut or are within residential zones
or uses.
(4) Off-street parking areas located in commercial, industrial and
medical zones which provide parking for 20 or more vehicles shall
be provided with shade trees of a type approved by the City
Engineer. The shade trees shall be located in a planned manner
within the parking lot area in quantity equal to not less than one
shade tree for every 10 parking spaces.
(5) For commercial and all nonresidential uses in business districts,
required parking shall be provided within 150 feet of such use. It
shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to
§ 345-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-42
332:935
the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to
serve.
(6) The provisions of this subsection may be met by participation in a
community parking program designed to serve a larger area,
provided that plans for such community parking have been
approved by the Planning Board.
(7) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving commercial and industrial uses shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the
use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by
commercial and industrial users to protect adjacent residential
zones from the glare of such illumination and from that of
automobile headlights.
C. Parking areas in residential districts.
(1) Parking may be in attached or detached garages, driveways or
parking areas.
(2) Driveways designated as parking space(s) shall have an area of
nine feet by 18 feet for each space within the property lines.
(3) Parking areas for other than one-family detached dwellings shall
provide landscaping consisting of attractive trees, shrubs, plants
and grass lawns and shall be required and planted in accordance
with the site plans. Special buffer planting shall be provided along
the side and rear property lines so as to provide protection to
adjacent properties when such lot lines abut or are within
residential zones or use.
(4) Commercial vehicles.
(a) No commercial vehicle shall be parked on private property
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or on Sunday in a
residential zone; provided, however, that such restriction shall
not apply to one commercial motor vehicle with a registered
gross weight of 8,000 pounds or less, owned or used by a
resident of the premises, which vehicle may be parked or
garaged between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on said
premises within a residential zone. [Amended 6-27-1994 by
Ord. No. 29-94; 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(b) The following vehicles shall be prohibited regardless of weight
classifications: tow truck, school bus.
(5) Parking restrictions.
(a) No motor vehicle of a registered gross weight greater than
8,000 pounds shall be permitted to park between 9:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. on any premises, private property, City property, City
street or City row within any residential zone or on any
§ 345-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-42
332:936
residential property. (See Chapter 325, Vehicles and Traffic,
§ 325-3L(1) and (2), and Chapter 316, Towing, § 316-5, Fees
and charges, for further restrictions.)
(b) Exemption. Any emergency municipal, state, federal agencies
or public utility vehicles being utilized to fulfill their specific
tasks. [Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
(6) Failure to comply with this subsection will result in those penalties
as prescribed in § 345-79, where applicable. [Added 2-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 8-95]
(7) In no case shall more than 20% of any front yard area be used for
parking or driveways in any R Residential Zone. [Added
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 18-08]
(8) In the case of corner lots, the smaller of the front yard areas
abutting any street shall be used in calculating the maximum
allowed twenty-percent lot coverage for parking/driveways within
any front yard areas within any R Residential Zone. [Added
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 18-08]
(9) With the exception of circular driveways, as defined in § 345-11Y,
not more than one driveway/parking area/curb cut shall be allowed
on any property which contains a one- to four-family residential use
and is located within any R Residential Zone. [Added 8-26-2008
by Ord. No. 18-08]
D. Required off-street parking space. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93]
(1) Requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Dwelling units.
[1] One-family detached dwelling: two parking spaces, except
that one additional parking space shall be required for
each additional bedroom, as defined in § 345-3, over four
bedrooms. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 26-00]
[2] Multifamily detached, two, three and four dwellings: 2 1/2
parking spaces per dwelling unit.
[3] Townhouses: 2 1/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
[4] Garden apartment: 2 1/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
[5] Apartment in structure of more than two stories: 2 1/2
parking spaces per dwelling unit.
[6] Age-restricted dwellings: see § 345-54G.
§ 345-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-42
332:937
(b) Barbershop, beauty salon and tanning salon: two spaces per
chair/tanning bed, plus one additional space for each
employee.
(c) Banks, financial and business offices and professional offices:
one parking space for every 150 square feet of building area or
major fraction thereof.
(d) Retail and service stores, except when otherwise specifically
covered herein: one parking space for every 200 square feet of
building area or major fraction thereof.
(e) Stores for the retail sale of furniture, appliances and hardware:
one parking space for every 500 square feet of building area or
major fraction thereof.
(f) Supermarkets and self-service food stores: one parking space
for every 100 square feet of building area or major fraction
thereof.
(g) Laundromats: one parking space for every two washing
machines.
(h) Motor vehicle sales and service: one parking space for every
200 square feet of building area or fraction thereof.
(i) Eating and drinking facilities (restaurants, diners, bars,
taverns, etc.).
[1] One thousand square feet or less of floor area: one parking
space for every four seats, plus one parking space for
every two employees.
[2] Above 1,000 square feet of floor area: one parking space
for every four persons who may be legally admitted therein
at one time under the state fire prevention laws, plus one
space per every two employees.
[3] Raised decks and outdoor dining facilities: one parking
space for every four persons who may be legally admitted
therein at one time under the state fire prevention laws.
[4] Ground level patios and outdoor dining facilities: one
parking space for every four seats provided.
(j) Bowling alleys: five parking spaces for each bowling lane.
(k) Auditoriums, churches, theaters, stadiums, assembly halls and
similar places of public and quasi-public assembly having fixed
seating facilities: one parking space for every four seats in the
main assembly unit.
(l) Auditoriums, exhibition halls, assembly halls, union halls,
community centers and similar places of public and quasi-
§ 345-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-42
332:938
public assembly not having fixed seating facilities: one parking
space for every four persons who may legally be admitted
therein at one time under the state fire prevention laws.
(m) Institutional uses for care of the ill or aged: one parking space
for every four beds, plus one additional parking space for every
two employees and members of the staff in the largest working
shift.
(n) Mortuaries and funeral homes: two parking spaces for every 50
square feet of floor area in the slumber rooms, parlors or
individual funeral service rooms.
(o) Public utility installations: five spaces.
(p) Parks and other outdoor recreation sites: five parking spaces
for each gross acre of land up to 50 acres, and one parking
space per gross acre of land above 50 acres.
(q) Industrial manufacturing establishments: one parking space
for each employee, plus one space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area in the buildings for use by visitors to the
building or buildings. The employee ratio shall be applied to
the shift of work activity that has the greatest number of
employees. Such parking area may be located in the required
yard area, but shall not be located within a buffer area as
required by this chapter.
(r) Home occupations: one parking space for each 150 square feet
of space used for home occupation.
(s) Hospital/medical center:
[1] One space for every two beds.
[2] One space for every 150 square feet of professional office,
clinic and outpatient facilities.
[3] One space for every three employees, doctors or students.
(t) Vertical parking garages.
[1] Vertical parking garages shall be treated as an accessory
building within the zone district of its location; however,
setbacks shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any property
line or the height of the structure, whichever is the
greater.
[2] Any site plan application for a vertical parking garage shall
include design data on structural bearing capacities,
anticipated loads, soil bearing and compaction tests.
§ 345-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-42
332:939
[3] All plans and structures shall be subject to those
applicable standards as set forth by appropriate federal,
state, county and local agencies.
[4] All roof lighting shall be properly shielded so as not to
produce glare affecting surrounding properties or any
other buildings on the site.
[5] To reduce visual blight and increase safety, the space
between the floors shall be of the same material and
aesthetic design as the principal structures. Provisions for
adequate ventilation must be provided so as to eliminate
lingering noxious fumes and odors. The roof shall be
enclosed with a solid masonry parapet four feet high
around the entire perimeter.
[6] Levels permitted above-grade shall have a maximum
height of 40 feet.
[7] An off-street waiting area capable of holding 5% of the
total parking capacity within the structure shall be
provided on the site.
[8] Ingress and egress points shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board based on reports from the City
Engineer, Traffic Bureau and Public Works and Division of
Planning so as to minimize traffic congestion and hazard.
No access point shall be closer than 150 feet of any street
intersection.
[9] Parking space; aisle width. See Subsection D(1)(y).
(u) Other regulations.
[1] Nursing homes. See Subsection D(1)(m).
[2] Single family. See Subsection D(1)(a).
[3] Loading. See § 345-43.
(v) Delicatessens: one space for every two employees. There shall
be one additional parking space for every 100 square feet of
building area or major fraction thereof.
(w) Arcade: one parking space for every 25 square feet of floor
area plus one space for each employee.
(x) Convenience store: one space for each 100 square feet of floor
area.
(y) Health spa/gym: two parking spaces per each apparatus, plus
one parking space per each 100 square foot of floor area, plus
one parking space per paid employee.
§ 345-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-42
332:940
(z) Active recreational sports, exposition and entertainment
facility: two parking spaces per each apparatus, plus one
parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space, plus one
parking space per employee. [Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
8-95; amended 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 36-98]
(2) Parking space size shall be nine feet by 18 feet minimum. Aisle
widths shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
Angle
(degrees)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
30° or 45° 12 20
60° 22 22
90° 25 25
E. Temporary seasonal parking. Temporary seasonal parking lots and
areas shall comply with all provisions of this section as follows: [Added
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-12]
(1) General requirements.
(a) Zoning permit. A commercial zoning permit is required for any
temporary parking lot and/or area.
(b) Location. Temporary seasonal parking shall be permitted in all
redevelopment zones except the Lower Broadway Corridor
(LBC).
(c) Time limit. No temporary parking lots and/or areas are
permitted for more than one season per year.
(2) Other requirements. The following requirements shall be met by
the site, the owner and/or occupier of the premises with respect to
a temporary seasonal parking lot or area:
(a) General provisions:
[1] Minimum overall lot area: 30,000 square feet.
[2] A layout plan shall be filed with the commercial zoning
permit application.
[3] No display vehicles or trailer devices for commercial
purposes shall remain for longer than a twenty-four-hour
period.
(b) Plan requirements:
§ 345-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-42
332:941
[1] Parking areas, driveways and access aisles may be located
in any yard space but shall not be closer than 10 feet to
any street line or property line.
[2] Not more than two driveways of not less than 20 feet or
more than 30 feet in width, used as a means of ingress and
egress for temporary parking lots or areas, shall be
submitted for each 200 feet of frontage on a public street,
nor shall any driveway be located closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of two public streets.
[3] Special buffer planting shall be provided along the side
and rear property lines so as to provide protection to
adjacent properties when such lot lines abut residential or
institutional zones or uses and as per screenings in this
section.
[4] All temporary parking lots or areas that are illuminated
during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use
is in operation shall provide a lighting plan. Adequate
shielding shall be provided to protect adjacent properties
from the glare of such illumination and from that of
automobile headlights. Pole height, locations and
illumination are required on the plans.
[5] Designated parking spaces shall have an area of nine feet
by 18 feet for each space within the property lines.
[6] Layout plan must be approved by the Department of Public
Safety.
(c) Screening requirements:
[1] Screening and buffer planting is required on any side
which adjoins, abuts or faces premises situated in any
residential zone district or institutional premises, as
required in this chapter, and shall consist of attractive
trees, shrubs, plans and grass lawns planted in accordance
with the layout plan.
[2] Buffer strip and/or plantings shall consist of a continuous
planting strip of trees and/or shrubs densely planted so as
to restrict clear view beyond such strip. Buffer planning in
front yard areas may not exceed four feet in height. Buffer
plantings in side or rear yards must be at least six feet in
height.
[3] In addition to such buffer planting, the owner of the
property shall erect on the buffer a fence at least four feet
in height for the purpose of protecting the residential
property from litter, debris and light glare and such other
nuisances that would disturb peaceful possession. The
§ 345-42 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-42
332:942
§ 345-43. Off-street loading and unloading provisions.
fence shall be closed post picket solid fence, containing
no more than twenty-five-percent open space. The
responsibility of maintenance of the property referred to
herein shall be joint and/or shared between the owner of
the property and any other tenants who are in possession.
No part of any parking area shall be closer than 10 feet to
any school, hospital or other institutional building unless
screened by an unpierced masonry wall.
[4] Fencing and gates must also comply with § 345-41.
A. For every building, structure or part having over 5,000 square feet of
gross building area erected and occupied for commerce, hospital,
laundry, dry cleaning, places of public and quasi-public assembly,
industry and other similar uses involved in the receipt and distribution
by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and
permanently maintained adequate space for standing, loading and
unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with the public
use of streets or alleys. Every building structure or addition having a
use which complies with the above definition shall be provided with at
least one truck standing, loading and unloading space on the premises
not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14 feet in height.
One additional truck space of these dimensions shall be provided for
every additional 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross area in
the building.
B. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will
not interfere with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe
movement of truck vehicles.
C. Loading space as required under this section shall be provided an area
in addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
D. Off-street loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced with a dustless,
all-weather pavement, which shall be adequately drained, all subject to
the approval of the City Engineer.
E. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located next
to a residential zone, the loading and unloading area shall be suitably
screened and buffered in accordance with § 345-42B(1) and (3).
§ 345-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-44
332:943
§ 345-44. Swimming pools. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93197]
All swimming pools shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the
local Health Department regulations and existing ordinances. (See Chapter
303, Swimming Pools, Article II, Public Recreational Bathing Places.)
Swimming pools may not be located in any front yard area and must be set
back at least 10 feet from any side or rear lot line. All swimming pools must
be enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high fence or wall. Swimming pools
shall be considered as a permitted accessory use when located on a site
containing a permitted residential use.
§ 345-45. Environmental standards.
As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of any
structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant shall
supply evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board or to its designated
representative, that the proposed use, structure, process or equipment
will conform fully with all of the applicable performance standards. As
evidence of compliance, the Board may require certification of tests by
appropriate government agencies or by recognized testing laboratories, any
costs thereof to be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may require
that specific operating procedures or methods be followed or that specific
types of equipment, machinery or devices be installed if the government
agencies or testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall
determine that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment,
devices, procedures or methods is required in order to ensure compliance
with the applicable performance standards. Permits and certificates
required by other government agencies shall be submitted to the Planning
Board as proof of compliance with applicable codes.
A. Preservation of natural features. No structure shall be built within any
drainage or conservation easement or, in their absence, within 100 feet
of the top of the bank of a flowing body of water. No building shall be
constructed within the floodplain of any stream or on land subject to
periodic overflow or on land which has an average water table within
two feet of the ground surface. No persons, firms or corporations shall
strip, excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or other use other than
on the premises from which taken, except in connection with the
construction or alteration of a building on such premises and
excavating or grading incidental thereto, or except as hereinafter
specified or pursuant to the terms of Chapter 290, Soil Removal.
Existing natural features such as trees, brooks and drainage channels
shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed
use of such property, a retention of the maximum amount of such
features consistent with the use of the property shall be required,
wherever possible, at the discretion of the Planning Board.
B. Noise. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-44 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-45
332:944
(1) Any noise produced on any premises or within any structure shall
not be in excess of the standards set by the Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, occupational
safety and health standards and applicable established federal
standards.
(2) Any noise produced on any premises or within any structure shall
not be in excess of standards as set forth in Chapter 235, Noise.
This subsection, if governed by a state or federal legislation,
regulation or standard, shall be deemed to be superseded by said
state or federal legislation, regulation and/or standard.
C. Air pollution. All standards and provisions of the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control Codes,
as amended or supplemented, shall be complied with.
(1) Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, smoke shall not be emitted into
the open air from any fuel-burning equipment in excess of the
standards set by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter 4,
Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution by Smoke, as amended or
supplemented.
(2) Solid particles.
(a) In any zone there shall be no discharge of solid particles
through a stack, duct or vent in excess of the standards set by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, New
Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter 7, Control and
Prohibition of Solid Particles, as amended or supplemented.
(b) No open burning shall be permitted in any zone except in
compliance with the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter
2, Control and Prohibition of Open Burning, as amended or
supplemented.
(c) All incinerators shall be approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and comply with all
standards and provisions of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Code, Chapter 11, Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution from
Incinerators, as amended or supplemented.
(d) No coal or coke shall be used to heat or cool any building or
used in any process.
(e) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial
movement of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or
otherwise stabilized during construction sufficiently to
§ 345-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-45
332:945
§ 345-46. Arcades.
§ 345-47. Adult entertainment uses. [Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
6-95]
minimize the generation of dust from the movement of such
vehicles or equipment.
D. Odors. In any zone, odorous material shall not be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without instruments
or in excess of the standards and provisions set by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code, Chapter 6, Prohibition of Air Pollution, as amended or
supplemented. Any process which may involve the creation or emission
of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so
that control will be maintained. Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air) in Part
1 (Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals) of Research on
Chemical Odors, copyrighted October 1968 by the Manufacturing
Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall be used as a guide in
determining quantities of offensive odors.
E. Liquid waste. No liquid waste shall be discharged (directly or
indirectly) into any watercourse except as to conform to federal, state
and local statutes, laws, rules and regulations, as amended or
supplemented. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
A. Gambling devices not permitted. Nothing in this section shall in any
way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices
whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be
a gambling device or in any way contrary to law or that may be contrary
to any future laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. License required. Any person, firm, corporation or association
displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be required to obtain
a license from the City of Long Branch as set forth in Chapter 106,
Amusements.
C. Exclusions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person, firm,
corporation or association operating within the City of Long Branch
from offering for public patronage or keeping for operation two
mechanical or electronic amusement games.
D. Parking. There shall be one parking space for every 25 square feet of
floor area plus one parking space for each employee.
A. In the development and execution of this section it is recognized that
there are certain uses which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics.
Such uses create and promote a deleterious effect on the City's
neighborhood characteristics, administration of schools and the
§ 345-45 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47
332:946
§ 345-47.1. Outdoor fresh produce markets. [Added 5-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-09]
Farmers' markets and/or community farmers' markets are authorized as
follows and as subject to the following terms and conditions:
commercial and economic viability of the community. Adult
entertainment uses are such uses. In order to prevent the deterioration
of the community, to preserve the neighborhoods of the City of Long
Branch, to ensure the economic prosperity of the community and to
provide for the protection and well-being of the quality of life in the
City of Long Branch, certain regulations are necessary to prevent these
adverse effects.
B. Adult entertainment uses are prohibited in all zones, except where
expressly permitted.
C. In any zone where adult entertainment uses are expressly permitted,
however, no adult entertainment use shall be located within 100 feet of
any of the following:
(1) Churches, monasteries, chapels, synagogues convents and
rectories.
(2) Schools, up to and including the 12th grade, and their adjunct play
areas.
(3) Public playgrounds, public swimming pools, public parks and
public libraries.
A. Zones and site locations.
(1) Farm markets and/or community farmers' markets are permitted in
the C-1, C-2 and C-3 Zones.
(2) City Council approval of specific site location(s) may be required.
(3) Special Events Committee approval for days and times of operation
may be required.
(4) A Farm market permit is required through the Planning and Zoning
Office.
B. Requirements.
(1) The property owner or sole proprietor for the farm market or
community farmers' market ("market") is considered the
management ("management") in charge of the market.
(2) Management:
(a) Is responsible for obtaining a farm market permit for the site.
§ 345-47 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-47.1
332:947
§ 345-47.2. Affordable housing development fee regulations. [Added
6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 9-19]
(b) Is responsible for obtaining Health Department approvals in
accordance with the state sanitary code and City ordinances
for the management and all farmers/growers/produce sellers
from the Jersey Fresh Organic Farmers' Market Program that
utilize the market.
(c) Is required to coordinate and keep records on providers.
(d) Is responsible to comply with all food safety requirements for
product sales for farm market and community farmers'
markets required by the N.J. Department of Agriculture and
N.J. Department of Health and Senior Services' Food and Drug
Safety Programs.
(e) May be asked by health officials to demonstrate knowledge of
the minimum food safety requirements for product sales for
farm market and community farmers' markets required by the
N.J. Department of Agriculture and N.J. Department of Health
and Senior Services' Food and Drug Safety Programs.
(f) Is required to comply with and enforce City Health Department
and Department of Public Works food vendor, recycling and
waste management rules and ordinances.
(3) Farmers/growers/produce sellers other than those within the
Jersey Fresh Organic Farmers' Market Program must obtain their
own Health Department approvals in accordance with the state
sanitary code and City ordinances.
(4) All participants are to operate under state health requirements.
(5) The total number of farmers/growers/produce sellers on the site is
determined by the N.J. Department of Agriculture farm market
guidelines and City requirements.
(6) No mobile food vendors/peddlers are permitted.
(7) Sales or vendors other than farmers/growers/produce sellers are
not permitted.
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
("Act"), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
§ 345-47.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47.2
332:948
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction ("court") and have an approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32
through 38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for
the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing.
This section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's
rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.1 et seq.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by the COAH or
the court pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.3.
(2) The City of Long Branch shall not spend development fees until the
COAH or the court has approved a plan for spending such fees in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.3.
C. Definitions.
(1) The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development that
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a
municipal construction project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act198 which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the state
or shall mean the court taking jurisdiction over the COAH
requirements.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.3.
198. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 345-47.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-47.2
332:949
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with §§ 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a
through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize
the impact of development on the environment, and enhance the
health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making
optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within the residential districts, except for developers of the
types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development provided no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
(c) Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1% of
the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the
specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed
value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site
has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
§ 345-47.2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47.2
332:950
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(d) Residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of a
natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development
fee.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
§ 345-47.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-47.2
332:951
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the
exemption no longer applies and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the City of Long Branch as a lien against
the real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Tax Assessor, based on
the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed
value of the development.
§ 345-47.2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47.2
332:952
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the Tax Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously
estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of the
development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should the City of Long Branch fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the City of Long Branch. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the City of Long Branch. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable housing trust fund.
§ 345-47.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-47.2
332:953
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the City of Long
Branch's affordable housing program.
(3) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
City of Long Branch shall provide COAH with jurisdiction with
written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow
agreement between the municipality, the bank and COAH to permit
COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the City of
Long Branch's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
§ 345-47.2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47.2
332:954
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation or any
other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8 et seq. and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the City of Long Branch
for past housing activities.
(3) The City of Long Branch shall use development fees collected and
interest earned to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal spending plan.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowner association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units to make them affordable to households
earning 30% or less of median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) The City of Long Branch may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its spending plan.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to
COAH's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring.
(1) The City of Long Branch shall complete and return to COAH (and/or
such other entity or entities as designated by the court) all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to
§ 345-47.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-47.2
332:955
the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other
funds collected in connection with the City of Long Branch's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH or the court. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH
or approved by the court.
J. Ongoing collection of fees.
(1) Municipalities that qualify for state aid pursuant to P.L. 1976, c. 14
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-17B), such as the City of Long Branch may impose,
collect and expend development fees by filing a development fee
ordinance and spending plan and requesting approval by the court
and/or COAH. The court approval of the municipal development fee
ordinance shall allow Long Branch to impose and collect
development fees for the period specified by the court and/or
COAH, commencing with the court's approval of the development
fee ordinance. Urban aid municipalities such as Long Branch may
impose, collect and spend development fees without petitioning for
substantive certification.
§ 345-47.2 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-47.2
332:956
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 345-48. Garden apartment projects of 20 or more units.
A. Area and yard requirements. Area and yard requirements shall be as
follows:
(1) Lot area ratio. In no case shall any structure or development
contain more than one dwelling unit per 3,100 square feet of the lot
area.
(2) Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of the lot area shall be occupied
by buildings nor more than a total of 60% maximum coverage of all
structures, including parking.
(3) Yards.
(a) Frontage. The front building line along each street accepted
for public maintenance shall not be less than the prescribed
standard for each zone in which garden apartments shall have
frontage of not less than 200 feet on at least one street
accepted for maintenance by the City. The front yard setback
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the schedule
for the applicable zone.
(b) Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip along the entire
perimeter of the property, exclusive of the front yard, of at
least 10 feet in width, measured inward from the property line
and suitably landscaped with grass and/or ground cover,
shrubs and trees.
(c) Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the
wings of the same building or by the walls of separate buildings
shall have a minimum court width of two feet for each one foot
in height of the tallest building.
(d) Buildings prohibited in buffer strip. No buildings, including
garages, other accessory structures, interior streets and
driveways, parking areas, drying yards or play areas may be
located in the buffer strips. Ingress and egress driveways may
be permitted in the front yard, but nothing herein contained
shall be construed to permit parking areas in the front yard.
(e) Setback. Every building shall have a minimum setback of 10
feet from all interior development roads, driveways and
parking areas.
(f) Garages. Garages not a part of a garden apartment dwelling
structure and accessory buildings shall be located at least 10
feet from the nearest building wall of a garden apartment
dwelling structure.
§ 345-48 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-48
332:957
(g) Proximity to other structures. No garden apartment dwelling
structure shall be located within 25 feet of another such
structure.
(h) Garbage collection. Garbage and refuse storage and collection
areas shall be provided with each apartment or motel or hotel
project in the appropriate numbers and locations to serve the
convenience of the residents and/or operation. Such areas
shall be screened from view but in suitable locations to permit
the use of dumpsters, which shall be required. Such areas shall
not be located in any front yard.
B. Off-street parking. There shall be provided on site two off-street parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
C. Building requirements.
(1) The owner and/or builder shall be required to erect no less than 20
dwelling units in the initial phase of construction. No building
permits shall be issued for fewer than 20 units, except as an
addition to an existing garden apartment dwelling structure, and
no occupancy permit shall be issued until such minimum number of
units has been completed. Additions to existing apartment units
shall be submitted in accordance with the procedure for new
applications.
(2) All buildings shall be not more than 2 1/2 stories and not in excess
of 30 feet in height.
(3) There shall be no dwelling unit below the first floor nor above the
second story of any structure with the exception of one dwelling
unit for the use of a building superintendent. Fire walls of approved
masonry construction shall be provided from the cellar to the roof,
separating every two dwelling units. The exterior of the buildings
shall be of brick veneer construction.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities and
toilet, bathing and sleeping facilities, as well as living space, and
shall have a minimum gross floor area in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) One-bedroom dwelling units and/or efficiency units shall have
a minimum of 700 square feet of floor area.
(b) Two-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 1,000
square feet of floor area.
(c) Three-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 1,500
square feet of floor area.
(5) There shall be not more than 20 dwelling units in each building or
structure.
§ 345-48 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-48
332:958
§ 345-49. Two- to four-family dwellings.
(6) In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 200 cubic feet
of storage area in a convenient, centrally located area in the
basement or ground floor of the dwelling structure or elsewhere
where personal belongings and effects may be stored without
constituting a fire hazard and where the belongings and effects
may be kept locked and separated from belongings of other
occupants. There shall be a further minimum common storage area
in each building for bicycles, perambulators and similar type of
equipment of 50 cubic feet per dwelling unit.
(7) The total number of one-bedroom or efficiency apartments shall not
be less than 80% of the entire project.
(8) Every dwelling unit shall have a front and rear entrance through a
full-size door. Such entrance shall lead only to an interior hallway
or stairway with ground level outdoor access to a parking lot.
D. Signs.
(1) One nonilluminated project identification sign shall be permitted
on each public street on which the garden apartment development
has frontage and which may bear only the name of the project, the
street address and the presence or lack of vacant units. Such sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet in area on either side and six feet in
height and shall be situated within the property lines but not
attached to the building.
(2) No other signs, other than pedestrian and vehicular directional
signs, shall be visible from the premises.
E. Open space and recreation. (See §§ 345-11X and 345-18.)
A. The minimum lot size and area and yard requirements for one-family
homes in the zoning district in which the structure is proposed shall
apply. Each dwelling unit in excess of one shall require an additional 15
feet lot frontage and an additional 2,000 square feet of area.
B. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises in the
rear and side yards, but not in the front yard, of not less than two
parking spaces per unit. A parking space shall be no less than nine feet
in width and 18 feet in length. There shall be provided on site 2 1/2
parking spaces per dwelling unit.
C. Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities and toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities, as well as living facilities, and shall have
a minimum gross floor area in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) One-bedroom dwelling units and/or efficiency units shall have a
minimum of 600 square feet of floor area.
§ 345-48 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-49
332:959
§ 345-50. Mid-rise apartments.
(2) Two-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 800 square
feet of floor area.
(3) Three-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 1,000
square feet of floor area.
(4) Four- or more bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of
1,500 square feet of floor area.
D. In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 200 cubic feet of
storage area in a convenient, centrally located area in the basement or
ground floor of the dwelling structure or elsewhere where personal
belongings and effects may be stored without constituting a fire hazard
and where such belongings and effects may be kept locked and
separated from belongings of other occupants. There shall be a further
minimum common storage area in each building for bicycles,
perambulators and similar types of equipment of 50 cubic feet per
dwelling unit.
A. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Professional offices located within the interior of the mid-rise
building, provided that:
(a) Such offices are located on the first and second floors only.
(b) A minimum of four off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each office.
(2) Restaurants, cocktail lounges and places of entertainment shall be
permitted on the top floor or roof and below the third floor of the
building.
B. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Lot area (ratio). In no case shall any structure or development
contain more than one dwelling unit per 1,200 square foot of lot
area.
(2) Lot coverage. In no case shall the lot area to be occupied by
buildings exceed 35%.
(3) Yard requirements.
(a) Each mid-rise apartment structure shall have a front yard
having a minimum depth of 50 feet or a depth equal to 1/2 of
the height of the building for which the front yard is being
measured, whichever is greater. Each mid-rise apartment lot
shall have a frontage of not less than 200 feet on at least one
street accepted for maintenance by the City.
§ 345-49 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-50
332:960
(b) Each mid-rise apartment structure shall have a minimum
setback from any side lot line or rear lot line a distance of 50
feet or 1/2 of the height of the building for which the side yard
is being measured, whichever is greater. There shall be a
buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the property
exclusive of the front yard, which may be included when
measuring required building setback, of at least 10 feet in
width measured inward from the property line and suitably
landscaped with grass and/or ground cover, shrubs and trees.
(c) Where more than one mid-rise apartment structure is placed
upon a single lot, the minimum distance between such
structures shall be a distance equal to the height of the taller of
the two buildings for which the separation distance is being
measured.
(d) No buildings, including garages, other accessory structures,
interior streets and driveways, parking areas, drying yards or
play areas, may be located in the buffer strips. Ingress and
egress driveways may be permitted in the front yard, but
nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit parking
areas in the front yard.
(e) Every building shall have a minimum setback of at least 10 feet
from all interior development, roads, driveways and parking
areas.
(f) Garages and other accessory buildings shall be located at least
20 feet from the nearest building wall of a mid-rise apartment
structure.
(g) At least 25% of the area of the lot on which one or more midrise
apartment structures are to be erected shall be planted
and landscaped as open lawn areas. Up to 1/2 of the required
planted and landscaped open lawn area may be provided on
the roof of a portion of the structure which is not more than
one story in height above the level of any through street
abutting the property.
C. Off-street parking. There shall be provided on site 2 1/2 off-street
parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
D. Building requirements.
(1) All buildings shall have a maximum height of six stories.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities and
toilet, bathing and sleeping facilities, as well as living space, and
shall have a minimum gross floor area in accordance with the
following schedule, provided that at least 90% of the units shall
contain no greater than two bedrooms and not more than 10% of
§ 345-50 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-50
332:961
§ 345-51. Garden and mid-rise apartments and motels.
the units shall contain three bedrooms. Units containing more than
three bedrooms shall not be permitted.
(a) One-bedroom dwelling units and/or efficiency units shall have
a minimum of 700 square feet of floor area.
(b) Two-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 900
square feet of floor area.
(c) Three-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 1,200
square feet of floor area.
(3) In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 200 cubic feet
of storage area in a convenient, centrally located area in the
basement or ground floor of the dwelling structure or elsewhere
where personal belongings and effects may be stored without
constituting a fire hazard and where the belongings and effects
may be kept locked and separated from belongings of other
occupants. There shall be a further minimum common storage area
in each building for bicycles, perambulators and similar types of
equipment of 50 cubic feet per dwelling unit.
E. Signs.
(1) One project identification sign shall be permitted and shall not
exceed 15 square feet in area on either side and eight feet in height
and shall be situated within the property lines but not attached to
the building. The sign may include only the name of the project, the
street address, the presence or lack of vacancies and the
availability of supporting or recreational facilities on the premises.
(2) No other signs, other than pedestrian and vehicular directional
signs, shall be visible from off the premises.
F. Open space and recreation. (See §§ 345-11X and 345-18.)
A. See § 345-42D(2) for requirements as to interior road aisle widths.
B. Parking areas shall be located within reasonable proximity of dwelling
units which they serve, and such structures shall be provided with a
direct means of entry. Parking stalls shall be nine feet wide by 18 feet in
length. Pedestrian walks shall be at least four feet in width and shall
have four-inch-thick concrete surface on a cinder or gravel fill and shall
be provided wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Parking
areas and driveways shall be constructed as herein specified: Grade to
an even surface and compact earth with a ten-ton roller, apply four
inches of clean stone, compacted with a ten-ton roller and penetrated
with a bituminous sealer (OA4) at a quantity of two gallons per square
yard, then top with a one-inch layer of asphalt FABC or equivalent.
§ 345-50 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-51
332:962
C. Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility areas must
be provided and shall be located with a view both to convenience and to
minimizing any detrimental effect on the aesthetic character of the
development and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing,
walls or shrubbery of at least six feet in height around the perimeter.
Fencing and walls shall not be less than 30% nor more than 50% open
to the vertical surface.
D. Interior development roads and pedestrian walks shall be provided with
shade trees which are of minimum size and character and malls
between buildings residents, and border strips along the sides of
pedestrian walks shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick stand of
grass or other plant material. Approaches to dwelling structures and
entrance areas shall be attractively shrubbed.
E. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site during construction but shall
be stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to view by occupants
and the public, and such areas shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
F. Interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling to entranceways
and pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to
minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same
and shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid disturbing glares to
occupants or buildings. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining residential buildings.
G. The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and storm drains
and catch basins so located as to provide rapid runoff of stormwater
disturbing to occupants, under the normal range of water conditions, as
may be required by the City Engineer.
H. Other standards and conditions relating to the site plan and to curbing,
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping and planting
not otherwise specified herein may be attached as conditions by the
Planning Board and further by the City Council in the event that it
renders final approval.
I. Refuse disposal facilities shall be enclosed and removed from sight in
addition to meeting the requirements of § 345-48A(3)(h). Dumpster
service may be requested by the City at the owner's expense.
J. When such facilities as air-conditioning units, auxiliary generators and
similar equipment are located upon the ground outside of the main
structure of any mid-rise apartment, garden apartment or motel
complex, these facilities shall be suitably enclosed by masonry walls
which complement the principal building or buildings, and the
installation shall be in accordance with a site plan approved by the
Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment if a variance is necessary
before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. When individual airconditioning
units are installed in any mid-rise apartment, garden
apartment or motel complex, they shall not extend outward beyond the
§ 345-51 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-51
332:963
§ 345-52. Additional requirements for hotels/motels in the C-4 Zone
District. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
exterior face of the building adjacent to their location unless they are
suitably trimmed so that they blend with and do not detract from the
architectural design and appearance of the finished structure.
K. Open space and recreation. (See §§ 345-11X and 345-18.)
A. The minimum land area shall be 700 square feet for each hotel or motel
occupancy room.
B. The minimum number of hotel or motel occupancy units in any hotel or
motel shall be 50.
C. The minimum size of any hotel or motel occupancy unit shall be 300
square feet.
D. The maximum lot coverage by a hotel or motel building shall be 35%.
E. Off-street parking space shall be provided in the following ratios: one
for each hotel or motel occupancy unit; one for each 50 square feet of
dining floor area; one for each eight seats in any area for public
assembly; one for each two employees of the hotel or motel and any
concession or rental space; and one space for every 150 square feet of
office area. This subsection may be met by the use of a reasonably
remote parking site or as outlined in § 345-42B(5).
F. Refuse disposal facilities shall be enclosed and hidden from sight from
streets. Dumpster service may be requested by the City at the owner's
expense.
G. Where more than one building is to be constructed on a single lot, the
distance between them shall be 25 feet or 1/2 the height of the tallest
building, whichever is greater.
H. Any wall of a hotel or motel building which faces a public street shall be
architecturally designed as a front wall even when it is not, in fact, a
front wall.
I. Interior roads shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way traffic
and 24 feet for two-way traffic, shall be so designed as to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and to motor vehicles operated in and on such
roads and in areas adjacent to such roads and shall comply with
requirements of the City of Long Branch as set forth in Chapter 300,
Subdivision of Land.
J. Parking stalls shall be nine feet wide and 18 feet in length. Pedestrian
walks shall be at least four feet in width and shall have four-inch-thick
concrete surface on a cinder or gravel fill and shall be provided
wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Parking areas and
driveways shall be constructed as herein specified: Grade to an even
surface and compact earth with a ten-ton roller, apply four inches of
§ 345-51 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-52
332:964
§ 345-53. Townhouse complexes.
clean stone, compacted with a ten-ton roller and penetrated with a
bituminous sealer (OA4) at a quantity of two gallons per square yard,
then top with a one-inch layer of asphalt FABC or equivalent.
K. Interior development roads and pedestrian walks shall be provided with
shade trees which are of a minimum size and character. Open space
adjacent to buildings and malls between buildings to be utilized by
residents and border strips along the site of pedestrian walks shall be
graded and seeded to provide a thick stand of grass or other plant
material.
L. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site during construction but shall
be stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to view by occupants
and the public, and such areas shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
M. Interior development roads, parking area, dwelling entranceways and
pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to
minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same
and shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid disturbing glares to
occupants or buildings. Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining residential buildings.
N. The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and storm drains
and catch basins so located as to provide rapid runoff to stormwater
disturbing to occupants, under the normal range of water conditions, as
may be required by the City Engineer.
O. Buildings shall not be closer than 10 feet in interior roads or parking
areas.
P. Other standards and conditions relating to the site plan and to curbing,
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping and planting
not otherwise specified herein may be attached as conditions by the
Planning Board and further by the City Council in the event it renders
final approval.
Q. Area and bulk requirements shall be as specified in § 345-7, except that
when 1/2 of the building height exceeds the required front yard, the
building height shall be the required front yard setback.199
A. Townhouse complex and parcel requirements.
(1) The minimum frontage of a townhouse parcel upon a duly-accepted
public street, improved at least to the standards of the street
specifications of the City of Long Branch, shall be 150 feet.
199. Editor's Note: Original Section 20-8.6, Additional Requirements for Hotels in the RC-3
Zone District, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed effective with the
adoption of the Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan on 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
15-96.
§ 345-52 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-53
332:965
(2) Each townhouse structure shall have a front yard, having a
minimum depth of 35 feet from the parcel property line. Each
townhouse structure shall be set back from any side or rear lot line
a minimum distance of 20 feet.
(3) There shall be not more than 12 townhouse dwelling units per
gross acre of townhouse parcel or such lesser density as is
specified in the individual zone regulations. In the event that the
parcel site to be developed as townhouse dwelling units is less than
one gross acre in size, the maximum number of townhouse dwelling
units to be developed thereon shall be reduced proportionately. The
minimum parcel site to be developed as townhouse dwelling units
shall consist of 30,000 square feet. [Amended 9-24-1996 by Ord.
No. 31-96]
(4) All portions of a townhouse parcel shall be either lotted and sold,
offered for dedication to and accepted by the City or put into
common ownership pursuant to the Condominium Act of 1970,
N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1, or a similar or comparable ownership
arrangement consistent therewith.200
(5) Every townhouse dwelling within a complex shall be served by
public water and public sanitary sewer, which shall be installed by
and at the expense of the developer. In addition, the developer shall
install, at his own expense, roads, drives, parking facilities, allweather
pedestrian walkways, streetlights, fire hydrants and any
other improvements, such as drainage facilities, as required in
accordance with the standards and ordinances of the City of Long
Branch, except where specific waiver is granted as provided for
within the standards and ordinances of the City of Long Branch.
(6) All utilities within a townhouse complex shall be installed
underground.
(7) The City shall require all streets or drives within the complex which
do not directly implement the proposals or the comprehensive plan
or Official Map for the City and do not provide a direct connection
between existing streets outside the complex, to be transferred to
the ownership of a homeowners' association for maintenance and
repairs. Any street transferred to such ownership shall be
constructed to the standards of the City of Long Branch for minor
streets to a width of not less than 25 feet.
(8) For purposes of meeting the requirements of 2 1/2 off-street
parking spaces per townhouse dwelling unit, it shall be proposed
where there is a separate driveway to a townhouse dwelling unit
with a garage at the end of the driveway of such townhouse unit to
count the garage as one off-street parking space and the driveway
leading to the garage as another off-street parking space.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-53 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-53
332:966
(9) Wherever medial grass strips or other landscaped areas are
proposed which will be visible to the general public within the
development, the covenants and/or agreements of the maintenance
of such areas by that association shall apply to such areas.
(10) Lot, yard, area and bulk requirements not otherwise provided for in
this section shall be as specified in § 345-7, where applicable.
(11) Interior development, roads, parking areas and driveways. All
interior development and parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from any side yard or rear yard property
boundary. All interior roads and driveways shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any side or rear yard property boundary
and an additional 10 feet from any interior development.
(12) Open space and recreation. (See §§ 345-11X and 345-18.)
B. Townhouse private areas requirements.
(1) Each townhouse dwelling unit shall have a private ground area or
areas accessible from within the dwelling unit and to adjacent open
space, having a total area of at least 400 square feet.
(2) Each townhouse shall have direct access to common open space or
public land or street from either the front or rear. Under no
circumstances shall the arrangement of townhouses require the
crossing of one townhouse lot or private ground area in order to
achieve access to another townhouse.
(3) No detached accessory buildings shall be permitted within the
private ground area. Accessory structures shall be within the
private ground area and shall be limited to normal residential
activities, such as outdoor barbecues, fireplaces and trellises, not
exceeding the height of the fence or wall enclosing the private
ground area.
C. Townhouse structure requirements.
(1) Not less than three or more than eight townhouse dwelling units
shall be contained within any one townhouse structure.
(2) The front facade of any townhouse structure shall not continue on
the same plane for a distance of more than the width of two
adjacent units. Offsets between front facade planes shall be at least
four feet and not more than 20 feet.
(3) An overall theme of designs and architectural modes shall be
utilized within every townhouse complex for the purpose of
presenting an aesthetically desirable effect and shall be such that
they provide varied building elevations, design and structural
appearance within the context of the overall theme. Identical front
facades for townhouse dwelling units shall not be repeated at a
§ 345-53 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-53
332:967
closer interval than every third dwelling unit. Each townhouse
dwelling unit shall have at least two shade trees.
(4) The minimum distance between townhouse structures shall be as
follows: end to end, 15 feet; end to back, 30 feet; back to back, 50
feet; front to back, 40 feet; front to front, 30 feet; and front to end,
30 feet, measured perpendicular to the walls of the structure. In no
event shall one townhouse structure be closer to another
townhouse structure, measured at any angle, than 15 feet.
(5) No townhouse structure shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
original townhouse parcel boundary.
(6) The maximum height of any townhouse structure shall be 35 feet
and shall not exceed three stories as measured from the average
finished grade immediately adjacent to the structure.
(7) There shall be two exits for each townhouse structure.
D. Townhouse dwelling unit requirements.
(1) The minimum floor area of a townhouse dwelling unit shall be
1,100 square feet for a one-bedroom dwelling and 1,200 square
feet for a two-bedroom dwelling, of which at least 600 square feet
shall be on the first floor. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall be a
minimum of two stories in height.
(2) No floor area of a room having more than 1/2 of its height below the
average finished grade immediately adjacent to the structure shall
be countable toward meeting the minimum floor area requirement
for dwelling units.
(3) Every townhouse dwelling unit shall have direct access to the
private area which is provided for that dwelling. When fences are
to be used, they shall be all uniform and comply with § 345-41.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities and
toilet, bathing and sleeping facilities.
(5) Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 300 cubic feet of
storage area. This area may be within the confines of the garage (if
one is proposed). The storage may not infringe upon the ten-footby-
twenty-foot area within the garage designated as the parking
space.
(6) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
E. Application procedures.
(1) At the time of application for a site plan approval as required by
§ 345-14, the development shall submit plans showing all
information required on the application for subdivision
classification if individual lots are to be created and to show areas
§ 345-53 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-53
332:968
to be used for dwelling units, specifying the location of the various
types of dwelling units proposed, the density of the proposed
complex, the proposed arrangement of structures, parking and
utilities, including drainage facilities, proposed on each lot and
in all open space. Typical elevations of all sides of the proposed
structure and typical floor plans of proposed dwelling units shall
also be submitted. Such plans shall be accompanied by appropriate
written information to supplement them as required to provide full
information to the City on the proposed complex. Such plans shall
also be accompanied by the proposed agreements, covenants and
restrictions which will affect the parcel, common areas and lots, to
include the provisions for maintenance of open space and common
areas and the proposed recourse to be provided to the City in
the event of nonperformance of maintenance responsibility. Such
plans shall also include a proposed form of the performance bond
or bonds to guarantee the completion of all utilities, streets and
drainage facilities proposed to be constructed by the applicant. The
amount of such bond shall be determined by the procedures which
would apply to a major subdivision whether or not subdivision is
actually contemplated.201
(2) A sketch plan of sufficient detail to show intent may be submitted
informally to the Planning Board for discussion purposes prior to
formal application for a permit at the discretion of the developer.
(3) During its review of the proposed townhouse complex, the Planning
Board shall determine that the proposal meets all the requirements
of this and all other applicable City ordinances and standards and
that the design of structures is consistent with the intent of
securing thematic architectural designs and treatments and that
the site planning is consistent with the intent of creating attractive
and usable open space, preserving desirable natural features and
tree cover and offering maximum visual protection to adjacent
property.
(4) A certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the completion of
each townhouse dwelling structure, provided that the installation
of all utilities, all-weather pedestrian walkways, parking areas,
roads or other improvements required affecting that particular
structure have been completed in a satisfactory manner.
F. Pending applications and variances.
(1) All applications for townhouse development filed with the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment prior to the introduction date of this
chapter (March 12, 1991) may be continued and decided under
those ordinances in effect as of the date of such filing, but any
appeals arising out of decisions made on any such application shall
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 345-53 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-53
332:969
§ 345-54. Modification of standards for senior citizen's housing.
Garden apartment or mid-rise apartment structures may be specified for
and restricted to occupancy by senior citizens, as that term may be defined
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. In that event, the
following standards shall override and augment the regulations of §§ 345-48
and/or 345-50 and/or 345-51 as appropriate. Except where contradiction or
augmentation exists, however, the regulations of those sections shall apply.
be governed by the provisions of such ordinance in effect at the
time of such appeal.
(2) All applicants who were granted variances for townhouse
development by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment prior to
the introduction of this chapter, which as a result of the passage of
this chapter would have expired as a result of the one-year
limitation set forth Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures, § 69-24,
Period of limitation, is hereby granted an additional ninety-day
period from this date in which to obtain a building permit and
comply with § 69-24.
A. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms, and at least
80% of all units shall have not more than one bedroom.
B. Efficiency units shall have a minimum of 500 square feet of floor area.
C. One-bedroom units shall have a minimum of 650 square feet of floor
area.
D. Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum of 800 square feet of floor
area.
E. No more dwelling units shall be constructed than permitted by the
following lot area requirements per unit:
Number of Stories
Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
2 to 5 2,100
6 to 7 1,000
F. Off-street parking shall be provided on the basis of the number of
bedrooms per unit as follows:
(1) Efficiency units: 0.75 spaces per unit.
(2) One-bedroom unit: 0.75 spaces per unit.
(3) Two-bedroom units: 1.00 spaces per unit.
§ 345-53 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-54
332:970
§ 345-55. Waterfront mix residential units.
G. In addition to professional offices, a short-term first aid room or
infirmary for minor treatment and short-term resident care may be
established on one of the first two floors of a mid-rise apartment.
H. The architectural design of all buildings shall be consistent with the
creation of independent, self-reliant and pleasant living atmosphere for
a group of older persons requiring indoor and outdoor privacy,
participation in social and community activities and having limited or
restricted mobility. As a minimum, 10% of the lot area should be
devoted to common recreation area.
I. All buildings shall be provided with a central heating system for each
building or for the entire project, designed with sufficient capacity to
maintain a temperature of 75° F. in all bathrooms and of 70° F. in all
other habitable rooms.
J. Each dwelling unit shall have bath facilities, including as a minimum a
lavatory, water closet and bathtub or stall shower.
K. The size of the bathroom and arrangement of the fixtures shall be
adequate for the convenient use of the fixtures by older persons. The
floor finish shall be impervious to water, have nonslip characteristics
and slope inward. The threshold should be flush with the floor.
L. All plumbing fixtures, accessories and trim shall be selected for and
provide the maximum features of design that contribute to the safety,
convenience and aid to older persons.
M. The shower stall will include a built-in seat or bench or sufficient space
for a bath stool.
N. Openable windows operated from across the bathtub will not be
permitted.
O. Ventilation fans shall be also controlled so that they can be operated
independently from the lighting. Convenience outlets in the bathroom
shall be integrated with electric fixtures. No other convenience outlets
will be permitted in the bathroom.
P. Cooking facilities shall not be of a type exposing open flame.
Q. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with an emergency signal which
transmits to either a central administrative center or to each of two
dwelling units.
R. Ten percent of the floor space shall be used as recreational area, for
such purpose as game rooms, dining, television and meeting rooms.
A. Waterfront mix residential unit and parcel requirements.
§ 345-54 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-55
332:971
(1) See § 345-7 for minimum size of tract, boundary line setback, street
setback and mixed use concept requirements. The minimum tract
size shall be two acres in all zones where permitted (RC-1, RC-2
and C-4). [Amended 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 50-95; 5-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 15-96; 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 29-05]
(2) No section of a building in a waterfront mix residential complex
shall be more than four stories high, except that when the four
stories are built over one level of ground-level parking or a building
lobby area, or required nonresidential uses, this parking level or
building lobby area or required nonresidential uses shall not be
counted in the number of stories of said complex. Any underground
parking level or nonresidential floor area located below the ground
floor of the building shall not be counted in the number of stories of
said complex. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(3) There shall be no less than 10 nor more than 30 waterfront mix
residential dwelling units per gross acre of any parcel. [Amended
1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 50-95]
(4) All portions of a waterfront mix residential parcel shall be either
lotted and sold, offered for dedication to and accepted by the City
or put into common ownership pursuant to the Condominium Act of
1970, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1, or a similar or comparable ownership
arrangement consistent therewith. [Amended 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 36-98]
(5) Every waterfront mix residential dwelling within a complex shall be
served by public water and public sanitary sewer which shall be
installed by and at the expense of the developer, In addition, the
developer shall install, at his own expense, roads, drives, parking
facilities, all-weather pedestrian walkways, streetlights, fire
hydrants and any other improvements, such as drainage facilities,
as required in accordance with the standards and ordinances of the
City of Long Branch, except where specific waiver is granted as
provided for within the standards and ordinances of the City of
Long Branch.
(6) All utilities within a waterfront mix residential complex shall be
installed underground.
(7) The City shall require all streets or drives within the complex which
do not directly implement the proposals or the comprehensive plan
or Official Map for the City and do not provide a direct connection
between existing streets outside the complex to be transferred to
the ownership of a homeowners' association for maintenance and
repairs. Any street transferred to such ownership shall be
constructed to the standards of the City of Long Branch for minor
streets to a width of not less than 25 feet.
§ 345-55 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-55
332:972
(8) For the purposes of meeting the requirements of a minimum of two
off-street parking spaces per waterfront mix residential dwelling
unit, parking may be provided beneath the unit, underground or in
common parking areas or garages. [Amended 1-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 50-95]
(9) Wherever medial grass strips or other landscaped areas are
proposed which will be visible to the general public within the
development, the covenants and/or agreements of the maintenance
of such areas by that association shall apply to such areas.
(10) Lot, yard, area and bulk requirements not otherwise provided for in
this section shall be as specified in § 345-7, where applicable.
(11) Each waterfront mix residential building within the C-4 Zone shall
have a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet or 1/2 the height of
the building, whichever is greater. [Added 1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
50-95]
(12) Each waterfront mix residential building within the C-4 Zone shall
have a minimum side/rear yard setback of 20 feet or 1/2 the height
of the building, whichever is greater. [Added 1-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 50-95]
(13) Any waterfront mix residential projects which directly abut the
oceanfront shall maintain a minimum of 40% of the oceanside
frontage free of residential development. [Added 1-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 50-95]
(14) Accessory uses/structures may be located in any yard area but
cannot be located closer than 10 feet to any property line. [Added
1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 50-95]
(15) Interior development, roads, parking areas and driveways. All
interior development and parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from any side yard or rear yard property
boundary. All interior roads and driveways shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any side or rear yard property boundary
and an additional 10 feet from any interior development.
(16) Each waterfront mix residential dwelling unit shall have a private
ground area or areas accessible from within the dwelling unit and
to adjacent open space, having a total area of at least 400 square
feet, or, in the alternative, common open space areas may be set
out throughout the tract based upon a ratio formula of 400 square
feet per dwelling unit, which sum may include for calculation
purposes the setback areas in Subsection C(2).
(17) Any type of residential use shall be permitted; however, a minimum
of 40% of the tract must be used for permitted uses other than
residential (does not include parking requirements).
Nonresidential uses permitted in a waterfront mix residential
§ 345-55 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-55
332:973
development complex include beach clubs, neighborhood-oriented
retail sales and services, eating and drinking establishments (but
not including drive-in restaurants), barber shops, beauty salons,
tanning salons, health spas and gymnasiums, day spas, hotels,
or any combination thereof. Parking requirements for the
nonresidential uses shall be the parking requirements for such uses
or similar uses in other zones. [Amended 10-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 29-05; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 17-07; 9-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 23-17]
(18) Open space and recreation. (See §§ 345-11X and 345-18.)
(19) Loading zones required for any nonresidential development in a
waterfront mix residential development complex shall be permitted
within the front-yard setback, provided it is located at the entrance
to the main lobby to the building, and provided sufficient space is
provided to allow vehicles to pass a vehicle in such loading zone.
[Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 17-07]
B. Waterfront mix residential unit structure requirements.
(1) There shall be no limit as to the number of waterfront mix
residential dwelling units that may be contained within any one
complex.
(2) The front facade of any waterfront mix residential structure shall
not continue on the same plane for a distance of more than the
width of two adjacent units. Offsets between front facade planes
shall be at least four feet and not more than 20 feet.
(3) An overall theme of designs and architectural modes shall be
utilized within every waterfront mix residential complex for the
purpose of presenting an aesthetically desirable effect and shall be
such that they provide varied building elevations, design and
structural appearance within the context of the overall theme.
Identical front facades for waterfront mix residential dwelling units
shall not be repeated at a closer interval than every third dwelling
unit. Each waterfront mix residential dwelling unit shall have
landscaping throughout which shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board.
(4) Height and setback requirements not otherwise provided for in this
section shall be as specified in § 345-7, where applicable.
(5) The number of exits from each waterfront mix residential structure
shall comply with the minimum provided in the State BOCA Fire
Requirements.
C. Waterfront mix residential dwelling unit requirements.
(1) The average minimum floor area of a waterfront mix residential
dwelling unit as computed over the total number of units shall be
§ 345-55 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-55
332:974
700 square feet for a one-bedroom dwelling and 1,000 square feet
for a two-bedroom dwelling; however, no more than 25% of the
total units on the tract may be efficiency-type units. No unit or units
may exceed four stories.
(2) The minimum distance between waterfront mix residential
dwelling units shall be as follows: end to end, 15 feet; end to back,
30 feet; back to back, 50 feet; front to back, 40 feet; front to front,
30 feet; and front to end, 30 feet, measured perpendicular to the
walls of the structure. In no event shall one waterfront mix
residential dwelling unit be closer to another waterfront mix
residential dwelling unit, measured at any angle, than 15 feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 300 cubic feet of
storage area. This area may be within the confines of the garage (if
one is proposed) or the covered parking area. The storage may not
infringe upon the ten-foot-by-twenty-foot area within the garage
designated as the parking space.
D. Application procedures.
(1) At the time of application for a site plan approval as required by
§ 345-14, the development shall submit plans showing all
information required on the application for subdivision
classification, if individual lots are to be created, and to show areas
to be used for dwelling units, specifying the location of the various
types of dwelling units proposed, the density of the proposed
complex and the proposed arrangement of structures, parking and
utilities, including drainage facilities, proposed on each lot and in
all open space. Typical elevations of all sides of the proposed
structure and typical floor plans of proposed dwelling units shall
also be submitted. Such plans shall be accompanied by appropriate
written information to supplement them as required to provide full
information to the City on the proposed complex. Such plans shall
also be accompanied by the proposed agreements, covenants and
restrictions which will affect the parcel, common areas and lots, to
include the provisions for maintenance of open space and common
areas and the proposed recourse to be provided to the City in the
event of nonperformance of maintenance responsibility. Such plans
shall also include a proposed form of the performance bond or
bonds to guarantee the completion of all utilities, streets and
drainage facilities proposed to be constructed by the applicant. The
amount of such bond shall be determined by the procedures which
would apply to a major subdivision, whether or not the subdivision
is actually contemplated.202
(2) A sketch plan of sufficient detail to show intent may be submitted
informally to the Planning Board for discussion purposes prior to
formal application for a permit at the discretion of the developer.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 345-55 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-55
332:975
§ 345-56. Scattered site housing. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord. No.
22-98]
(3) During its review of the proposed waterfront mix residential
complex, the Planning Board shall determine that the proposal
meets all the requirements of this and all other applicable City
ordinances and standards and that the design of structures is
consistent with the intent of securing thematic architectural
designs and treatments and that the site planning is consistent with
the intent of creating attractive and usable open space, preserving
desirable natural features and tree cover and offering maximum
visual protection to adjacent property.
(4) A certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the completion of
each waterfront mix residential dwelling unit, provided that the
installation of all utilities, all-weather pedestrian walkways,
parking areas, roads or other improvements required affecting that
particular structure have been completed in a satisfactory manner.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SCATTERED SITE HOUSING — A form of attached owner occupied
housing not to exceed two units per structure, which must consist of
a minimum of 10 units of proposed project. Said structures may exist
on nonadjacent properties; however all initial proposed units/structures
must be contained within one Planning Board application.
B. Application limits.
(1) Designation as a Scattered Site Housing developer must he
obtained from the State of New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance
Agency as administered by the City Office of Economic
Development prior to the filing of Planning Board Application.
(2) A developer must obtain support of the City Council prior to the
filing of a Planning Board Application.
(3) A designated scattered site housing developer may combine
permitted R-5 housing types into one proposal, provided that the
specific area and bulk requirements for each allowed housing type
are met. [Added 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 20-01]
C. Requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum units per project is a total of 10, with a minimum and
maximum of two per structure. Ten additional units may be added
to the original project application as an amendment/revision in twounit
increments. [Amended 1-22-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99]
(2) Maximum buildout for R-5 Zone: 80 units. [Amended 6-12-2001
by Ord. No. 20-01]
§ 345-55 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-56
332:976
(3) Front setback: 25 feet.
(4) Rear setback: 25 feet.
(5) Side setback: zero feet to adjoining unit; five feet to adjacent
property line. [Amended 1-22-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99]
(6) Minimum frontage: 50 feet for every two units.
(7) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
(8) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet for every two units.
[Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 33-98; 1-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 7-99]
(9) Maximum lot coverage, all structures: 40%.
(10) Parking requirement: two spaces per unit. (NOTE: A garage is
required for each unit and may be considered as one parking
space.)
(11) Maximum height: 35 feet/three stories.
(12) Minimum unit size: 1,600 square feet.
(13) Bedrooms: minimum, two; maximum, three. (NOTE: One additional
room type from the following will also be allowed and not he
considered as a bedroom: den, gym, office, study.)
(14) Accessory use height: 15 feet maximum height.
(15) Accessory use setback: 10 feet from all sides/rear property lines.
(No accessory uses are allowed in front yard areas.)
(16) All units must contain garage (attached/detached).
(17) Storage area: minimum of 300 cubic feet.
(18) Architectural aesthetics: subject to review by Planning Board Site
Plan/Aesthetics Committee.
(19) Minimum landscaping: two trees per unit.
(20) All units to be subject to deed restrictions or requirements as
approved by the Planning Board. These restrictions and/or
requirements, including but not limited to applications to the
Building Department for approvals of exterior alterations, such as
repair, replacement, resurfacing or painting of areas, including but
not limited to roof, siding, windows, doors and trim, will be
specifically designed to ensure the future aesthetics and
maintenance of the structures in conformance with other scattered
sites and scattered site developments or projects throughout the
City. [Added 1-22-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99]
D. Corner lots. [Added 1-22-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99]
§ 345-56 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-56
332:977
(1) The following exceptions are allowed on corner lots:
(a) Maintain a minimum front yard setback from the narrowest
side of the lot fronting on a street.
(b) Allow a ten-foot setback along the longest lot side fronting on a
street.
(2) The exceptions enumerated in this Subsection D are only permitted
if the side elevation on the widest side of the structure located on
the longer of the two lot frontages which face a street includes a
minimum of one bay or two double hung windows on the first floor
and one window for each room on the second and third floors.
§ 345-56 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-56
332:978
ARTICLE VII
Conditional Uses
§ 345-57. Findings.
A. Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the City, and at the same time
recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical to the public
health, safety and general welfare if located and operated without
proper consideration being given to existing conditions and character
of the surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as conditional
uses.
B. In addition to other powers conferred by this chapter and applicable
statutes, the Planning Board shall have original jurisdiction in the
granting of a permit for a conditional use under the terms and
conditions established by this chapter under the following stipulations
and guiding principles set forth in § 345-76.
C. The use for which application is being made is specifically authorized as
a conditional use in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, for the
zoning district in which it is located.
D. The minimum standards specified for the particular uses in §§ 345-58
through 345-67 shall be adhered to.
E. No conditional use shall be located within 2,500 feet of another
conditional use.
F. Exception relating to churches/places of worships and eleemosynary/
philanthropic uses within a portion of the R-5 Zone. [Added 8-24-2004
by Ord. No. 34-04]
(1) Area of exemption to include all properties fronting on Liberty
Street and C.P. Williams Way located between Lewis Alley to the
south and a point 160 feet north of Central Avenue (as denoted on
the map annexed hereto and incorporated herein).203
(2) Exemption shall only apply to those organizations which have
entered into formal agreement for shared parking between
themselves and the City of Long Branch.
(3) Exemption from requirements to include:
(a) No limitations as to number of conditional uses allowed within
2,500 feet of another conditional use.
(b) No maximum lot coverage for all structures.
(c) All lot area and bulk requirements (setbacks/depth/frontage/
area) to be based on exiting site conditions.
203. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 345-57 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-57
332:979
§ 345-58. Private schools.
Private schools, excluding institutions of higher learning, but not trade or
business schools, may be permitted by conditional use permit as provided
for in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, subject to the following:
(d) On-site parking requirements (may be waived based upon
shared parking agreement).
A. The application, in triplicate, shall include a detailed plot and drainage
plan of the site, drawn to scale, indicating overall dimensions and
topographical conditions, before and after; the location and intended
use of existing and proposed buildings; location of recreation area; the
relationship of the proposed use to highways, streets and adjacent
properties; and such physical features as might present any deterrent
to the protection of the health and safety of the pupils. The application
shall include a complete set of architectural plans and specifications
and existing and proposed buildings and structures and a statement
setting forth in general terms the proposed course of instruction. This
statement shall indicate the grade levels of the pupils to be in the
building or buildings and the contemplated eventual enrollment of the
school. Before authorizing the Construction Code Official to issue a
permit, the Planning Board shall determine that the following standards
are met:
B. The curriculum of the proposed school shall be approved by the New
Jersey Department of Education.
C. The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be five acres, plus
one additional acre for each 100 pupils. The minimum lot area for an
intermediate school, high school or institution of higher learning shall
be 10 acres, plus one additional acre for each 100 pupils. No more than
10% of the site shall be covered by buildings.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in the following ratios: Elementary
schools shall provide one parking space for each 10 pupils, plus
adequate space for buses and delivery vehicles. All other schools shall
provide one parking space for each staff member or employee, plus one
parking space for each five pupils, plus adequate space for buses and
delivery vehicles. These requirements may be increased if, in the
judgment of the Planning Board, such considerations as the
unavailability of the bus services, the distance from centers of
population or a relatively high percentage of pupils driving their own
cars make such increased requirements desirable.
E. No driveway shall open onto a public street or road within 150 feet of
an intersection of such street or road with another public street or road.
In determining the suitability of proposed or existing driveways upon
the site, the Board shall consider such factors as grade and site
clearance, the number and pattern of driveways and number, location
and design of ingress and egress points, the volume of traffic which may
§ 345-57 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-58
332:980
§ 345-59. Churches and places of worship.
Churches and places of worship may be permitted by conditional use permit
in zoning districts as provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use
Regulations, subject to the following:
be anticipated on the site and upon adjoining roads and the condition
and width of pavement of adjoining roads.
F. Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from view
from adjoining streets and residential areas.
G. The Planning Board shall decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure provided for the issuance of conditional use permits in
§ 345-76B.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 25,000 square feet; the minimum width
shall be 150 feet.
B. The minimum bulk requirements for a church or place of worship shall
be as follows:
Bulk Requirement Minimum Dimension
Lot depth 250 feet
Lot frontage 200 feet
Setbacks:
Front 70 feet
Rear 50 feet
Side 15 feet
Maximum building height:
Principal building 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
For accessory building 1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
Maximum lot coverage of all
buildings
35%
C. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one off-street parking
space for each four seats in the church.
D. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall be no more
than 24 feet wide at any point. Driveways must be at least 10 feet from
any side lot lines and 25 feet from the intersection of street lines. Not
more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 150 feet of street
frontage.
E. The Planning Board shall determine that the site plan is appropriate to
the adjacent area. It may require buffers of foliage if necessary to
protect surrounding properties from effect of light or noise generated in
connection with use of the property.
§ 345-58 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-59
332:981
§ 345-60. Beach clubs.204
Beach clubs may be permitted by conditional use permit as provided for in
Article IV, Conditional Uses, subject to the following:
F. The Planning Board shall decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure provided for the issuance of conditional use permits in
§ 345-76B.
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans, and a statement setting
forth full particulars on the operation of the structure are filed with the
Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
B. The beach club shall be limited to use by members of the beach club
only.
C. A complete and itemized list containing the names and residences of all
members for the current year shall be furnished and filed with the City
Clerk within five days after July 1 in each and every year.
D. The beach club shall provide and maintain locker space and dressing
room facilities on the premises for each member and/or family.
E. In order to be used as a private beach club, a lot or plot of ground shall
have a frontage of not less than 200 feet on Ocean Avenue and shall
extend from Ocean Avenue to the Atlantic Ocean with a width
throughout of not less than 200 feet. A front yard shall be provided on
every lot, and no story or part of any building exclusive of cornices shall
be erected nearer to the street line than 200 feet. The front yard shall
be used exclusively for parking facilities or lawns or grass plots or lawn
decorations. Any swimming pool or bathing facility shall not be erected
unless erected easterly of existing or new structures.
F. No beach club structure shall exceed a height of 25 feet.
G. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the operation of
a beach club offering its facilities to the public generally or to transient
guests or customers on less than an annual membership basis.
H. The facility in no way will adversely affect the surrounding property
values, traffic and the residential environment and that the use and/or
facility will serve a useful purpose to the general welfare of the City.
I. All utility service to a beach club shall be underground.
J. The Planning Board of Adjustment shall decide the matter in
accordance with the procedure provided for the issuance of special use
permits in § 345-76B. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 114, Beach Clubs.
§ 345-59 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-61
332:982
§ 345-61. Public utilities.
Public utility uses, such as high voltage transmission lines, towers and
substations, but no service or storage yards, may be permitted by
conditional use permit as provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use
Regulations, subject to the following:
§ 345-62. Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
Fraternal, social, civic, recreational or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses
may be permitted by conditional use permit in zoning districts as provided
for in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, provided that no lodging or
boarding facilities are included, and subject to the following:
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans, and a statement setting
forth the need and purpose of the installation, are filed with the Board
of Adjustment, in triplicate, by the applicant.
B. Proof is furnished to the Board of Adjustment that the proposed
installation in a specific location is necessary and convenient for the
efficiency of the public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient
provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which
the particular use is to be located; and further provided that the design
of any building in connection with the facility conforms to the general
character of the area and will in no way adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is
located; that adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices
will be provided and that sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees
and lawn, are provided and will be periodically maintained.
C. The Planning Board shall decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure provided for the issuance of conditional use permits, in
§ 345-76B.
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans, and a statement setting
forth full particulars on the operation of the structure or use, is filed
with the Planning Board by the applicant, in triplicate.
B. It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use is a bona
fide nonprofit organization.
C. It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use in the
proposed location provides sufficient landscaping, including trees,
shrubs and lawn, to serve as a buffer between such use and residential
properties and to ensure an attractive appearance for the use.
D. Off-street parking space is provided as required in § 345-42.
E. The proposed use and/or structure shall conform in all respects to the
minimum bulk requirements as set forth in § 345-7.
§ 345-61 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-62
332:983
§ 345-63. Nursing, rest and convalescent homes.
Nursing, rest and convalescent homes may be permitted by conditional
use permit in the area bounded by Westwood, Bath and West Avenues, as
provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, subject to the
following:
§ 345-64. Motor vehicle service stations.
Motor vehicle service stations may be permitted by conditional use permit
in zoning districts as provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use
Regulations, subject to the following:
F. The Planning Board shall then decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure provided for the issuance of conditional use permits in
§ 345-76B.
A. A set of plans, specifications, a plot plan and a statement setting forth
full particulars on the operations of the structure or use are filed with
the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
B. The nursing home proposes to be duly licensed under the New Jersey
Hospital Licensing Act and conforms in all respects to the standards
prescribed by the Bureau of Community Institutions, State of New
Jersey.
C. The structure or use shall conform to all yard requirements for onefamily
dwellings in the appropriate zoning district in which it is located.
D. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises in the
rear, but not in the front yard and side yard, of not less than one parking
space for every four beds, plus one additional parking space for every
two employees and members of the staff in the largest working shift.
E. One sign shall be permitted and bear only the name of the
establishment, the street address and presence or lack of vacant units
and the rooming house permit number. If the sign is to be illuminated,
the illumination shall be from within. The sign shall not exceed four
square feet in area on either side and five feet in height and shall be
situated within the property lines.
F. The Planning Board shall decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure provided for the issuance of conditional use permits in
§ 345-76B.
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans is filed, in triplicate, with
the Planning Board, showing in detail the exact location of the motor
vehicle service station or public garage, the number and location of fuel
tanks to be installed, the dimensions and capacity of each tank, the
depth at which the tanks will be placed below the ground, the number
and location of dispensers to be installed, the type of structure and
accessory buildings to be constructed, the number of automobiles
§ 345-62 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-64
332:984
which may be garaged and a description of the nature and extent of the
proposed use.
B. Motor vehicle service stations shall comply with the requirements of
that zone set forth in § 345-7 and the schedules.205
C. All fuel dispensers shall be located at least 30 feet from any street line
or property line.
D. No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the premises
of a motor vehicle service station other than those used by the
employees in the indirect or direct operation of the establishment.
E. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall not be more
than 24 feet wide at any point. Driveways must be at least 10 feet from
any side lot line and 25 feet from the intersection of street lines. No
more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 100 feet of street
frontage.
F. The entire area of the site traversed by motor vehicles shall be hardsurfaced.
G. The Planning Board shall determine that the site plan is appropriate to
the area. A five-foot planting strip, suitably landscaped, shall be
provided between curb cuts and along all other property lines.
H. No motor vehicle service station shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any public entrance to a church, school, library, hospital, fire station,
existing motor vehicle service station, park, playground, charitable
institution or place of public assemblage. The distance shall be
measured in a straight line along the center lines of streets forming the
shortest route from a point opposite the nearest side boundary from the
public entrance to a point opposite the nearest boundary of the service
station or garage lot. No motor vehicle service station shall be located
at the intersection of any two existing or proposed major or collector
streets as indicated upon the Master Plan of the City.
I. Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle may be stored
out-of-doors.
J. Coin-operated service stations are not permitted.
K. Permitted sign and advertising devices shall be permitted as follows:
(1) One pylon identification sign illuminated only by spotlight for each
100 feet of frontage, not to exceed 20 feet in height and 45 square
feet in area on any one side. Those stations having more than 100
feet frontage shall have a maximum of two such signs.
205. Editor's Note: The schedules are included in Art. XI, § 345-102 et seq.
§ 345-64 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-64
332:985
§ 345-65. Senior citizen housing. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93]
Senior citizen housing may be permitted by conditional use permit as
provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, subject to the
following:
(2) One portable A-frame-type sign approximately three feet by three
feet shall be permitted for each 100 feet frontage. Those stations
having more than 100 feet frontage shall have a maximum of two
such signs.
(3) Two signs pertaining to the products or services offered by the
gasoline service station may be displayed on each of the pylon
signs. One sign shall not exceed two square feet. The second sign
shall not exceed four square feet.
(4) The use of all flags, windmills, banners and any flashing or
animated signs and the use of neon shall be prohibited. However,
the use of pennants may be utilized for the purpose of advertising
the opening of a new station, but shall be restricted to a ten-day
period.
(5) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and
the building island only. The outside storage of oil cans and/or
antifreeze and similar products may be displayed on the respective
islands if provided for in a suitable metal stand or rack.
L. The Planning Board shall decide the matter in accordance with the
procedure in § 345-76B for the issuance of conditional use permits. No
existing public garage or a motor vehicle service station shall be
deemed to become a nonconforming use through the subsequent
erection of a school, hospital, church, theater, library, park, playground
or fire station.
A. A complete set of plans, as required for site plan review, shall be filed
with the Planning Board.
B. It shall be ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use and
organization has a bona fide charter and covenants restricting
occupancy to senior citizens exclusively.
C. The structure and proposed use shall comply in all respects with the
requirements set forth in § 345-54 regarding senior citizen housing.
D. The structure and proposed use shall comply in all respects with the
requirements set forth in §§ 345-50, 345-51 and 345-54 regarding midrise
and garden apartment standards.
E. The proposed use and structure shall not exceed six stories.
§ 345-64 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-65
332:986
§ 345-66. (Reserved)206
§ 345-67. Secondhand stores. [Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95]
Secondhand stores may be permitted by conditional use permit in zoning
districts as provided for in Article IV, Zone District Use Regulations, subject
to the following:
§ 345-67.1. C-3 District West End Design Overlay District (WEDO)
[Added 4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 5-15]
F. The Planning Board shall then decide the matter in accordance with the
procedures provided for the issuance of conditional use permits in
§ 345-76B.
A. All procedures set forth in § 345-76B must be complied with.
B. Storage and display areas must be clearly delineated. Storage areas
must be separated from display areas by interior walls and must not
exceed 40% of the total gross floor area of the store.
C. No merchandise may be displayed outside the building, except by
special permit.
D. Display areas must be shown in floor plan layout with aisle widths no
less than three feet.
E. One identification sign will be permitted as specified in §§ 345-40 and
345-30B.
F. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided according to § 345-43.
A. Multifamily units above ground-level retail (mixed-use) on development
parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater.
B. Institutional uses above ground-level retail (mixed use) on development
parcels of 20,000 square feet or greater.
C. Adaptive reuse of the West End School for one of the following uses:
(1) Visual and/or performing arts educational and performance facility:
(a) Performing arts theater, inclusive of performance venues of
varying sizes, such as cabaret or dinner theatre, cafe,
intermission concessions and space for receptions before or
after performances or for fundraising events, but excluding
independent full-service restaurants.
(b) Instruction in performing arts, inclusive of dance,
instrumental, vocal, composition, drama, playwriting, musical
206. Editor's Note: Former § 345-66, Community residences for the developmentally disbaled
and community shelters for victims of domestic violence, was repealed 2-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 13-99.
§ 345-65 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-67.1
332:987
theater, set design and construction, audio engineering and
recording or related arts.
(c) Instruction in the visual arts, inclusive of illustration and
rendering, sculpture, filmmaking, screenplay and related arts,
as well as display space or galleries for students, faculty and
artists-in-residence.
(d) Temporary living accommodations for professional or student
performers and artists during periods of performances or
special programs, such as performing and visual arts "camps."
(2) Specialty education, such as culinary schools, computer training,
secretarial schools, cosmetology schools or similar professional,
business or vocational schools.
(3) Professional offices.
§ 345-67.1 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-67.1
332:988
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 345-68. Continuance of existing provisions.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing October 22, 1969, may be continued, although such use
or building does not conform to the regulation specified by this chapter for
the zone in which such land or building is located; provided, however, that:
§ 345-69. Abandonment.
A use shall be adjudged as abandoned when there occurs a cessation of any
use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant
or owners to reinstate or change such use.
§ 345-70. Restoration.
Any use or structure validly existing under the law on October 22, 1969,
which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter may be
continued upon the lot or in the building so occupied or any such structure
may be restored or prepared, but not enlarged, in the event of partial
destruction. The use, matter or purpose may be continued, notwithstanding
any change of title or right to possession. A nonconforming use may not
be changed to another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use which is
abandoned may not be reestablished.
§ 345-71. Conversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.
§ 345-72. Alterations.
A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered
during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50% of the assessed
value of the building unless such building is changed to a conforming use.
§ 345-73. Construction approval prior to chapter.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit and the ground
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased
unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance.
C. No nonconforming use may be expanded.
§ 345-68 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-73
332:989
story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, which has
work of which has been completed within six months of the date of the
permit and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans
as filed within one year from October 22, 1969.
§ 345-74. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing or created
thereby.
§ 345-73 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-74
332:990
ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 345-75. Zoning Officer; powers and duties.
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
conferred upon, but not reserved solely upon, the Zoning Officer, who
shall have such powers as are conferred upon him or her by this chapter
and as reasonably may be implied. The Construction Code Official,
Department Head/Director of the Building and Development
Department and/or Administrative Director of City Planning, or their
designee or a designee or alternate designee as appointed by the
Council of the City, may be appointed Zoning Officer. In no case shall a
permit be granted for the construction or alteration of any building
where the proposed construction, alteration or use thereof would be in
violation of any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to cause any building, plans or premises to be inspected
or examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition
found to exist in violation of this chapter, and he shall have the right to
enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course of his
duties. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 38-00]
B. Where the Zoning Officer in the course of his duties determines that
any plans, buildings or premises are in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, he shall order the responsible party, in writing, to remedy such
conditions. Such written order shall specify the nature of the violation
found to exist, the remedy ordered and time permitted for such action,
the penalties and remedies which may be invoked by the City and the
violators' rights of appeal as provided for by this chapter and the laws
of the State of New Jersey.
C. A copy of the written order shall be transmitted to the Construction
Code Official, who shall thereupon refuse to grant such applicant a
building permit or certificate of occupancy until the above violations
have been remedied. Where such violations apply to an existing
structure or use, the Construction Code Official shall cause the
certificate of occupancy for the building or premises in question to be
held null and void. A new certificate of occupancy shall be required for
any further use of such building or premises.
D. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of the Municipal Land Use Law207 or of this chapter or
other regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the City of
Long Branch or the Zoning Officer of the City of Long Branch or any
interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to
207. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 345-75 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-75
332:991
prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises.
E. Enforcement procedure.
(1) Prior to construction and operation. Any application for a building
permit for a use which shall be subject to performance standards
shall be accompanied by a sworn statement filed by the owner of
the subject property or the operator of the proposed use that such
use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards
set forth herein.
(2) Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards is required and shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Official.
(3) Termination of violation. All violations shall be terminated within
30 days or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day
following and subject to fines as set forth within.
(4) Violation inspection.
(a) As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use,
occupancy of any structure and operation of any process or
equipment, the applicant shall supply evidence, satisfactory to
the Planning Board or to its designated representative, that the
proposed use, structure, process or equipment will conform
fully with all of the applicable performance standards. As
evidence of compliance, the Board may require certification of
tests by appropriate government agencies or by recognized
testing laboratories, any costs thereof to be borne by the
applicant. The Planning Board may require that specific
operating procedures or methods be followed or that specific
types of equipment, machinery or devices be installed if the
government agencies or testing laboratories examining the
proposed operation shall determine that the use of such
specific types of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures or
methods are required in order to ensure compliance with the
applicable performance standards. Permits and certificates
required by other government agencies shall be submitted to
the Planning Board as proof of compliance with applicable
codes. The Construction Code Official shall be the designated
representative for the Planning Board for the purpose of this
subsection.
(b) Whenever in the opinion of the Construction Code Official
there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy
violates the regulations of this chapter, he is hereby
empowered to employ a qualified technician or technicians to
perform investigations, measurements and analyses to
determine whether or not the regulations of this chapter are
being violated. In the event that a violation is found to exist,
§ 345-75 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-75
332:992
§ 345-76. Certificates and permits.
the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fees of the
technicians employed to perform such investigations,
measurements and analyses.
A. Zoning permits. Zoning permits, where required, shall be secured from
the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction or alteration of any structure or part of a structure or upon
a change in the use of the land or a structure. Such permits shall be
valid for not more than one year from the date of issuance. [Amended
7-25-2000 by Ord. No. 27-00]
B. Conditional use permits.
(1) Applications for conditional use permits for conditional uses
provided for under this chapter shall be made to the Planning
Board through the Secretary of the Planning Board upon the forms
supplied by him.
(2) All applications shall be filed not less than 31 days prior to the
meeting at which the initial consideration of the application is
requested.
(3) No application for a conditional use permit shall be acted upon
unless and until it is determined to be complete in every respect,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, including but not limited to
necessary supporting data, papers, certificates, plans and fees, and
all other items set forth in the Long Branch development
application checklist dated February 1, 2006, incorporated herein
by reference.208 Any applicant for development shall be given a
copy of the aforesaid checklist upon request for a development
application. He may seek waiver of any of the aforesaid provisions
pursuant to the aforesaid statute. [Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 9-06]
(4) Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary of the Planning
Board shall transmit copies of the plans and information to those
persons or agencies referred to in § 345-14 for action as required
therein.
(5) Application details.
(a) The application for a conditional use permit shall be made, in
quadruplicate, accompanied by a detailed statement of what is
intended and setting forth the need and purpose of the
proposed construction.
(b) The plans and information accompanying an application for a
conditional use permit shall also include the following:
208. Editor's Note: the application checklist is on file in the City offices.
§ 345-75 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-76
332:993
[1] The location, use, design, specification, floor plan,
dimensions and height of each proposed building or
structure.
[2] Existing property lines, streets and buildings within 500
feet of the property.
[3] The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways
and the location, size and capacity of all areas to be used
for off-street parking, loading and unloading.
[4] The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways and
all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
[5] The design and treatment of buffer areas and screening
devices to be maintained, including dimensions of all areas
devoted to planting, lawns, trees or other landscaping
devices.
[6] Sufficient data to indicate the effects of the proposed use
development in producing traffic congestion and safety
hazards and sufficient additional data to enable the
Planning Board to determine compliance with the design
requirements set forth in this and other pertinent sections
of this chapter.
(6) The Planning Board shall hear the matter in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., and Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures. All
provisions therein (including but not limited to publication of
notice, serving of notices, certification of payment of taxes, hearing
and appeal procedures) shall apply.
(7) If the Planning Board determines that the application is
incomplete, it shall advise the applicant to that effect through its
Secretary within 45 days of the date of submission of the
application to the Secretary and shall specify the nature of the
incompleteness; and it shall either require the applicant to submit
amended or revised applications to the Secretary or to supply
additional specific data or documents to the Board.
(8) If the Planning Board determines the application is complete, it
shall schedule the matter for hearing and advise the applicant of
the date of the hearing.
(9) Conditional uses shall be granted by the Planning Board on the
basis of the requirements and standards for these uses set forth in
the regulations for the particular zone of this chapter where they
are allowed. A conditional use shall be granted or denied within 95
days from the date the application is determined to be complete or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Otherwise the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
§ 345-76 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-76
332:994
final approval, and a certificate of the Secretary as to the failure
of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
(10) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or
deny conditional uses and site plans simultaneously without the
applicant being required to make further application to the Board
or the Planning Board being required to hold further hearings. The
longer time period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be
for site plan or conditional use, shall apply. Whenever approval of a
conditional use is requested by the applicant under this subsection,
notice of the hearing on the site plan shall include a reference to
the request for such conditional use.
(11) The Planning Board may impose any modifications and conditions it
deems necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter or to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the community. If the application
is granted, the Zoning Officer shall be empowered to issue a permit
upon request of the applicant in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Board's approval.
C. Temporary use permits. It is recognized that it may be in accordance
with the purpose of this chapter to permit temporary activities for a
limited period of time, whether such activity may or may not be
permitted by other provisions of this chapter. The Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment are hereby empowered to grant temporary
use permits. This chapter does not require an application for such
activities as circuses, fairs, religious events, special sales and similar
activities which must be approved by the City Council. The Planning
Board shall have jurisdiction, however, to grant temporary use permits
for any use permitted in a particular zone. All other applications for
temporary use permits shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The appropriate Board shall determine that such
uses are of such a nature and are so located that at the time of petition
they will in no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land and
the activities normally permitted in the zone, but rather contribute
materially to the general welfare of the City, particularly in a state of
emergency, under conditions peculiar to the time and place involved.
Upon such determination, the appropriate Board shall direct the
Construction Code Official to issue a certificate of occupancy for a
period not to exceed six months.
D. Building permits. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or
structurally altered until a permit has been issued by the Construction
Code Official. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance
with the requirement of the building code.209
E. Certificates of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by
the Construction Code Official in the manner prescribed in the Building
209. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 345-76 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-76
332:995
§ 345-77. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications
for zoning permits, a record of all permits issued and a record of all
certificates of occupancy, which he countersigns, together with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all
plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office
and shall be available for the use of the officials of the City. The Zoning
Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the City Council, summarizing
for the period since his last report all zoning permits and certificates
countersigned by him and all complaints of violations and the action taken
by him and consequent thereon. A copy of each report shall be filed with the
City Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed with the City Council.
§ 345-78. Fees.
The City Council shall fix the fees for permits and designate the official
authorized to issue the same.
§ 345-79. Violations and penalties.
Code. On the serving of notice by the Zoning Officer to the owner of
any violation of any of the provisions or requirements with respect to
any building or use thereof or of land, as specified in this chapter, the
certificate of occupancy for such use shall be deemed to be in violation
of this chapter and subject to penalty. A new certificate of occupancy
shall be required for any further use of such land or building. No fee
shall be charged for an original certificate of occupancy as required
herein; but for each copy of an original certificate, there shall be a
charge of $1, which shall be remitted to the City Treasurer by the
issuing officer in accordance with the manner of reporting and payment
as is generally provided.
A. This chapter may be enforced by the Zoning Officer, Supervisor of the
Building Department, administrative head of City Planning,
Construction Code Official or police officer of the City of Long Branch,
all of whom are empowered to cause any building, structure, plans or
premises to be inspected and examined and to order the remedying of
any condition found to exist therein or thereafter in violation of any
provision of this chapter. The owner or agent of a building or premises
where a violation of any provision of this chapter shall have been
committed or shall exist or the lessee or tenant of any part of the
building or premises in which such violation shall have been committed
or shall exist or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other
person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation or
who shall maintain any building or premises in which any violation of
this chapter shall exist shall, for each and every violation, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.210
§ 345-76 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-79
332:996
§ 345-80. Interpretation and applicability.
In the application and interpretation of this chapter, all provisions hereof
shall be held to be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the City. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances,
the most restrictive, or that imposing the highest standards, shall govern.
§ 345-81. Conflict with other laws.
B. In addition to the powers given to the Zoning Officer, as aforesaid, the
owner of any property in the City of Long Branch may make a complaint
for any violation of this chapter or any provision or section thereof and,
upon conviction in such case, the penalties hereinbefore provided shall
be imposed.
C. In addition to the remedy or remedies hereinbefore provided, any
person, persons, company or corporation violating this chapter or any
provision or section thereof may be proceeded against by the City of
Long Branch or by the Zoning Officer of the City of Long Branch or by
the owner of any property in the City of Long Branch by appropriate
action or proceeding in equity or otherwise to prevent and enjoin any
threatened violations or any existing violation of this chapter or any
provision or section thereof.
A. All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistencies. All plans submitted to appropriate municipal
authorities for approval and to obtain the issuance of building permits
for a use permitted under this chapter, which use is, subsequent to
filing of the plans, prohibited by an amendment to this chapter, may
continue to be processed by the municipal authorities, provided that no
building permits shall be issued under this section later than one year
after such an amendment has been made prohibiting a use under this
chapter.
B. This chapter shall be read in para materia with Chapter 69, Land Use
Procedures; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 69, Land Use
Procedures, the provisions of that ordinance shall govern.
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-79 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-81
332:997

ARTICLE X
Redevelopment Plan
[Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
§ 345-82. Adoption of plan.
§ 345-83. Glossary.
As used in the Redevelopment Plan, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (BID) — The generic term that
includes New Jersey's Special Improvement Districts (SID's) under the
District Management Act of 1984. A legally defined method by which
properties can be assessed for specified purposes, typically services, and
A. The Redevelopment Plan, entitled "City of Long Branch, New Jersey
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan," dated April 1996, as
attached hereto, is hereby adopted.
B. It is hereby found that the above-referenced Redevelopment Plan meets
the criteria for adoption of a redevelopment plan as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-7, and as further specified in the plan itself.
C. It is hereby found and determined that the above-referenced
Redevelopment Plan is consistent with the Master Plan of the City of
Long Branch.
D. The above-referenced Redevelopment Plan shall constitute an overlay
zone for the area contained in the plan. The Zoning Map of the City of
Long Branch, Chapter 345, Zoning, § 345-5, is hereby amended to
designate the area set forth in this plan as the "Oceanfront-Broadway
Redevelopment Zone."
E. Uses in the redevelopment area shall be limited to those permitted in
the Redevelopment Plan. Further, the requirements set forth in the
Redevelopment Plan shall supersede Chapter 345, Zoning, Chapter
300, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter 69, Land Use Procedures, of the
City of Long Branch in the redevelopment area covered by the plan, as
provided in the § 345-100, entitled "Miscellaneous," in the
Redevelopment Plan and to the extent anything set forth in those
chapters is inconsistent with the provisions of the Redevelopment Plan.
In the case of any inconsistency between this article and any prior
ordinance with respect to a Redevelopment Plan adopted by the City of
Long Branch, the provisions of this article, and the plan referenced
herein, shall prevail, except as to lots or parcels of land on which
redevelopment has actually taken place and structures or
improvements built or installed under such prior ordinance and
Redevelopment Plan.211
211. Editor's Note: Original Section VIII, regarding the plan kept on file, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 345-82 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-83
332:999
under some conditions physical improvements. New Jersey law allows
District Management Corporations to borrow for no more than 180 days.
CONCEPT PLAN — Plans that may precede Master Plan in which desired
improvements are illustrated and suggestions made regarding land uses
and other elements.
DENSITY — The relationship of a unit of geography (e.g., acres, miles) to
the number of housing units or to some demographic data (e.g., persons
per square mile) or economic statistics (e.g., purchasing power or stores or
sales per square mile, etc).
ECO-TOURISM — A branch of the tourism industry that specializes in travel
and other arrangements that enable people to enjoy rare natural areas, e.g.,
safaris, climbing in the Rockies, undersea diving, etc. Two areas in New
Jersey offering this possibility include the Brigantine Wildlife Refuge and
fall birdwatching at Cape May.
ENTERPRISE ZONE — State-approved area within designated
municipalities in which tax incentives are available to encourage investment
and, in selected instances, sales taxes (on selected items) are reduced
by 50% and the receipts placed in a fund for state-approved projects. A
state-mandated local Board makes recommendations for funding to the City
Council and the State Enterprise Board.
FINDING OF NEED FOR REDEVELOPMENT — The step precedent to the
adoption of a Redevelopment Plan is the process defined in the housing
and redevelopment statutes by which an area is declared in need of
redevelopment. To warrant the finding, a study must show evidence of
meeting at least one of seven statutory tests. Recommended by the Planning
Board and adopted by the governing body.
MASTER PLAN — Term used in State Municipal Land Use Law to indicate
an adopted general plan for a municipality to guide zoning, public
investments and related matters. Required elements include land use,
housing, circulation, etc. Should be reviewed every six years and updated
as necessary.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Area found in need of redevelopment for which
a Redevelopment Plan has been adopted.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — A step in the process mandated by state
housing and redevelopment statutes and the Constitution whereby localities
can condemn properties for private redevelopment and can award tax
incentives to encourage redevelopment. Plan provides guidance for land use
and meets various statutory tests. Plan is prepared for the Planning Board
and adopted or modified by the governing body.
REVITALIZATION — A popular word referring to the process of improving
an area, usually commercial, economically visually or otherwise. Not a
legally defined term.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING (TIF) — A method by which the added
increment of taxes anticipated to be realized from a real estate project
(above the existing revenue level) can be used as the basis to bond for
§ 345-83 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-83
332:1000
acquisition of land, infrastructure or other purposes defined in each state
law. New Jersey does not now have such legislation.
ZONE — An area of a City in which specific land use requirements
regarding what can and what cannot be built are included in the adopted
Zoning Code.212
ZONING — Adopted codes that implement the Master Plan's directions
regarding land use.213
§ 345-84. Intent; objectives.
§ 345-85. Boundaries and area descriptions.
A. This Redevelopment Plan was adopted by the City of Long Branch, New
Jersey, in order to achieve redevelopment of an underdeveloped
segment of the oceanfront and an underutilized commercial area west,
north and south of the intersection of Broadway and Ocean Boulevard.
The overall goal is to bring about a compact and integrated ensemble of
public and private places that support year-round uses related to living,
working and recreation and visitation. All of the area covered by the
plan has been found to be in need of redevelopment.
B. The Oceanfront district includes five sectors or "Zones of Character"
which are identified as:
(1) Beachfront South: Residential.
(2) Pier/Village Center: Mixed Commercial, Entertainment,
Residential.
(3) Hotel Campus: Office, Hotel.
(4) Beachfront North: Residential, Entertainment.
(5) Broadway-Gateway: Mixed Commercial.
C. These five sectors will be made available for redevelopment under
development/design requirements described in this plan. Further
specificity will be added during the developer selection process.
Density of development is a major factor in this plan. It is reflected in
building bulk and height, realized in specific building types and
expressed in commercial FAR (floor area ratio) or residential dwelling
units per acre (du/acre).
D. The plan sets out the City's objectives for redevelopment, describes
how redevelopment rights will be awarded to private redevelopers,
specifies relocation policies and states how tax incentives may be
applied to achieve needed improvements.
212. Editor's Note: See Chapter 345, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Long Branch.
213. Editor's Note: See Chapter 345, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Long Branch.
§ 345-83 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-85
332:1001
A. The area included in this Redevelopment Plan (Map 1214) is described as
follows:
Starting at a point at the intersection of North Bath Avenue and Ocean
Boulevard, move northward along Ocean Boulevard to the intersection
of Ocean Boulevard and Chelsea Avenue. Then move westward along
Chelsea Avenue to the intersection of Chelsea Avenue and Second
Avenue. Then move northward along Second Avenue to the
intersection of Second Avenue and Broadway. Continue across
Broadway in a northerly direction along Union Avenue until Union
Avenue makes a 90 degree turn westward. At this point, continue
in a northerly direction until meeting the southerly property line of
the abandoned Conrail Railroad right of way. At this point, follow
the southerly side of the R.O.W. eastward to Long Branch Avenue.
Continue in a northerly direction along Long Branch Avenue until the
northerly property line of the Conrail R.O.W. is reached. From this
point, follow the northerly side of the Conrail R.O.W. westward to a
point which intersects the westerly fence line of the NJNG facility.
Continue in a northerly direction along fence line past the foot of
Brook Street (C.P. Williams Way). Continue to follow fence in northern
and eastern directions along the property line, which divides NJNG/
JCP&L property from City of Long Branch Housing Authority property,
to Central Avenue. Continue in an easterly direction to the Open
Brook. Follow the Open Brook in a northerly direction to the point
of intersection with the northerly property line of the former Jerry
Morgan Park. Follow this property line in an easterly and southerly
direction until Long Branch Avenue is met. Continue in a southerly
direction along Long Branch Avenue to the intersection of Long Branch
Avenue and Cooper Avenue. Continue easterly along Cooper Avenue
until the intersection of Cooper Avenue and Witmer Place. Continue
northward along Witmer Place until the intersection of Witmer Place
and Sea View Avenue. Follow Sea View Avenue eastward until meeting
the mean high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean. Follow mean high
water line inclusive of existing Pier riparian lands southward until
reaching a point created by the intersection of the mean high water
line and a line projected from the right of way for north Bath Avenue.
Then turn westward along this line and North Bath Avenue to the point
of origin, which is the intersection of Ocean Boulevard and North Bath
Avenue.
B. Virtually all of the area in the plan is also within the state-designated
Urban Enterprise Zone (Map 2215) which offers a variety of financial
incentives to qualifying private investors.
C. Map 3216 illustrates the five sectors or Zones of Character listed above.
Boundary descriptions follow:
214. Editor's Note: Maps are included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
215. Editor's Note: Maps are included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
216. Editor's Note: Maps are included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 345-85 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-85
332:1002
§ 345-86. General redevelopment objectives.
General redevelopment objectives shall be as follows:
(1) Beachfront South. This sector lies between Ocean Boulevard and
Ocean Avenue and is bounded on the south by Bath Avenue North.
It includes some residential development. Estimated size: 17.25
acres.
(2) Pier/Village Center. This sector fronts on Ocean Boulevard. It
includes the former amusement pier and land and buildings
formerly part of an amusement complex, along with some
residential units and a large amount of publicly held property. On
the east edge, Ocean Avenue is a lightly used north-south street
with some commercial buildings built over the beach. Little
commercial activity remains here except for a small motel.
Estimated size: 25.5 acres.
(3) Hotel Campus. This sector includes the 250-room Ocean Place
Hilton hotel, restaurant and spa, parking, a block of residential
buildings, another restaurant and a former day-care center. It is
bounded by the Promenade and beach, Ocean Boulevard, Laird
Street and Madison Avenue. Estimated size: 16.75 acres.
(4) Beachfront North. This sector lies south of Monmouth County's
Seven Presidents Park, west of the Ocean Place Promenade, east of
Ocean Boulevard and north of Madison Avenue. This area contains
the former State Armory, expected to become a private recreation
facility; a significant amount of vacant land; and a number of
residential properties whose conditions range from wellmaintained
to poorly maintained. Estimated size: 27.5 acres.
(5) Broadway-Gateway. This sector includes approximately 3/4 of a
mile of frontage on Ocean Boulevard, an industrial area, the
"Broadway Triangle" commercial area, and some residential
properties in the northern and southern edges. Estimated size: 48.5
acres.
D. An additional sector may be created in the Broadway corridor, west of
Second Avenue, extending to the railroad right-of-way, when it appears
that use of redevelopment powers will be useful.
E. The Long Branch beaches are scheduled to be replenished in 1996 by
the Army Corps of Engineers. The sand will extend approximately 250
feet eastward from the bulkhead.
A. Reestablish the identity of Long Branch as a multifaceted community
for residence, work and leisure, in a framework of both historic legacy
and citizen consensus.
§ 345-85 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-86
332:1003
§ 345-87. Specific objectives: key principles.
B. Create value in land and enterprise for public and private interests
through high-yield projects that exploit ocean views from residential
and commercial development and public spaces.
C. Strengthen retail trade and City revenues by increasing year-round
population by creating housing types that will attract a diversified
market, primarily of small households.
D. Ensure public access to the restored beachfront, augmented with
recreational amenities and civic purpose, and designed as a vital safe
zone with year-round night/day uses.
E. Increase employment opportunities for residents, stabilize taxes and
increase maintenance and amenities as part of a better quality of life.
F. Improve public facilities in commercial areas, at the beachfront and
along various City streets, and facilitate pedestrian movement among
residences, commercial areas and the beachfront.
G. Improve the City's image by replacing vacant lots and poorly
maintained buildings with new, carefully designed buildings, both
commercial and residential.
H. Attract more retail and service enterprises which will provide more
commercial choices for residents and visitors.
I. Achieve shared parking where needed to facilitate use by residents,
employees and visitors at different times, saving land and development
costs.
J. Achieve state and local environmental objectives by restricting
impervious surfaces on a sector basis, thereby eliminating the waste
often associated with project-by-project attempts to meet these and
similar standards, such as parking.
K. Conserve sound, well-maintained single-family housing to the extent
possible, and encourage residential development through infill.
L. Encourage mixed use development which includes both commercial
and residential uses.
A. Density and use.
(1) A concentration of building density is encouraged in order to create
a walkable environment and an enlarged base population to sustain
a lively, year-round retail and residential core on Long Branch's
Oceanfront.
(2) Compared to the existing density of about 0.25 FAR, the objective
should be to achieve FAR's between 0.5 and 0.75. While such
concentrated development is usually constrained by parking area
§ 345-86 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-87
332:1004
§ 345-88. Specific objectives: uses by sector.
The Redevelopment Plan includes the following component areas: entrance
parkway, commercial gateway, beachfront with Boardwalk, a Village Center
and Pier, flanked by two residential neighborhoods, one low-rise and one
mid-rise. Within these zones, the objective is to establish individual places
of character, where old blends into new, where people arrive, congregate,
do business and pursue pleasure in the community's everyday life. Each
new proposed development project will be expected to support and realize
these objectives. Further detail and enumeration of the specific objectives
outlined hereunder will be included in the Design Guidelines Handbook
requirements, a four-pronged parking approach is envisioned to
support this increased density by taking less land for unproductive
vehicular uses. This approach is expected to include:
(a) Optimizing the use of dedicated parking sites by sharing across
complementary uses.
(b) Reevaluating parking requirements based upon actual demand
at different times of the day and night.
(c) Creating incentives to use public transit and shared ridership.
(d) Realizing on-street parking, on a regular and "surge" basis.
B. Urban form. This plan requires a close relationship between built and
open areas by maximizing street-fronting uses, controlling street
scales, encouraging zero-lot line development and minimizing marginal
utilization of land given to driveways, unusable setback easements,
stand-alone development, and underutilized parking lots. Building
design guidelines and a set of performance and prescriptive codes will
be provided during the developer selection process in order to control
the quality, scale and compatibility of future development proposals in
the redevelopment area.
C. Circulation. A hierarchy of streets, ranging from arterial roads to
neighborhood streets and pedestrianways, will be created in order to
sustain safe and coherent access to regional, local and neighborhood
uses.
D. Public beach access. Beach access will be enhanced by connecting
existing highways and transit facilities to beachfront destinations and
uses with pedestrian promenades, bikeways, trolleyways and vehicular
streets. Proposed improvements include gateways to the beach and the
inland community from Ocean Boulevard, environmental signage and
graphics and the reopening of Ocean Avenue to vehicular traffic.
E. Temporary and conditional uses. Such uses shall be allowed on a percase
basis to accommodate phased improvements and to prevent
developments that underutilize resources for short-term gains.
§ 345-87 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-88
332:1005
being prepared by the City.217 By sector and by use, the objectives are the
following:
A. Beachfront South: Mid-Rise Residential.
(1) Residential development in this area is to continue the mid-rise
residential pattern of four- to eight-story structures that maximize
views to the Atlantic. This community is to achieve a friendly
pedestrian environment unified by landscaping: lawns, hedges and
walls, seating areas and buffered parking areas and good access on
foot to the Boardwalk and beaches.
(2) Development/design requirements for this sector include:
(a) Create a cohesive mid-rise residential district, built upon the
existing type of residential development.
(b) Densities at a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 30 dwelling
units/acre.
(c) Institute strict setback and coverage requirements:
[1] Ten feet on Ocean Avenue.
[2] Thirty feet on side streets.
[3] Fifty feet landscaped buffer on Ocean Boulevard.
[4] Fifty feet or height of building, between buildings. (The
setback between buildings must be reviewed on a per case
basis, to encourage usable areas, rather than unused
"view" corridors.)
[5] Permitted ground coverage: 50%.
(d) Give incentives for building types that provide terraces and
balconies, stepping towards the ocean, or that provide publicly
accessible amenities on the Boardwalk.
(e) Require mid-block "pedestrian greens," buffering parking
areas and connecting adjacent sites.
(f) Combine entrances to parking lots to minimize the curb cuts on
Ocean Boulevard by extending a driving lane between adjacent
parking lots in a block, entered from side streets.
(g) Close and landscape unnecessary side streets off Ocean
Boulevard.
(h) Allow permitted (short-term) visitor parking on Ocean Avenue
and side streets. Restrict new curb cuts and access to all new
projects from Ocean Boulevard.
217. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-88
332:1006
(i) Create a friendly pedestrian environment through uniform
landscaping: evergreen trees and hedges on Ocean Boulevard
side; lawns, hedges and stone footwalls on the Ocean Avenue
side; combined "gateways" and address markers on side
streets, for the entire block; low pedestrian lights from parking
to building entrances.
(j) Create sidewalks, crosswalks and pedestrian-operated lights at
intersections.
(k) Require multistory residential developments to provide
benches and trash cans on Ocean Avenue side.
(l) Encourage resident facilities and amenities (pools, clubs,
community halls, inns, etc.) on ground floors and in existing
historic structures that face Ocean Avenue and the boardwalk.
(m) Restrict nonconforming/ancillary uses to 5% of each proposed
development.
(n) Create landscape buffers between residential and other
nonconforming uses.
(o) Create combined access to beaches from the boardwalk.
(p) Build small neighborhood shelters, handstands, shuttle stops
and gazebos on the Ocean Avenue side.
B. Pier/Village Center: Commercial and Entertainment, Residential.
(1) A Village Center concept is to govern redevelopment of this area. A
concentration of street-level retail and recreation-related
development is anticipated, allowing second and third floors to be
developed for restaurants, small office or residential uses. Current
low-density patterns are to be increased to an FAR of at least 0.5 to
0.75 based upon the complementarity of existing and proposed
uses, in optimizing parking demand and supply. The now derelict
Pier is intended to become a public place restored by public action.
The southerly half of this district is to feature a two- and three-story
residential pattern, made more cohesive with infill on individual
lots and some larger low-rise development of medium density (15
dwelling units/acre). No ground level residential uses shall be
permitted on Ocean Avenue between Morris Avenue and Seaview
Avenue, in the redevelopment area. Bed-and-breakfast conversions
will be allowed as part of the permitted conversion of single-family
homes to two and three units. The commercial and entertainment
uses in this sector consist of two areas: Laird Street, and Ocean
Avenue, between Morris Avenue and Laird Street.
(2) Development/design requirements for the Commercial and
Entertainment area on Ocean Avenue include:
§ 345-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-88
332:1007
(a) Retail/restaurant/small inns/entertainment/ convenience, etc.,
catering to residential, worker and visitor populations.
(b) Reparcel Ocean Avenue frontage into small lots (150 feet by 50
feet to 75 feet wide) where feasible.
(c) Require a continuous street frontage with transparent display
windows and frequent store entrances (zero lot line
development).
(d) Allow small scale incremental development:
[1] Floor area ratio: 1.0 maximum.
[2] Permissible ground coverage: 75%.
[3] Maximum height: 60 feet.
(e) Improve public and private amenities through joint land
development where feasible.
(f) Widen Ocean Avenue right-of-way to 115 feet between Morris
Avenue and Laird Street.
(g) Provide easy access to front doors along "Main Street."
Increase short-term on-street parking. Create a tree-lined
median with diagonal parking and curbside parallel parking on
Ocean Avenue.
(h) No on-site parking requirements for Ocean Avenue commercial
buildings.
(i) Phase in parking as required and reserve land for a municipal
parking lot at rear (validated for customers) to share with
hotel/office users. (Additional parking management specifics to
be included in the City's parking plan.)
(j) Buffer adjoining residential neighborhoods from commercial
activity.
(k) Widen wooden boardwalk to 25 feet and create paved
crosswalks and dropoffs.
(3) Development/design requirements for the Commercial and
Entertainment area on Laird Street include:
(a) Extend the retail "Main Street" on Ocean Avenue to connect
with the Commercial Gateway and the upper Broadway retail
street.
(b) Continue small lot commercial development on the south side
of Ocean Avenue.
(c) Wrap retail/commercial uses around the existing hotel garage.
Move the garage's parking entrance, currently at the northeast
§ 345-88 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-88
332:1008
corner, to the northwest corner of the garage near the hotel
entrance.
(d) Create a distinctive "corner" that faces Ocean Avenue/Laird
Street/Pier intersection. An anchor restaurant should be open
day and night, all year around.
(e) Set the new building frontage to yield a sixty-foot right-of-way
with a ten-foot planted median on Laird Street.
(f) Establish continuous street frontage (zero lot-line
development) on either side of Laird Street.
(g) Small scale incremental retail development with a maximum
FAR of 1:0 may be considered. Permissible ground coverage:
75%. Maximum height: 60 feet.
(h) Redo Laird Street intersection at Ocean Boulevard.
(i) No residential uses are permitted on the ground level on Ocean
Avenue in this sector.
(j) Motel/hotel uses on Ocean Avenue are encouraged.
(4) Development/design requirements for the residential area include:
(a) Close the entrances to all neighborhood streets (Franklin,
Melrose and Chelsea East) at Ocean Boulevard, to deter
through traffic.
(b) Extend alleys connecting these streets at mid-block.
(c) Require access such that neighborhood "gateways" occur on
Ocean Avenue and Morris Avenue.
(d) Create a landscaped buffer at the perimeter of the residential
neighborhood.
(e) Make "Pier Gateway" at the Laird/Garfield intersection with
Ocean Boulevard.
(f) Develop a cohesive low-rise, medium-density (15 dwelling
units/acre) residential neighborhood compatible with existing
neighborhood fabric, similar to that described for Beachfront
North. Development proposals will be reviewed on a per case
basis until design guidelines are drawn up for the area.218
(g) Only residential uses are permitted in this section of the Pier/
Village Center area, with the exception of bed-and-breakfast
and motel accommodations.
(h) Allow bed-and-breakfast conversions per new City ordinance.
218. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-88
332:1009
C. Hotel Campus: Hotel, Commercial.
(1) The objective is to develop a distinctive Hotel "Campus" ensemble
as a gateway to the City and to the oceanfront.
(2) Development/design requirements for this area include:
(a) Mixed commercial development at an urban scale on the key
corners.
(b) Change the context of the hotel on its isolated parking-based
site.
(c) Introduce real urban streets into the campus to encourage a
firm edge, movement through the site and activity of vehicles
and pedestrians.
(d) Floor area ratio permissible to 2.0.
(e) Make edge streets with prominent ground level uses and
frequent entrances.
(f) An office building of at least 100,000 square feet which is to be
complementary to existing hotel.
(g) Develop parking facilities shared by hotel and office, and at
least partially available to the public during off-hours and on
weekends. Create short term on-street parking.
(h) Develop South Broadway as a frontage street.
(i) Create a pedestrian-friendly landscaped frontage street/square
on the South Broadway extension to the hotel, connecting to
modified Laird Street and Madison Avenue.
(j) A small convention facility or business hotel/inn facility should
be built on the northwest corner of the hotel block.
(k) Create a landmark restaurant on the Laird Street corner of the
hotel site, wrapped around the existing garage on the Pier side.
D. Beachfront North: Low-Rise Medium-Density Residential.
(1) Beachfront North is a sector composed of a Waterfront Recreation
Zone (sites fronting the Promenade/Ocean Avenue) and a
Beachside Residential Village. Building types that are "street
based" and "street dependent" shall be required in the entire
sector. A neighborhood character is to be established, emphasized
by controlled street traffic, bike and walking paths, on-street
resident parking and through-block alleys for garages and
secondary parking.
(2) Development/design requirements for Beachside Village include:
§ 345-88 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-88
332:1010
(a) Create a transition between public and private spaces by
introducing a hierarchy of accessways which move from
regional to local to residential scale and which are marked by
identifiable "neighborhood gateways."
(b) Create a single cohesive neighborhood by connecting each
existing east-west street with an extended Grant Street (northsouth)
as the primary "spine." Close North Broadway, Madison
Avenue and Ocean Terrace at Ocean Boulevard. Direct traffic
away from Seaview Avenue, Cooper Avenue, and South
Broadway.
(c) Create a block structure that replaces individual front
driveways with shared mid-block alleys linked to garages. A
forty-five-foot right-of-way is required for residential streets
and twenty-foot deeded right-of-way for rear alleys. Existing
sixty-foot rights-of-way may accommodate diagonal (permit)
parking.
(d) Create deeded pedestrian ways to the beach. Twenty-foot
easements for pedestrian pathways required at locations to be
specified during the developer selection process. Any existing
or assembled sites that contain these paths are required to
create and maintain such public pedestrian accessways.
(e) Create a Residential Parking Permit District. New development
is to be restricted to providing no more than one on-site
parking space per unit. Additional on-street parking space may
be lease/purchased from the Parking Permit District.
(f) Building Design Guidelines219 to be prepared by the City to
ensure that new developments do not conflict with desired
residential scale and character.
(g) Permitted density to be at a consistent range between 12
dwelling units/acre and 15 dwelling units/acre (relative to site
area).
(h) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(i) Zero lot development (no side setback).
(j) Minimum ground coverage: 40%.
(k) Maximum ground coverage: 75%.
(l) Balconies/terraces should be encouraged for buildings over
two stories high.
(m) Townhouse or alley based clustered development are building
types which meet the broad criteria listed above.
219. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-88
332:1011
(n) Bed-and-breakfast use to be permitted.
(o) Create a landscaped buffer surrounding the area. All
nonconforming uses required to create an on-site buffer
separation to minimize impact on residential neighborhoods.
(Setbacks and treatment to be delineated in Design Guidelines
Handbook.220)
(p) All uses, other than residential, are restricted and conditional
in this area, subject to their impact on the residential
neighborhood.
(q) No commercial (strip) development is permitted on Ocean
Boulevard fronting sites. No new curb cuts or accessways are
allowed off Ocean Boulevard, unless specified in the sector
plans.
(3) Development/design requirements for Beachfront North area
which is part of Waterfront Recreation Zone include:
(a) All projects must address the Promenade/Ocean Avenue as
delineated in the Design Guidelines Handbook.221
(b) Maximum permissible FAR: 0.25.
(c) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(d) A landscaped thirty-foot setback required on west edge of site.
Setback on Ocean Avenue to be reviewed on a per-case basis.
(e) Parking requirements must be satisfied by shared public onsite
or off-site parking. Public (beach) parking is a permitted
use on all sites in this zone.
(f) One tree shall be planted for every five parking spaces
provided.
(g) Twenty-foot easement for public pedestrian ways required at
locations to be indicated in sector plans in the Design
Guidelines Handbook.222
(h) No residential uses permitted on all oceanfront sites between
Hilton Hotel and Seven Presidents Park.
(i) Neighborhood retail and restaurants are permitted uses.
(j) All uses in the Waterfront Recreation Zone must adequately
mitigate disturbance to the adjoining residential uses.
(4) Armory site.
220. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
221. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
222. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-88
332:1012
(a) Development design requirements for the Armory Site include:
[1] Maximum permissible FAR: 1.0. (Structured parking
required for FAR over 0.3.)
[2] Maximum height: 40 feet.
[3] A landscaped thirty-foot setback on all sides is required on
the Armory site (treatment to follow Design Guidelines
Manual.223)
[4] The parking requirements for this site must be satisfied by
a combination of dedicated on-site parking and shared
(public) off-site parking.
(b) Uses permitted are those reflected in the deed from the State
of New Jersey, dated February 27, 1996. The reopened Ocean
Avenue will suffice as primary access to the site. Cooper
Avenue will be a neighborhood through-street with residential
development only.
(c) However, if the recreational use at the Armory has the high
intensity of a regional destination, as measured by standard
transportation analysis of traffic and destination patterns,
Cooper Avenue will become a mixed use frontage street. Sites
abutting Cooper Avenue up to 150 feet from the edge of rightof-
way will be subject to the following development criteria,
and to Design Guidelines224 to be formulated by the City:
[1] Maximum permissible FAR: 1.0. (Structured parking
required for FAR over 0.3.)
[2] Maximum height: 40 feet.
[3] Mandatory setback on Cooper Avenue (for diagonal
parking and pedestrian path easement): 25 feet.
[4] Parking to be integrated with street right-of-way, and
Cooper Avenue access plan as described in the sector
plans in the Design Guidelines Handbook.225
[5] Seventy-five percent of approved FAR for each site must be
built within 100 feet of property line at Cooper Avenue,
leaving buffered rear for long-term parking.
[6] Twenty-foot mandatory landscaped buffer with alley facing
residential development.
223. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
224. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
225. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-88
332:1013
[7] No more than 25% of proposed built uses may be approved
commercial/retail uses.
[8] Parking structures appropriately buffered may be a
permissible nonconforming use on these sites, if not
intruding on residential uses, and provided that they are in
conformity with the City's shared parking requirements.
Details per Design Guidelines226 and Parking Plan.
[9] Parking requirements for mixed commercial/residential
development: two on-site spaces per dwelling unit; five
spaces per 1,000 square feet of commercial space.
(d) Temporary conditional use. The Cooper Avenue sites,
described above, may be occupied by temporary surface
parking lots for a period approved by the City (not to exceed
three years), at the end of which the developer is to be
required to develop designated sites per criteria described
above. The City shall set specific terms when developers are
designated or approved for these sites.
E. Broadway-Gateway: Mixed Commercial.
(1) Commercial and retail uses with larger square footage
requirements are encouraged for this area on the west side of
Ocean Boulevard.
(2) Development/design requirements include:
(a) Close North Broadway from Second Avenue to Ocean
Boulevard, and make South Broadway the gateway to
downtown.
(b) Create a four-building gateway complex that attracts daily
commuters, shoppers and residents.
(c) Maximum permissible FAR: 2.0. (Structured parking required
for developments with FAR greater than 0.7. This shall be
detailed in the shared parking plan to be developed by the
City.)
(d) Lots abutting South Broadway are required to build 80% of
gross (permitted) building area within 80 feet of South
Broadway lot line.
(e) Landscape, signage and access management of projects in this
sector to be built as detailed in the Design Guidelines
Handbook.227
226. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
227. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-88
332:1014
§ 345-89. Relationship of Redevelopment Plan to local objectives.
All of the objectives listed in §§ 345-87 and 345-88 above are considered
by the Long Branch Planning Board and City Council to be local objectives
with which this Redevelopment Plan is consistent. Prior to approving this
Redevelopment Plan, both bodies found that the area addressed in this
Plan was an "area in need of redevelopment." Both bodies subsequently
found that this Redevelopment Plan's objectives are consistent with and
appropriate to the objective of furthering redevelopment within the
specified area.
§ 345-90. Land use regulations.
This subject is discussed earlier in the Plan, in §§ 345-87 and 345-88,
i.e., Specific Objectives: Key principles and Specific objectives: uses by
sector. More detailed requirements will be provided as a separate document
accompanying the Design Guidelines Handbook.228
§ 345-91. Acquisition plan.
(f) Buildings required to be built up to lot line on South Broadway,
to create a street wall, with at least one major pedestrian
entrance on South Broadway.
(g) No building entrances or curb cuts permitted on Ocean
Boulevard, unless specified in sector plans.
(h) Extend Garfield Avenue to Ocean Boulevard as a new
connection from the City to the beach aligned with Laird
Street.
(i) Use infill sites around the existing church for multifamily
residential fronting on Second Avenue. Land shall be reserved
close to Ocean Boulevard for buffered parking.
(j) Add new curb cut for Supermarket/Big Box store to facilitate
homeside access.
(k) Twenty-four-hour public-oriented mixed uses are encouraged.
A. It is the City's intention that property acquisition necessary to
implement this plan will be carried out by designated private
redevelopers negotiating with property owners.
B. The City reserves the right to condemn property if private negotiations
fail and the property or properties in question are judged essential to
achieve objectives intended by the Plan. In cases where the designated
redeveloper and a private property owner cannot agree on the terms of
purchase, and as a last resort after other means have been exhausted,
the developer may request that the City use its power of eminent
228. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-91
332:1015
§ 345-92. Relocation.
§ 345-93. Tax incentives.
The City Council has adopted the following policies regarding possible use
of tax incentives which may be applied to Redevelopment Area projects
seeking such financial assistance:
domain, specifying the means that have been applied to purchase the
property. If the City agrees to acquire by condemnation, the developer
will pay all costs of acquisition/condemnation, including legal and
appraisal costs. The City may require a refundable cash deposit
accompanying this request.
C. To the extent that properties may be subject to title problems, the City
may relieve the properties of these problems through use of eminent
domain.
A. The amount of relocation required to implement the Redevelopment
Plan is expected to be moderate at most, given the policy encouraging
infill. In accordance with the requirements of State law, all persons
(including families, business concerns and others displaced by project
activities) will be assisted in finding other locations and facilities.
Persons displaced from their homes will be assisted in finding housing
which is decent, safe, sanitary and within their financial means in
reasonably convergent locations and otherwise suitable to their needs.
B. Where relocation of any resident or business becomes necessary to
improve and revitalize the Redevelopment Area, the City and/or any
developer that enters into a developer agreement with the City or any
party for the development of any portion of the Redevelopment Area,
shall conform to and meet all the requirements of applicable state and
federal relocation laws.
C. All costs associated with relocation shall be the responsibility of
designated developers.
A. There is no presumption of need for tax abatement within the
Redevelopment Area. The City Council will consider any application for
tax abatement on its merits, depending upon the degree to which the
project needs such an incentive in order to achieve City objectives,
listed below as "projects of special community benefit."
B. Projects of special community benefit include, but are not limited to:
(1) Construction or substantial rehabilitation for office use.
(2) Construction of residential or hotel projects five or more stories in
height.
(3) Construction of new retail space or substantial rehabilitation of
existing space for retail use.
§ 345-91 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-93
332:1016
§ 345-94. Developer selection. [Amended 7-8-2008 by Ord. No.
11-08; 12-30-2013 by Ord. No. 19-13]
(4) Multilevel parking structures with provision for shared parking.
(5) Significant public amenities beyond the minimum state or local
requirements, such as beach access, parks, public art, pedestrian
lighting, etc., in accordance with this plan.
(6) Conversion of nonresidential space to residential or to mixed use.
(7) New buildings that combine residential and commercial uses.
(8) Redevelopment of areas requiring environmental cleanup for any
approved use.
C. It is assumed that nonelevator residential structures will not require tax
incentives.
A. It is the policy of the City of Long Branch that selection of developers to
implement redevelopment plans be accomplished through either an
open and competitive process or initiated by request of existing
property owners, contract purchasers or other parties so authorized by
a property owner who are proposing a project and seeking redeveloper
designation. The City, however, reserves the right to waive this policy,
by resolution of the governing body, if it judges that specific
circumstances justify doing so.
B. Open and competitive developer solicitation and designation process. If
the City determines that a competitive process is to be pursued for
redevelopment of a sector or subsectors, or any portions thereof, the
competitive developer selection process will include these steps, as
further detailed in § 345-95A:
(1) Preparation of developer qualifications, guidelines to selection and
phasing of solicitations.
(2) Preparation and approval of developer solicitation materials
(request for qualifications).
(3) Advertisements and direct solicitation of developers.
(4) Review of developer qualifications through completion by
developers of a request for qualification (RFQ) document created
by the City Administration. Selected developers invited to submit
proposals in response to a request for proposal (RFP) document
created by the City Administration.
(5) Review of developer proposals and consultation with the
Redevelopment Design Review Committee through a collaborative
process, including conceptual site plans, proposed schedule and
financial plan leading to selection of developers.
§ 345-93 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-94
332:1017
(6) Conditional designation of developers and execution of an escrow
agreement by developers in the initial amount required pursuant to
§ 345-94E to cover City costs in connection with further design
review and refinement and negotiations with selected developers,
leading to developer agreements.
(7) City Council designation of developers, based on agreements
between developers and City.
(8) If negotiation with a selected developer is unsatisfactory, the City
will terminate the negotiation and begin again with another
developer until a satisfactory agreement is reached.
(9) The City may also restart the developer solicitation process. It is
the City's intention to continue this process until agreements have
been reached with developers regarding all five sectors.
C. Unsolicited developer designation process. With respect to any
properties in the Redevelopment Area where the City has not
determined to apply the open and competitive developer solicitation
and designation process, the current owner of any such properties, or
any other person with written authorization from the current property
owner, may propose unsolicited redevelopment projects for such
properties. The process for review and approval of such projects by the
City as redevelopment entity are set forth in § 345-95B.
D. Developer agreements will include such issues as developer
responsibilities for public facilities, relocation responsibilities, local
employee recruitment policies, adherence to design guidelines,
approval of all firms which become members of the development team,
timely inception of construction, phasing and other considerations. The
City reserves the right to change developers in the event of failure to
perform in accordance with the agreement.
E. Upon conditional designation, the developer shall execute an escrow
agreement posting an escrow in an initial amount, subject to
replenishment if and as necessary, according to the following schedule:
(1) Five thousand dollars for projects with a total estimated project
cost less of than $3,000,000;
(2) Ten thousand dollars for projects with a total estimated project cost
of greater than $3,000,000 and less than $10,000,000; and
(3) Fifteen thousand dollars for projects with a total estimated project
cost of greater than $10,000,000.
F. Upon execution of a developer agreement, developers will make a
nonrefundable payment of 0.5% of the total estimated project cost, up
to a maximum of $100,000 to the City at the time agreements are
signed. These funds will be applied to economic development programs,
§ 345-94 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-94
332:1018
§ 345-95. Developer designation process. [Amended 12-30-2013 by
Ord. No. 19-13]
including incentives for facade and sign improvements and other
business attraction projects.
A. Open and competitive developer solicitation and designation process.
When the City determines that a competitive process is to be pursued
for redevelopment of a sector or subsectors, the developer designation
process will include the following steps:
(1) Prepare and adopt a land use and parking and access management
plan for affected sectors.
(2) Begin developer solicitation process by releasing requests for
qualifications (RFQ) for one or more of the five sectors or any
portions thereof.
(3) Review responses to RFQ for:
(a) Team qualifications.
(b) Experience.
(c) Financial capacity and financing plan.
(d) Project concept.
(e) Project schedule.
(4) Select developers to respond to request for proposals (RFPs) for
one or more sectors or a part of one sector.
(5) Evaluate RFP responses on the basis of:
(a) Project concept, program and phasing.
(b) Conceptual site plan.
(c) Parking plan.
(d) Acquisition plan.
(e) Relocation plan.
(f) Infrastructure cost responsibility plan.
(g) Necessity for tax abatement.
(6) Award developer(s) exclusive right to negotiate with City through
conditional redeveloper designation and execution of an escrow
agreement by developers in the initial amount required pursuant to
§ 345-94E to cover City costs in connection with further design
review and refinement and negotiations with selected developers,
leading to developer agreements.
§ 345-94 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-95
332:1019
(7) Negotiate developer agreements.
(8) Award "designated developer" rights by sector or subsector or any
applicable portion thereof.
(9) Begin development process leading to application to Planning
Board for preliminary and final site plan approval.
B. Unsolicited developer designation process. With respect to any
properties in the Redevelopment Area where the City has not
determined to apply the open and competitive developer solicitation
and designation process, the current owner of any such properties, or
any person with written authorization from the current property owner,
may propose a project and seek designation as redeveloper for such
properties.
(1) If the proposed development includes the construction of more
than eight dwelling units; or more than 12,500 square feet of
nonresidential development; and the total estimated project cost is
greater than $3,000,000, then the proposed redeveloper
candidates will complete the RFQ and REP and be subject to the
same process set forth in § 345-95A and shall meet the same
requirements set forth in that section and the RFQ and RFP.
(2) If the proposed development includes the construction of eight or
fewer dwelling units; or 12,500 or less square feet of nonresidential
development; and the total estimated project cost is less than
$3,000,000, then the developer designation process will include the
following steps:
(a) Review of developer qualifications and proposals through
completion by developers of a request for designation (RFD)
document created by the City Administration. The RFD shall
include a two-step process pursuant to which there will be a
pre-qualification based upon an initial review and assessment
of the proposed development concept, candidate's
qualifications, experience, financial capacity and financing
plan, project schedule and the development concept's
compliance with the redevelopment plan and design
guidelines.
(b) After such pre-qualification, award developer(s) exclusive right
to negotiate with City through conditional redeveloper
designation and execution of an escrow agreement by
developers in an initial amount of $5,000 to cover City costs in
connection with further design review and refinement and
negotiations with selected developers, leading to developer
agreements.
(c) Continued review and refinement of the development proposal
through a collaborative process with the Redevelopment
Design Review Committee.
§ 345-95 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-95
332:1020
§ 345-96. Non-RFP development proposals.
§ 345-97. Provisions necessary to meet state and local
requirements.
§ 345-98. Procedures for changing Redevelopment Plan.
(d) Negotiate developer agreements.
(e) Award "designated developer" rights for the property(ies).
(f) Begin development process leading to application to Planning
Board for preliminary and final site plan approval.
A. Before the Design Guidelines Handbook229 for each sector is approved
by the City, any developer or landowner must, prior to applying for
preliminary or final development approval, obtain the approval of the
City Council regarding the consistency of the proposed development
with the design goals and objectives of this Redevelopment Plan. The
Council shall act within 45 days, after submission of an application for
such a consistency determination on such forms as the City shall
require.
B. The City Council shall, prior to taking action, obtain advice from the
Design Review Committee appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
A. The proposals of this plan are consistent with the general plan for the
municipality. Local planning objectives having direct bearing on this
project, and which have been planned as integral parts of the total
planning for the City, are as follows:
(1) The effectuation of the Redevelopment Plan will carry out major
proposals of the Master Plan for the City and will comply with local
objectives of the City as to appropriate land uses, improved street
systems, and overall improvement of the area.
(2) The effectuation of the Redevelopment Plan will improve the total
living and working conditions of the City through improvement of a
blighted area, removal of structures in poor condition and the
provision of land for new commercial and residential development.
B. The various elements of this Redevelopment Plan set forth above are in
compliance with the requirements of State and local law.
A. The Redevelopment Plan may be amended from time to time by the City
Council of the City of Long Branch, provided that, if amended after the
disposition of any land in the Redevelopment Area, the modification
must be consented to in writing by designated developers. Any
amendments to the Redevelopment Plan shall be reviewed by the
229. Editor's Note: See § 345-101, Redevelopment design standards.
§ 345-95 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-98
332:1021
§ 345-99. Maps.230
This plan shall constitute an overlay zone on the Zoning Map for the areas
covered by this plan.
§ 345-100. Miscellaneous.
Uses in the redevelopment area shall be limited to those permitted in
this plan. In addition, the provisions of this plan shall be the exclusive
basis for regulation of all development within the redevelopment area with
respect to subjects covered by this plan. Any other development regulations
otherwise applicable in the redevelopment area shall remain in effect unless
inconsistent with the provisions of this plan, provided that the Planning
Board may grant waivers or variances from such regulations in order to
carry out the intent and purposes of this plan.
§ 345-101. Redevelopment design standards. [Added 7-22-1997 by
Ord. No. 23-97; amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 28-16]
Planning Board of the City of Long Branch. After such review, the
Planning Board shall make recommendations to the City Council, which
may adopt the changes by ordinance. Such ordinance shall specify the
relationship of the proposed changes or amendments to the City Master
Plan and the goals and objectives of the Redevelopment Plan.
B. The Redevelopment Plan, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
be in effect from the date of its adoption by the City Council on second
reading and publication.
A. This section shall be known as the "Redevelopment Design Standards
Ordinance of the City of Long Branch."
B. The redevelopment guidelines set forth in the attached sections entitled
"General Design Guidelines," "Village Center at Pier," "Broadway
Gateway," "Beachfront North," "Hotel Campus," "Beachfront South,"
and, as may be applicable, "2016 Addendum to Oceanfront-Broadway
Redevelopment Plan Design Guidelines,"231 are hereby adopted as the
standards for land use, density and intensity of development, bulk
requirements, parking and design for redevelopment in the City of Long
Branch within the areas each covered by the applicable set of design
guidelines and by the general guidelines. Notwithstanding the use of
the term "guidelines" in this section or the attached sections, which are
incorporated herein by reference, the provisions as attached shall be
enforced as standards governing redevelopment in the City of Long
Branch. It is the intent of the City Council that the attached
development requirements be the sole and exclusive standards
governing development in the portions of the Redevelopment Area
affected by them except as to standards of general applicability which
230. Editor's Note: Maps are included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
231. Editor's Note: Said Design Guidelines are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 345-98 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-101
332:1022
are clearly not covered or clearly have been intentionally omitted from
the attached sections.
C. No variances of the kind set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d may be
granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Long Branch
from the requirements of this section. All applications for development
in the Redevelopment Area shall be heard by the Planning Board of the
City of Long Branch in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-13.
D. In addition to the review provided in Subsection C above, any developer
seeking any development approval within the redevelopment area must
in addition provide 10 copies of the application and plans submitted to
the Planning Board to the City Clerk for distribution to the Mayor and
Council of the City of Long Branch. Approval of such plans by the City
Council of the City of Long Branch shall be a condition of any approval
granted by the Planning Board. Such Council approval shall be obtained
no later than the time at which an application for development receives
final development approval from the Planning Board of the City of Long
Branch.
E. The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of copies of the development
applications and plans, provide sufficient copies to the Design Review
Committee so as to enable it to carry out its functions under this
section. In reviewing applications for development in the
Redevelopment Area, the City Council shall take into account the advice
of the Design Review committee previously established by the Council
of the City of Long Branch. The Council shall approve it if the proposed
development conforms to the requirements of the design guidelines and
the terms of any applicable Redeveloper's Agreement, and will
contribute to the revitalization and use of the Redevelopment Area in
accordance with the goals of the guidelines and the Redevelopment
Plan Ordinance.
F. For any portions of the redevelopment area not covered by the design
guidelines as attached hereto and incorporated herein, the
development standards as either set forth or incorporated in the
Redevelopment Plan ordinance adopted May 14, 1996, shall continue in
full force and effect.
G. All ordinances or provisions of ordinances inconsistent with the within
section are hereby repealed. However, the May 14, 1996,
Redevelopment Plan Ordinance and April 1996 Redevelopment Plan
shall remain in full force and effect and be read in pari materia with this
section except that the development standards set forth in Sections 4
and 5 of the Redevelopment Plan are superseded by this section whose
provisions shall be controlling.
H. This section may be enforced by the Planning Board, Zoning Officer and
other officials of the City of Long Branch as in the same manner as is
Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of Long
Branch.
§ 345-101 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-101
332:1023
I. If any paragraph, section, clause or application of this section, or of the
provisions referenced and incorporated herein, shall be found to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such findings shall not affect any
remaining section, clause, paragraph or application, which shall be
severable and shall continue in full force and effect notwithstanding
such a finding of invalidity.
§ 345-101 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-101
332:1024
ARTICLE XI
Schedules of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements for the City of Long
Branch
[Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 19-93]
§ 345-102. R-1 One-Family Residential Zone District.
See § 345-20.
Permitted uses One-family residential
Conditional uses Beach club, community residence,
church
Minimum lot area (square feet) 17,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 175
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures [Amended 12-26-2018
by Ord. No. 29-18]
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 70
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both no less than 30% of lot
width
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height, principal
building [Amended 12-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 29-18]
2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area
[Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
33-99]
1 story: 1,600 square feet 1 1/2
stories: 2,200 square feet, with not
less than 1,400 square feet on first
floor
2 stories: 2,800 square feet, with
not less than 1,400 square feet on
first floor
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
§ 345-102 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-102
332:1025
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-103. R-2 One-Family Residential Zone District.
See § 345-21.
Permitted uses One-family residential
Conditional uses Community residence, church,
public/private school
Minimum lot area (square feet) 12,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 125
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures [Amended 12-26-2018
by Ord. No. 29-18]
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 35
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both not less than 30% of
lot width
Rear yard setback (feet) 35
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area 1 story: 1,400 square feet 1 1/2
stories: 2,000 square feet, with not
less than 1,200 square feet on first
floor
2 stories: 2,000 square feet, with
not less than 1,000 square feet on
first floor
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
§ 345-102 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-103
332:1026
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-104. R-3 One-Family Residential Zone District.
See § 345-22.
Permitted uses One-family residential
Conditional uses Community residence, church,
public/private school
Minimum lot area (square feet) 9,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35%
Front yard setback (feet) 35
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both not less than 30% of
lot width
Rear yard setback (feet) 35
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area 1 story: 1,200 square feet 1 1/2
stories: 1,600 square feet, with not
less than 1,000 square feet on first
floor
2 stories: 1,600 square feet, with
not less than 800 square feet on
first floor
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
§ 345-103 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-104
332:1027
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-105. R-4 One-Family Residential Zone District.
See § 345-23.
Permitted uses One-family residential
Conditional uses Community residence, church,
public/private school, philanthropic/
eleemosynary
Minimum lot area (square feet) 5,760
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50
Minimum lot depth (feet) 115
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 25
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both no less than 20 feet
Rear yard setback (feet) 35
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area 1 story: 1,200 square feet 1 1/2
stories: 1,600 square feet, with not
less than 1,000 square feet on first
floor
2 stories: 1,600 square feet, with
not less than 800 square feet on
first floor
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirement as indicated,
except where the side yard is
adjacent to a public street, in which
case such side yard shall meet the
front yard requirements of the zone
in which it is located
§ 345-104 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-105
332:1028
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-106. R-5 One- to Four-Family Residential Zone District.
[Amended 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 31-96; 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 6-99]
See § 345-24.
Permitted uses One- to four-family residential; twoto
four-family residential, see
§ 345-49; townhouses (12), see
§ 345-53; scattered site residential,
see § 345-56
Conditional uses Community residence, church,
public/private school, garden
apartments
Minimum lot area (square feet) 9,000 (one-family only, same
requirements as R-4 Zone)
Minimum lot frontage (square feet) 75 (one-family only, same
requirements as R-4 Zone)
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120 (one-family only, same
requirements as R-4 Zone)
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35% (40% for scattered site as
defined in § 345-56)
Front yard setback (feet) 35; townhouses, see § 345-53;
scattered site residential, see
§ 345-56
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both not less than 30% of
lot width; townhouses, see § 345-53;
scattered site residential, see
§ 345-56
Rear yard setback (feet) 35; townhouses, see § 345-53;
scattered site residential, see
§ 345-56
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet; townhouses,
see § 345-53; scattered site
residential, see § 345-56
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet; townhouses,
see § 345-53
§ 345-105 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-106
332:1029
Minimum gross habitable floor area One- to four-family, 1 story, 1,200
square feet; 1 1/2 stories, 1,600
square feet, with not less than 1,000
square feet on first floor; 2 story,
1,600 square feet, with not less than
800 square feet on first floor;
townhouses, see § 345-53; scattered
site residential, see § 345-56
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located;
townhouses, see § 345-53; two- to
four-family, see § 345-49; scattered
site residential, see § 345-56
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-107. R-6 Townhouse/Professional Office Zone District.
[Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96]
See § 345-25.
Permitted uses [Amended
8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 38-99]
One- to four-family residential,
townhouses (10), professional office
Conditional uses Community residence,
philanthropic/eleemosynary, senior
citizen housing
Minimum lot area (square feet) 9,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35%
Front yard setback (feet) 35; townhouses, see § 345-53
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both not less than 30% of
lot width; townhouses, see § 345-53
Rear yard setback (feet) 35; townhouses, see § 345-53
§ 345-106 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-107
332:1030
Maximum building height, principal
building
One- to four-family: 2 1/2 stories or
30 feet; townhouses, see § 345-53;
professional office: 35 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet; townhouses,
see § 345-53
Minimum gross habitable 1 story: 1,200 square feet; floor area
townhouses, see § 345-53 1 1/2
stories: 1,600 square feet, with not
less than 1,000 square feet on first
floor; townhouses, see § 345-53
2 stories: 1,600 square feet, with
not less than 800 square feet on
first floor; townhouses, see § 345-53
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located;
townhouses, see § 345-53; two- to
four- family see § 345-49
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-108. R-7 Riverfront Mixed Zone District. [Amended 2-27-1996
by Ord. No. 5-96; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96]
See § 345-26.
Permitted uses One-family residential, townhouses
(6)
Conditional uses Community residence, church,
marina
Minimum lot area (square feet) 9,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35%
Front yard setback (feet) 35
§ 345-107 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-108
332:1031
Side yard setback (feet) Neither less than 10 feet, with sum
width of both not less than 30% of
lot width
Rear yard setback (feet) 35; townhouses, see § 345-53
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet; townhouses,
see § 345-53
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet; townhouses,
see § 345-53
Minimum gross habitable floor area 1 story: 1,200 square feet 1 1/2
stories: 1,600 square feet, with not
less than 1,000 square feet on first
floor
2 stories: 1,600 square feet, with
not less than 800 square feet on
first floor
Townhouses, see § 345-53
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
Townhouses, see § 345-53
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-109. R-8 Boulevard Mixed Zone District. [Amended
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 44-00; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
See § 345-27.
Permitted uses Townhouses (6), professional office,
one-family, two- to four-family, see
§ 345-99
Conditional uses Senior citizen housing
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000; one-family: 5,760
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200; one-family: 50
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200; one-family: 115
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
40%
§ 345-108 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-109
332:1032
Front yard setback (feet) 40; townhouses, see § 345-53; onefamily:
25
Side yard setback (feet) 30; townhouses, see § 345-53; onefamily:
10 minimum
Rear yard setback (feet) 40; townhouses, see § 345-53; onefamily:
35
Maximum building height, principal
building
3 stories or 35 feet; townhouses, see
§ 345-53; one-family: 2 1/2 stories or
30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet; townhouses, see § 345-53
Minimum gross habitable office
floor area
Townhouses, see § 345-53; onefamily,
see § 345-105
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Townhouses, see § 345-53; onefamily,
see § 345-305
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-110. RC-1 Beachfront Mixed Zone District. [Amended
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 30-99; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 41-00;
3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 6-06]
See § 345-28.
Permitted uses Waterfront mixed residential
(10-30), townhouses (6),
professional office, beachfront
commercial, one-family dwellings
(R-1)
Conditional uses Community residence
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000; waterfront mixed: 2 acres;
townhouses, see § 345-53
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35%
Front yard setback (feet) 30; waterfront mixed and
townhouses, see Article VI
Side yard setback (feet) 30; waterfront mixed and
townhouses, see Article VI
§ 345-109 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-110
332:1033
Rear yard setback (feet) 30; waterfront mixed and
townhouses, see Article VI
Maximum building height, principal
building
Waterfront mixed: 4 stories, 5 with
parking
Beachfront commercial and
professional office: 3 stories or 35
feet
Townhouses, see § 345-53
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet; townhouses, see § 345-53
Minimum gross habitable floor area Townhouses, see § 345-53
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See § 345-30E
Townhouses, see § 345-50
Waterfront mixed, see § 345-55
Beachfront commercial uses, see
§ 345-28E(2).
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.
§ 345-111. RC-2 Riverfront Residential/Commercial Zone District.
See § 345-29.
Permitted uses Neighborhood commercial,
waterfront mixed residential
Conditional uses Senior citizen, motor vehicle station,
public utilities, marina
Minimum lot area (square feet) Neighborhood commercial: none
Waterfront mixed: 2 acres
Minimum lot frontage (feet) Neighborhood commercial: none
Waterfront mixed: 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) Neighborhood commercial: none
Waterfront mixed: 200
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
Neighborhood commercial: none
Waterfront mixed: 35%
Front yard setback (feet) Neighborhood commercial: as
determined by average setback of
existing commercial buildings in the
same block front
§ 345-110 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-111
332:1034
Waterfront mixed, see § 345-55
Side yard setback (feet) Neighborhood commercial: as
determined by average setback of
existing commercial buildings in the
same block front
Waterfront mixed see § 345-55
Rear yard setback (feet) Neighborhood commercial: as
determined by average setback of
existing commercial buildings in the
same block front
Waterfront mixed see § 345-55
Maximum building height, principal
building
Neighborhood commercial: 2 1/2
stories or 30 feet
Waterfront mixed: 4 stories, 5 with
parking
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area Neighborhood commercial: N/A
Waterfront mixed see § 345-55
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Neighborhood commercial: see
§ 345-30E Waterfront mixed see
§ 345-55
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.232
§ 345-112. C-1 Central Commercial Zone District.
See § 345-30.
Permitted uses Commercial
Conditional uses Senior citizen, motor vehicle station,
public utilities
Minimum lot area (square feet) None
Minimum lot frontage (feet) None
Minimum lot depth (feet) None
232. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements for the RC-3 Waterfront
Mixed Zone District and the RC-4 Ocean Promenade Waterfront Mixed Zone District,
which immediately followed this schedule, were repealed effective with the adoption of the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan on 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96.
§ 345-111 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-112
332:1035
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures Front yard setback (feet)
None As determined by average
setback of existing commercial
buildings in the same block front
Side yard setback (feet) None
Rear yard setback (feet) None
Maximum building height, principal
building
None
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See § 345-30E.
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-30.
§ 345-113. C-2 Professional Office/Related Services Zone District.
See § 345-31.
Permitted uses [Amended
5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 9-09]
One-family residential, professional
office, related services, farm
markets/community farmers' market
Conditional uses Community residence, church
Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures Front yard setback (feet)
50% 40
Side yard setback (feet) 20 feet each
Rear yard setback (feet) None
Maximum building height, principal
building
3 stories or 40 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
See § 345-30E.
§ 345-112 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-113
332:1036
Rear yard herein defined as
Branchport Creek
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements. See § 345-31.
§ 345-114. C-3 Neighborhood Commercial Zone District. [Added
4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 5-15]
See § 345-32.
Permitted uses Commercial
Conditional uses Senior citizen, motor vehicle station,
public utilities
Conditional uses, C-3 District WEDO
only
Multifamily units and above groundlevel
retail on development parcels
of 20,000 square feet or greater,
institutional uses above ground-level
retail (mixed-use) on development
parcels of 20,000 square feet or
greater and adaptive reuse of the
West End School for one of the
following uses: visual and
performing arts education facility,
specialty education such as a
culinary school, computer training,
secretarial school, cosmetology
schools or similar professional
business or vocational schools and
professional offices.233
Minimum lot area (square feet) None
Minimum lot frontage (feet) None
Minimum lot depth (feet) None
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
None
Front yard setback (feet) As determined by average setback
of existing commercial buildings in
the same block front
Side yard setback (feet) None
Rear yard setback (feet) None
233. Editor's Note: See also § 345-32.1, West End Design Overlay (WEDO) District.
§ 345-113 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-114
332:1037
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See § 345-30E.
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-32.
§ 345-115. C-4 Resort Commercial Zone District. [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-95; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 50-95; 8-10-1999
by Ord. No. 31-99; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 16-07; 9-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 23-17]
See § 345-33.
Permitted uses One-family residential, townhouses
(6), hotels, waterfront mix residents
(10-30)
Conditional uses Beach club, community residence,
church
Minimum lot area (square feet) Residential: 10,000; others: 2 acres
Minimum lot frontage (feet) Residential: 100; others: 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) Residential: 100; others: 200
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35% (60% waterfront mix
residential)
Front yard setback (feet) 30; townhouses, hotels, waterfront
mix residential (see Article VI)
Side yard setback (feet) 10 feet each; townhouses, hotels,
waterfront mix residential (see
Article VI)
Rear yard setback (feet) 30; townhouses, hotels, waterfront
mix residential (see Article VI)
Maximum building height, principal
building
Residential: 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet;
hotels and townhouses: 3 stories or
35 feet; waterfront mix residential
(see Article VI)
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area One-family: 1 story or 1,600 square
feet
§ 345-114 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-115
332:1038
1 1/2 stories: 2,200 square feet,
with not less than 1,400 square feet
on first floor
2 stories: 2,800 square feet, with
not less than 1,400 square feet on
first floor
Hotels: 300 square feet per unit
Townhouses: see § 345-53
Waterfront mix residential: see
§ 345-55
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See yard requirements as indicated,
except where the side yard is
adjacent to a public street, in which
case such side yard shall meet the
front yard requirements of the zone
in which it is located
See § 345-30E.
Townhouses, hotels, waterfront mix
residential: see Article VI
Accessory structures and uses 1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements.234
§ 345-116. Industrial Zone District.
See § 345-34.
Permitted uses Industrial, manufacturing
Conditional uses [Amended
8-22-2000 by Ord. No. 35-00]
Public utilities; public, parochial and
private schools
Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 150
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 20 each
234. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements for the C-5 Commercial
Recreation Zone District and the C-6 Boulevard Commercial Zone District, which
immediately followed this schedule, were repealed effective with the adoption of the
Oceanfront-Broadway Redevelopment Plan on 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96.
§ 345-115 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-116
332:1039
Rear yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height, principal
building
3 stories or 40 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-34.
§ 345-117. HTLI High Technology Light Industrial Zone District.
See § 345-35.
Permitted uses High technology, light industrial
Conditional uses Public utilities
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 40
Side yard setback (feet) 20
Rear yard setback (feet) 20
Maximum building height, principal
building
Unlimited
Maximum building height, accessory
building
40 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See § 345-33.
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-35.
§ 345-118. MB Manufacturing Business Zone District.
See § 345-36.
§ 345-116 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-118
332:1040
Permitted uses Industrial, manufacturing,
commercial
Conditional uses Public utilities
Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 150
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
40%
Front yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 20 each
Rear yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height, principal
building
3 stories
Maximum building height, accessory
building
40 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
See § 345-33E.
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-30 and § 345-36.
§ 345-119. S-1 Professional Office Zone District.
See § 345-37.
Permitted uses One-family residential, professional
office
Conditional uses Community residence
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
35%
Front yard setback (feet) 25
Side yard setback (feet) 10 each (also see § 345-11G)
Rear yard setback (feet) 10
Maximum building height, principal
building
2 1/2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum building height, accessory
building
1 1/2 stories or 15 feet
§ 345-118 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-119
332:1041
Minimum gross habitable floor area One-family: 1 story or 1,200 square
feet
1 1/2 stories: 1,600 square feet,
with not less than 1,000 square feet
on first floor
2 stories: 1,600 square feet, with
not less than 800 square feet on
first floor
Other permitted uses: N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Side yard requirements as
indicated, except where the side
yard is adjacent to a public street, in
which case such side yard shall
meet the front yard requirements of
the zone in which it is located
Accessory structures and uses
[Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07]
1 1/2 stories and/or fifteen-foot
maximum, minimum setback 10
feet. See § 345-11P for other
requirements. See § 312 for tennis
court requirements. See § 345-37
§ 345-120. S-2 Oceanfront Zone District.
See § 345-38.
Permitted uses Eating and drinking establishments,
parking
Conditional uses Beach club, pier
Minimum lot area (square feet) N/A
Minimum lot frontage (feet) N/A
Minimum lot depth (feet) N/A
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
N/A
Front yard setback (feet) Side yard
setback (feet)
N/A N/A
Rear yard setback (feet) N/A
Maximum building height, principal
building
1 1/2 stories
Maximum building height, accessory
building
15 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
None
§ 345-119 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-120
332:1042
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-38.
§ 345-121. M Medical Hospital Zone District.
See § 345-39.
Permitted uses Garden apartments, townhouse (12),
hospital, professional office
Conditional uses Philanthropic/eleemosynary,
nursing/rest home
Minimum lot area (square feet) 60,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Maximum lot coverage of all
structures
Residential: 35% Others: 50%
Front yard setback (feet) 1/2 height of building or 50 feet,
whichever is greater
Garden apartments and
townhouses: see Article VI
Side yard setback (feet) 1/2 height of building or 10 feet,
whichever is greater Garden
apartments and townhouses: see
Article VI
Rear yard setback (feet) 1/2 height of building or 35 feet,
whichever is greater
Garden apartments and
townhouses: see Article VI
Maximum building height, principal
building
Residential: see Article VI Others:
unlimited
Maximum building height accessory
building
40 feet
Minimum gross habitable floor area N/A Residential: see Article VI
Other requirements and
supplementary notes
Townhouses: see § 345-53 Off-street
parking, subject to § 345-42
Garden apartments see § 345-48
Permitted accessory uses See § 345-39.
§ 345-120 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-121
332:1043

ARTICLE XII
Historic Preservation
[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09235]
§ 345-122. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Historic
Preservation Ordinance of the City of Long Branch."
§ 345-123. Scope.
§ 345-124. Findings and purpose.
A. In adopting this article, it is the intention of the City Council of the City
of Long Branch to designate and regulate historic sites within the City
consistent with and pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law of the
State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and as interpreted by
court decisions in this state.
B. A Commission is hereby created to review the potential effect of
development and permit applications on designated historic sites and to
work with and advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board and
individual property owners on the effect of applications coming before
either Board on designated historic properties or improvements within
an historic district.
C. This article is intended to regulate only those activities on designated
sites which require a permit from a municipal officer or employee or
which require an application for development to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board. Nothing herein shall prevent review of other activities by
the Commission, but such review is not required by the adoption of this
article.
D. This article does not require or prohibit any particular architectural
style; rather its purpose is to preserve the past by making the past
compatible with and relevant to the present. To that end, new
construction upon or near an historic site should not necessarily
duplicate the exact style of the site; rather, it should be compatible with
and not detract from the historic site.
E. This article does not require or mandate the creation of any historic
district(s).
A. The City Council of the City of Long Branch finds and determines that
the City has many historic and architecturally significant properties,
together with groupings of properties of generally vernacular
structures. These properties contribute visually to the character and
integrity of the City and are important in assessing the historic patterns
235. Editor's Note: These historic preservation provisions were added as §§ 345-1 through
345-10 and were subsequently renumbered 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 17-09.
§ 345-122 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-124
332:1045
of development and the City's history. Maintaining, preserving, and
rehabilitating these visual links to the past is an important function of
government, not only to provide a sense of stability and continuity for
future generations, but to provide impetus for the revitalization of the
City's economic base and for the resulting increase in property values.
B. Moreover, the City's Master Plan adopted by the City Council in 1988
contained many elements related to historic preservation designations,
including a list of more than 60 properties which were identified as
qualifying for landmark status.
C. These historic preservation regulations are intended to effect and
accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of especially
noteworthy examples of the City's environment in order to:
(1) Safeguard the heritage of Long Branch by preserving resources
within the City which reflect elements of its cultural, social,
economic and architectural history;
(2) Encourage the continued use of historic landmarks and facilitate
their appropriate use;
(3) Maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for
the historic and architecturally significant buildings, structures,
sites or objects within the City of Long Branch;
(4) Stabilize and improve property values for historically significant
buildings and buildings within the historic district, and foster civic
pride in the building environment containing historic sites;
(5) Promote appreciation of historic landmarks for education, pleasure
and the general welfare of the local population;
(6) Encourage beautification and private reinvestment in or near
historic sites;
(7) Manage change by preventing alteration or new construction not in
keeping with the historic districts or individually designated
historic properties;
(8) Discourage demolition of historic resources;
(9) Encourage the proper maintenance and preservation of historic
settings and landscapes;
(10) Encourage appropriate alteration of historic landmarks;
(11) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, continuity
and interest in the City of Long Branch; and
(12) Promote the conservation of historic sites and invite and encourage
voluntary compliance.
§ 345-124 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-125
332:1046
§ 345-125. Establishment of Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission; membership; terms; vacancies.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et
seq., the City of Long Branch Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission (hereafter "Commission") is hereby established and
created.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members,
three of which shall be Class A and three of which shall be Class B, and
who shall serve without compensation, except that Commission
members shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of official business within the guidelines of
the budget established by the City Council. Two Commission members
shall be appointed solely by the Mayor, and five Commission members
shall be appointed solely by the City Council. The Commission shall
include members from each of the following classes: [Amended
2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 1-10]
(1) Class A: a person knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality; and
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable of or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality; and
(3) Class C: regular members who are not designated Class A or B shall
be designated as Class C. Class C members shall be citizens of the
municipality who shall hold no other municipal office, position or
employment, except for membership on the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment.
(4) No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest, and all members shall disclose to the
Commission any such personal or financial interest.
C. Term; vacancies; removal. The terms of members shall be for four
years. The terms of the initial members appointed under this article
shall be staggered, to the extent possible, evenly over the first four
years after their appointment. The term of any member common to the
Commission and the Planning Board shall be for the term of
membership on the Planning Board; and the term of any member
common to the Commission and the Zoning Board shall be for the term
of membership on the Zoning Board. All members, at the expiration of
their terms, may be eligible for appointment to an additional four-year
term. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only to complete the
unexpired terms. Vacancies shall be filled within 60 days. A member of
the Commission may, after public hearing if requested, be removed by
the City Council for cause.
§ 345-125 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-126
332:1047
§ 345-126. Organization of Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission.
A. Officers. Each year in the month of January, the Commission shall elect
a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its members and select a secretary
who may or may not be a member of the Commission or a municipal
employee.
B. Staff, experts, counsel, expenses and costs.
(1) The City Council shall make provision in its annual budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Commission.
(2) The Commission may employ, contract for, and fix the
compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall
deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from
the Municipal Attorney or other authorized attorney approved by
the City Council at the rate of compensation determined by the
governing body. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not
exceed, exclusive of gifts, grants or other sources of self-generated
revenue, the amount appropriated by the governing body for the
Commission's use and shall be in accordance with the Local Public
Contracts Law.236
(3) Escrow and application fee schedules, which are necessary to
reimburse the Commission for costs incurred pursuant to
§ 345-126B(2), shall be established and adopted via ordinance by
the City Council.
C. Meetings; procedures; decisions. The Commission shall reorganize
annually, each January. The Commission may adopt such administrative
rules, regulations, procedures and forms for applications by formal
resolution, as shall provide for the orderly conduct of its business and
processing of applications, provided that such rules, regulations and
procedures shall not be inconsistent with any provision of this article. A
quorum shall consist of four members. All Commission meetings shall
be subject to the Open Public Meetings Act.237 To the extent practical,
the procedures followed by the Commission as to public hearings,
voting, etc., shall be patterned after those of a Planning Board pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law.238 Decisions by the Commission shall be
in writing by resolution setting forth findings of fact and conclusions of
law. The Commission may follow the procedure for memorializing
decisions as is permitted for Planning Boards.
D. A staff member of the Department of Building and Development may
attend all meetings of the Commission and may participate in a
nonvoting capacity.
236. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
237. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
238. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 345-126 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-127
332:1048
§ 345-127. Responsibilities of Historic Preservation Advisory
Commission.
A. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Commission shall be as
follows:
(1) To prepare and to maintain guidelines for the appropriate
architectural designs applicable to the exterior appearance of new
construction and for the renovation, alteration, enlargement or
other change to the exterior of structures that are located on an
historic property in the City which have been designated historic
landmarks.
(2) To review all applications relative to § 345-130 and make
recommendations on proposed designs.
(3) To review and make recommendations on proposed designs and
other design elements (e.g., exterior materials, signs, landscaping,
exterior lighting, etc.) contained in site plans for new, enlarged, or
altered existing buildings designated as landmarks.
(4) To review and make recommendations on design for all plans that
call for the construction of new buildings or the improvement or
demolition of existing buildings, in whole or in part, that are
located in or on any historic property, site or buildings located
elsewhere in the City that have been designated by the City or
other agency.
(5) To study and prepare reports evaluating other areas or properties
in the City which, because of their recognized architectural/
historical significance, would qualify as historic landmarks. Such
findings and recommendations shall be presented to the Planning
Board for action thereon and shall be included in the list of
properties.
(6) Prepare an inventory of historic sites/landmarks of the City
pursuant to criteria identified in the survey report. Thereafter, in
cooperation with City professionals, determine which properties
are eligible for state and national historic preservation designation
and apply for such designations where applicable. For purposes of
"survey" definition, the Commission adopts the following nationally
accepted guidelines: National Register Bulletin 24-Guidelines for
Local Surveys, "A Basis for Preservation Planning"; and National
Register Bulletin 15 – "How to Apply the National Register
Criteria."
(7) Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan.
(8) Advise the Planning Board and City Council on the inclusion of
historic landmarks in any recommended capital improvement
program.
§ 345-127 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-127
332:1049
(9) Advise the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment on
applications for development.
(10) Provide written reports on the application of the zoning provisions
concerning historic preservation to the administrative officer in
charge of issuance of building permits.
(11) Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the City,
including serving as the City's archivists and participating in
education programs dealing with preservation for schools, senior
citizens and others.
(12) Assist other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding
historic resources, their significance and methods of preservation.
(13) Advise the City Council on the relative merits of proposals
involving public lands to restore, preserve and protect historical
buildings, sites and structures, including the preparation of a longrange
plan; identify and secure state, federal and other grants and
aid to assist therein; and monitoring such projects once underway.
(14) Recommend to the Planning Board and the City Council the
establishment and boundaries of historic sites where appropriate.
(15) Advise the Board of Adjustment as to the granting of use variances
where such are deemed to be within the intent and purposes of this
article.
(16) Secure the voluntary assistance of the public and, within the limits
of the budget established by the City Council for the Commission's
operation, to retain consultants and experts and incur expenses to
assist the Commission in its work and to provide testimony in
support of the Commission's position before other bodies,
commissions or courts.
(17) Cooperate with local, county, state, or national historical societies,
governmental bodies and organizations to maximize their
contributions to achieve the intent and purposes of this article.
(18) Recommend to the applicable county, state and federal agencies,
where appropriate, recognition of historic buildings, structures,
sites, objects or districts.
(19) To provide recommendations, input and advice relative to sites of
historic interest to the same extent as to historic landmarks and to
buildings, structures, sites and/or objects; however when an
application for a construction permit relating to a site of historic
interest has caused the Commission's jurisdiction to be invoked,
any such recommendation, input and advice shall be purely
advisory and shall have no binding effect.
§ 345-127 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-127
332:1050
§ 345-128. Definitions and word usage.
(20) The Commission shall on or before January 14 of each year provide
to the City Council, Municipal Clerk, Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Construction Official and administrative officer an
updated list of landmarks and sites of historic interest. Throughout
the year, the Commission shall update such lists as designations
change.
B. Compatibility with other agencies.
(1) The responsibilities, powers and duties of the Commission shall not
conflict with or supersede the powers and duties of any other board
or agency within the City of Long Branch.
(2) The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall refer to the
Commission every application for development submitted to either
board for development in historic zoning districts or on historic
sites designated on the Zoning or Official Map or identified in any
component element of the Master Plan. This referral shall be made
when the application for development is deemed complete or is
scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure to refer
the application as required shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding. The Commission may provide its advice, which shall be
conveyed through delegation of one of its members or staff to
testify orally at the hearing on the application for development and
to explain any written report which may have been submitted.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this article, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
(1) The term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the term
"may" indicates a permissive action.
(2) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "premises."
(3) The word "used" includes the words "intended to be used" or
"arranged to be used."
(4) The word "occupied" includes the words "intended to be occupied,"
"designed to be occupied" or "arranged to be occupied."
(5) The word "permit" shall refer to a "certificate of appropriateness"
permit and shall be the certificate issued by the Planning Board,
Zoning Board or administrative officer after review of the
certificate of appropriateness application by the Commission. This
certificate is required prior to undertaking rehabilitation,
restoration, renovation, alteration, ordinary and nonordinary repair
work or demolition work undertaken within an historic district or
on an individually designated historic structure pursuant to this
article.
§ 345-127 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-128
332:1051
(6) The word "demonstrate" means to provide such visual, written or
oral information as will enable the Commission or other reviewing
agency or board to render an informed opinion or decision thereon.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as a part of
an existing improvement when such new improvement changes the
exterior appearance of any landmark.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated to handle the
administration of building permit applications as referenced in this
article.
AFFECTING A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any act which
alters or changes an historic landmark.
ALTERATION — Any work done on any existing improvement which:
BUILDING — A structure created to shelter human activity of any kind.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing or destruction of any
building, structure, or of any improvement within or on an historic site
or of any historic landmark.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically definable area (but not
including any City-designated areas in need of redevelopment)
possessing a significant linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings,
structures, and/or objects which when viewed collectively:
HISTORIC DISTRICT RESOURCES — Resources within an historic
district shall be classified either as "key," "contributing," or
"noncontributing," which are defined as:
(1) Is not an addition to that improvement; or
Changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
(2)
(1) Represent a significant period in the development of the City; or
Have a distinctive character resulting from their architectural
style; or
(2)
Because of their distinctive character, can readily be viewed as
an area or neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the
City.
(3)
KEY — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects which due to their
significance would individually qualify for landmark status.
(1)
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are integral components of the Historic District either
because they date from a time period for which the district is
(2)
§ 345-128 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-128
332:1052
HISTORIC PROPERTIES — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects, or
districts which possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, or association (but not including any of the aforegoing
which are located in any City-designated areas in need of
redevelopment), and which have been determined pursuant to the
terms of this article to be:
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof constructed or
installed upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be
kept at the location of such construction or installation for a period of
not less than 120 continuous days.
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to
a specific setting, environment or event.
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which:
significant or because they represent an architectural type, period
or method for which the district is significant.
NONCONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are not integral components of the Historic District because
they neither date from a time period for which the district is
significant nor represent an architectural type, period, or method
for which the district is significant.
(3)
Of particular historic significance to the City of Long Branch by
reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, county or community;
(1)
Associated with historic personages important in national, state,
county or local history;
(2)
The site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state, county, City or neighborhood;
(3)
An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period,
or method of architecture or engineering;
(4)
Representative of the work of an important building, designer,
artist, engineer or architect;
(5)
Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a significant Innovation; or
(6)
Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
(7)
(1) Is not an addition to the improvement;
Does not change the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement.
(2)
§ 345-128 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-128
332:1053
§ 345-129. Designation of historic landmarks.
REPLACEMENT — The act or process of replicating any exterior
architectural feature that is used to substitute for an existing and
deteriorated or extensively damaged architectural feature.
SITE — The place where a significant event or pattern of events
occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupations
or activities that may be marked by physical remains; or it may be the
symbolic focus of a significant event or pattern of events that may both
have been actively occupied. A site may also be the location of a ruined
building, structure or object if the location itself possesses historic,
cultural or archaeologic significance.
SITES OF HISTORIC INTEREST — Any buildings, structures, sites,
objects or districts which, although not given historic landmark
designation under this article, are an important historical asset to the
community which it is felt would benefit from the advice and input of
the Commission.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made work arranged in a definite pattern of
organization.
A. Guidelines for designation. The Commission may recommend to the
Planning Board guidelines for review to be utilized in determinations of
historic landmark status, sites of historic interest status, and for review
of development applications or permits affecting historic landmarks,
sites of historic interest or improvements within historic districts. The
Planning Board may recommend modifications of the guidelines and
shall make the final decision as to their adoption.
B. Historic landmark/sites of historic interest designation list. In addition
to the properties and structures already identified in The Historic
Preservation Plan Element of the City's Master Plan, the Commission
shall consider for historic designation buildings, structures, objects,
sites, and districts within the City which merit landmark designation
and protection by reason of possessing integrity of location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, or association based on its review or
upon the recommendation of other City bodies or of concerned citizens,
with the exception of all properties located within the existing
redevelopment plan of 1996 (including all designated redevelopment
sections). The Commission shall make a list of landmarks recommended
for designation. For each landmark, there shall be a brief description of
the landmark, of the landmark's significance pursuant to the criteria set
forth above, a description of the landmark's location and boundaries,
digital photograph of each property and a location map. In conjunction
with the list of landmarks recommended for designation, the
Commission may, at the same time, or at some later time, prepare a list
of buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts which merit
designation as sites of historic interest. Those properties that are listed
on either the State or Federal Register of Historic Places shall comply
with all requirements of this article, unless the property owner objects
§ 345-128 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-129
332:1054
to the proposed designation of the property as an historic landmark
and/or site of historic interest in accordance with the provisions of
§ 345-129C herein.
C. Hearing on proposed designation. A hearing shall be conducted on the
proposed designations at which interested persons shall be entitled to
present their opinions, suggestions, and objections on the proposed
recommendations for landmark/site of historic interest designation. To
the extent that a property owner appears at the hearing to indicate or
provides written confirmation to the Commission at or prior to the
hearing that such property owner does not agree or consent to having
such property designated as an historic landmark and/or site of historic
interest, then such property shall not be so designated under any
circumstances pursuant to this Historic Preservation Ordinance. The
Commission shall then vote on its recommendations to the Planning
Board for resources to be designated as historic landmarks and/or sites
of historic interest.
D. Notice of proposed designation. At least 10 days prior to the hearing
provided for in Subsection C above, the Commission shall provide
notice of the hearing in the following manner:
(1) By certified mail, return receipt requested, to each owner, that his
property being considered for historic landmark/site of historic
interest designation and the reasons therefor. The notice shall
advise the owner of the significance and consequences of such
designation, that if so designated, his or her property would be
subject to the provisions of this article; shall advise him of his
opportunities and rights to challenge or contest such designation;
and shall set forth the time, date and location of the public hearing
to be held.
(2) By publishing in an official newspaper of the municipality, a notice
of the time, date and location of the hearing, a preliminary list of
potential designations including a lot and block designation for
same as it appears on the official City Tax Map.
E. Historic Preservation Advisory Commission report to Planning Board.
After the hearing, the Commission shall prepare a concise report,
including a list and map of its recommended sites, to be designated as
historic landmarks/sites of historic interest. Copies of the report shall
be delivered to the Mayor, City Council, Planning Board and the
Municipal Clerk and a notice of action published by the Commission
Secretary in an official newspaper of the City. The published notice shall
state the Commission's recommendations and also that final
designation shall be made by the Planning Board at a public meeting
specified on a date not less than 15 nor more than 45 days from the date
of publication. The Planning Board shall communicate its action with
respect to the Commission's recommendation to the City Council.
§ 345-129 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-129
332:1055
§ 345-130. Actions requiring review by Historic Preservation
Advisory Commission.
F. City Council's adoption of designations. The Commission shall submit
the list of designated landmarks/sites of historic interest and a map to
the Municipal Clerk for filing. The City Council shall then consider the
designation list and map, and may approve, reject or modify same by
ordinance. Once adopted, the designation list and map may be amended
in the same manner in which it was adopted. Upon adoption, the
designation list and map shall also be incorporated by reference into
the municipal Master Plan and the zoning provisions of this article.
G. Filing of certificate of designation. Copies of the list of designated
landmarks and location maps as adopted shall be made public and
distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and building permits. A certificate of designation shall be
served by certified and regular mail upon each owner included on the
list, a true copy thereof shall be filed with the Tax Collector and Tax
Assessor who shall maintain a record of all historic designations on the
tax rolls. No filing shall take place for sites of historic interest.
H. Reconsideration of designation. Nothing herein shall be construed as
requiring the Commission to designate a structure, building, object or
site an historic landmark even if all criteria to so designate have been
satisfied. The Commission retains the discretion to designate such
structure, building, object or site as a site of historic interest subject to
the provisions of § 345-129C. Thereafter, the Commission shall not be
prohibited from reconsidering such designation and, after following the
procedures of § 345-129C, designate a site of historic interest as an
historic landmark.
A. Applications subject to Commission review:
(1) All building permit, demolition and development applications
affecting an historic landmark/site of historic interest or an exterior
improvement within an historic district as designated in the
Historic Preservation Plan Element of the City's Master Plan and
those historic landmark properties, pursuant to § 345-129 shall be
reviewed by the Commission. Such review shall be required for, but
not limited to, the following:
(a) Demolition, in whole or in part, of an historic property or of any
improvement within an historic district.
(b) Relocation of an historic property or an improvement with an
historic district.
(c) Significant, nonhistoric changes in exterior appearance by
means of repainting (not in the same color or an historically
certified color).
§ 345-129 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1056
(d) Changes in exterior appearance by means of nonordinary
repairs, replacement, rehabilitation, alteration or addition to
any historic property or any improvement within a designated
historic district.
(e) New construction taking place within a designated historic
district.
(f) Changes in or additions of new signage or exterior lighting.
(g) Zoning variances affecting an historic property or any
improvement within a designated historic district.
(h) Site plans or subdivisions affecting an historic property or an
improvement within an historic district.
(i) Roadway-widening projects. In making a recommendation on
an application, the Commission shall be aware of the
importance of finding a way to meet the current needs of the
applicant. The Commission shall also recognize the importance
of making recommendations that will be both consistent with
the purposes of this article and reasonable for the applicant to
carry out. Before an applicant prepares plans, he or she may
bring a tentative proposal to the Commission for informal
review and comment.
(2) Any proposal for renovation, modification, addition or expansion
requiring a building permit shall have plans drawn by a New Jersey
licensed architect. An escrow fee shall be assessed to cover costs of
review by City professionals and any portion of the procedural
requirements may be waived depending on simplicity or complexity
of the proposal.
(3) The following activities are not subject to this article:
(a) Changes to the interior of structures.
(b) Ordinary repairs and maintenance or the exact replacement of
any existing architectural details that are otherwise permitted
by law, provided that this work on an historic landmark does
not alter the exterior appearance of the building.
B. Waiver; emergencies.
(1) Waiver. Applicants for building permits for existing properties,
located in historic district zones, but which are noncontributing as
defined herein may apply for a waiver of the requirements of
review and are defined as a minor application; provided that they
transmit a letter, requesting said waiver to the Commission, which
includes the following information:
(a) Identification of the property by City block and lot number as
shown on the current Tax Maps.
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1057
(b) Year original structures were built and years when additions (if
any) were built.
(c) Photographs taken within a year of the waiver requests
showing front, side and rear elevations of structures.
(d) Explanation of work to be done under requested building
permit.
(e) Reasons for waiver request.
(2) Emergencies. Approval by the Commission is not required prior to
immediate and emergent repair to preserve the continued
habitability of the landmark and/or the health and safety of its
occupants or others. Emergency repairs may be performed in
accordance with City building and construction codes, without the
necessity of first obtaining the Commission's review. Under such
circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are
necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
historic landmark, or others, and/or to maintain the habitability of
the structure. A request for the Commission's approval shall be
made as soon as possible thereafter and no further work shall be
performed upon the structure until an appropriate request for
approval is made and obtained. All work done under this subsection
shall confirm to the criteria set forth in this article and the
guidelines for review of applications as adopted by the Planning
Board in accordance with this article.
(3) Pursuant to the authority granted to a Chairman of the Historic
Preservation Commission as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111, the
Chairman will be allowed to act in place of the full Commission on
minor applications.
C. Referrals to Historic Preservation Advisory Commission. The Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment shall refer all development applications
to the Commission; and the administrative officer shall refer all building
permit applications, including permit applications for new construction,
demolition, alterations, additions, or replacements which affect an
historic landmark, a site of historic interest or an improvement within
an historic site, to the Commission.
(1) Procedures for the review of development and zoning applications.
(a) For all applications presented to the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board which meet the criteria set forth § 345-130E, the
property owner shall also submit to either Board, as
appropriate, an application for review and request for issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness. Such an application shall
pertain solely to the proposed site review or zoning request. If
building permits are required, those actions will be reviewed
separately by the Commission in accordance with the
procedures outlined in § 345-130C(2).
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1058
(b) The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall forward to the
Commission a complete set of all application materials as well
as the application for review and request for issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness. Such referral shall be made
when the application is deemed complete or is scheduled for a
hearing, whichever is sooner. The Commission shall be allowed
at least 14 calendar days from the day it receives a complete
application to prepare its recommendations to either the
Planning Board or Zoning Board regarding whether the
certificate of appropriateness should be approved or denied.
Said recommendations shall be in the form of a written report,
which may be orally conveyed to the appropriate Board
through the Commission's delegate at a hearing on the
application.
(c) The Commission's recommendation shall focus on how the
proposed undertaking would affect an historic property's
historical or architectural significance as outlined in § 345-129.
In considering the Commission's recommendations, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board shall be guided by the review
criteria established in § 345-130E. The recommendation of this
Commission shall not be binding upon the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board.
(2) Procedures for review of building permits and alterations.
(a) Prior to undertaking any action affecting the exterior
architectural appearance of an historic property or an
improvement within an historic district, regardless of whether
a building permit is required, the property owner shall
complete and submit to the administrative officer an
application for review and request for issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness.
(b) An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
submitted on forms provided by the administrative officer.
Each application submission shall include, at a minimum, the
following information:
[1] Those drawings, plans, photographs, manufacturer
specifications and sample materials that are required by
the administrative officer and/or as may be noted in the
application checklist.
[2] Detailed drawings, when required by the administrative
officer, which shall be drawn at the appropriate scales and
shall depict the exact work to be performed, including
renderings of the exterior of any proposed new building
and/or structure or any exterior alterations to existing
improvements. A detailed plot plan delineating the
relationship of the renderings of the proposal in relation to
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1059
adjacent improvements, buildings and/or structures or
surrounding lands may be required as determined by the
administrative officer. Drawings shall be prepared and
sealed by either a New Jersey licensed registered architect
or other New Jersey licensed design professional or by
the residing property owner of a single-family dwelling
under his/her ownership with an accompanying affidavit
of ownership, as required by P.L. 1989, Chapter 277
(commonly known as the "Building Design Services
Act239") or other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
(c) The administrative officer shall refer the application to the
Commission for its recommendation. The Commission or its
designee shall review the application for technical
completeness. Any application found to be incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant within 10 calendar days of the receipt
of the application.
(d) When an application is found to be technically complete, the
Commission shall schedule a review of the application at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall be
notified of the meeting date and shall be allowed an
opportunity to speak at the meeting. The Commission may
recommend the denial of any application that is not properly
represented at the hearing.
(e) The Commission shall report to the Planning Board within 25
calendar days after the application is deemed complete. The
report shall set forth the Commission's recommendation
regarding whether the certificate of appropriateness should be
approved, denied or conditionally approved; and it shall
explain, in writing, the reasons for its recommendation. In
accordance with Subsection C(2)(g) of this section, if the
application involves demolition or removal, the Commission
may also recommend postponement. The Commission's
recommendation shall focus on how the proposed undertaking
would affect a property's historic or architectural significance
pursuant to the review criteria set forth in § 345-130E. The
Commission's recommendation shall not be binding upon the
Planning Board.
(f) When making its determination on the application for a
certificate of appropriateness, the Planning Board should be
guided by the review criteria set forth in § 345-130E. The
Planning Board should consider the Commission's
recommendations with the same care it affords all expert
information. The Planning Board may accept, reject or modify
the Commission's recommendations. The Planning Board shall
provide its report to the administrative officer for the
239. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:4B-1 et seq.
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1060
appropriate action within 45 days of his or her referral of the
application to the Commission. Failure to report within the
forty-five-day period shall be deemed to constitute a report in
favor of the application for a certificate of appropriateness,
without conditions. The administrative officer is bound by the
Planning Board's decision.
(g) Approval, denial or postponement.
[1] The Planning Board, upon affirmative vote of a majority of
the membership, may approve, deny or postpone
demolition of an historic property ancillary to a
development application for up to one year. The Planning
Board and the Commission may utilize this time period to
consult with the New Jersey State Historic Preservation
Office, the Monmouth County Historical Commission or
other similarly qualified organizations to ascertain how the
City may preserve the structure when demolition or
moving thereof would be a great loss to the City. The
Planning Board may request that the City Council initiate
such actions as may lead to the preservation of the
premises within the one-year hiatus. In its review of an
application to demolish a site pursuant to this section, the
Commission may require the applicant to prepare a
financial analysis which may include any or all of the
following:
[a] Amount paid for the property, date of purchase and
party from whom purchased, including a description
of the relationship, whether business or familial, if
any, between the owner and the person from whom
the property was purchased.
[b] Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the most recent assessment.
[c] For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial
statement prepared by an accountant or broker of
record.
[d] All appraisals obtained by the owner in connection
with his purchase or financing of the property, or
during his ownership of the property.
[e] Bona fide offers of the property for sale or rent, price
asked and offers received, if any.
[f] Any consideration by the owner as to profitable,
adaptive uses for the property.
[2] The Commission shall study the question of economic
hardship for the applicant and shall determine whether the
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1061
site or the property in the historic district can be put
to beneficial use without the approval of the demolition
application. In the case of an income-producing building,
the Commission shall also determine whether the
applicant can obtain a reasonable return from his existing
building. The Commission may ask applicants for
additional information to be used in making these
determinations.
(3) Applications involving historic landmark.
(a) The Commission shall determine if an application is complete.
If incomplete, it shall be returned within 30 days. When
complete, the Commission shall schedule a review at its next
regular meeting and the applicant shall be notified and given
an opportunity to be heard.
(b) The Commission shall provide written advice and
recommendation to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
or, in the case of the permit application through the
administrative officer, except otherwise provided by
§ 345-130B(2), shall direct such officer to approve, deny or
conditionally approve the application. Such determinations by
the Commission shall be made within 45 days of the
Commission's determination that the application is complete,
unless such time is extended by consent of the applicant and is
in the form of a written consent from the applicant and
received by the Commission.
(c) On any application involving demolition or removal of any kind,
except otherwise provided by § 345-130B(2), the Commission's
recommendation shall specify whether the permit is to be
denied or postponed. If postponement is ordered, the
Commission shall work with the applicant during this interim
period to investigate and consider alternatives to demolition or
removal.
(4) Applications involving sites of historic interest.
(a) If such applications are for other than a building permit, each
shall be processed in the same manner as under Subsection C
above. If such applications are for a building permit, the
Commission shall review the application submitted to the
Construction Official and, if the Commission deems it desirable
based on the application filed, may request a meeting with the
applicant to discuss the extent of the work planned and provide
suggestions to accommodate the desires of the applicant while
at the same time attempting to protect the historical
significance of the site of historic interest. Such
recommendations shall be purely advisory and shall offer any
technical assistance as nonbinding discussions during its
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1062
regularly scheduled meeting and shall have no binding effect,
however, the Construction Official shall await the report of
the Commission for a period of 45 days after referral to the
Commission. If no report is received within the forty-five-day
period, the Construction Official may, if all other requirements
therefor are met, issue the requested permit.
(b) In the cooperative effort outlined above, the Commission shall
explore the availability of public or private funds to assist the
property owner with any increased costs which may
accompany following the Commission's recommendations. If
such funds are provided by the City through any established
grant or assistance program, it shall be required that, as a
condition to receipt of such funds, the property owner shall
record restrictions, in the County Clerk's office, subjecting the
property to historic landmark designation to the same extent
as though the procedure set forth in § 345-129D was followed
and the certificate reference in § 345-129G was filed.
D. Submission requirements. An original and two copies of each of the
following shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Commission:
(1) Applicable application form, if any, as adopted by the Commission.
(2) Plans and specifications as accepted by the Building Department.
(3) Detailed information shall be provided on the construction
material, color, design and any of the following or other elements of
the proposal to provide clear and comprehensive information for
the Commission in its determination of the complexity of the
proposal:
(a) Roof design and surfacing;
(b) Walls/siding/pattern of shingles/and exterior painting or stain;
(c) Windows: style, relationship to each other/awnings;
(d) Doors;
(e) Ornaments or trim;
(f) Colors/materials;
(g) Railings/porches;
(h) Chimneys;
(i) Fences;
(j) Garages/carports;
(k) Signs;
(l) TV antennas/satellite dishes;
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1063
(m) Solar energy installation;
(n) Outdoor furniture for accessory use of a principal
(nonresidential) use such as restaurant's outdoor eating
section;
(o) Street furniture generally relative to a public or a semipublic
use; or recreation equipment;
(p) Landscaping, grading and topography;
(q) For new construction, utilities shall be placed underground
and site plans shall show the placement of same; statements
from the relevant public utility company may be requested by
the Commission.
E. Standards of review. In reviewing an application for its effect on a
building, improvement or structure within an historic district or an
historic property, the following criteria shall be used by the
Commission, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board. The criteria set
forth in Subsection E(1) relate to all projects affecting an historic site or
an improvement within an historic district.
(1) If the historic landmark/site of historic interest is involved:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on its historic and
architectural significance as defined in this section.
(b) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which the
historic or architectural interest would be adversely affected to
the detriment of the public interest.
(c) The extent to which there would be involvement of textures
and materials that would not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(d) The use of any structure involved.
(e) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect
the public's view of a landmark from a public street.
(f) If the application deals with a structure within an historic
district, the impact the proposed change would have on its
character and ambience and the structure's visual
compatibility with the buildings, places and structures to
which it would be visually related in terms of visual
compatibility factors set forth herein.
(g) In regard to applications, additional pertinent matters may be
considered, but in no instance shall interior arrangement be
considered.
(h) In assessing the effect of any proposed change on an
application concerning any landmark, the Secretary of the U.S.
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1064
Department of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings shall be
utilized. Such standards and guidelines are hereby adopted by
reference and copies shall be made available for inspection
and/or purchase in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
(2) With respect to applications for certificates of appropriateness
relating to changes in exterior appearance, new construction,
alteration(s), addition(s), nonordinary repair(s), rehabilitation,
replacement(s), signage or exterior lighting, excavation or ground
disturbance, involving an historic property or any improvement
within the historic district, the following shall be considered:
(a) The use of any building and/or structure involved;
(b) The historical or architectural value and significance of the
building and/or structure and its relationship to the historic
value of the surrounding area;
(c) The effectiveness of the proposal in adhering to the building
and/or structure's original style or destroying or otherwise
affecting the exterior texture, materials and architectural
features;
(d) The overall effect that proposed work would have upon the
protection, enhancement, perpetuation and the use of the
property, adjoining properties and the historic district in which
it is located;
(e) The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement and
materials proposed to be used and any other factor, including
aesthetic, which is found to be pertinent;
(f) The practicality of performing the work with materials or
workmanship of a type equivalent or similar to the historical or
architectural era during which the structure, building or place
was constructed;
(g) The impact of the proposed change upon archaeological
resources;
(h) The general purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, including but not limited to the following:
[1] Appropriate use or development of all lands in a manner
which promotes the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare;
[2] Promotion of a desirable visual environment through
creative development, techniques and good civic design
and arrangements;
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1065
[3] Conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources to
prevent degradation of the environment through improper
use of land;
[4] Encouraging coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities, shaping land development with
a view of lessening the cost of such development and to the
more efficient use of land.
F. Demolitions. An application for a permit to demolish an historic
landmark/site of historic interest shall be forwarded by the
Construction Official to the Commission.
(1) Demolitions involving historic landmarks.
(a) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed demolition. At least 10 days before such hearing, the
applicant shall give notice of the time, date, location and
purpose of the hearing to the agencies listed below by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by published notice in an
official newspaper of the municipality; and shall present an
affidavit attesting to such notification prior to commencement
of the hearing:
[1] Monmouth County Historical Commission.
[2] Monmouth County Heritage Committee.
[3] Monmouth Conservation Foundation.
[4] Monmouth County Historical Association.
[5] State Historic Preservation Office.
[6] State Advisory Council of Historic Preservation.
(b) The following matters shall be considered by the Commission:
[1] Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in
relation to the criteria established in this section;
[2] If it is within an historic district, its significance to the
district as a key, contributing, or noncontributing resource
and the probable impact of its removal on the district;
[3] Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted
by the zoning provisions of this article;
[4] Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of
alternatives to the proposal;
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1066
[5] Its importance to the City and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal
would be detrimental to the public interest;
[6] The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it would
not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great
difficulty and expense;
[7] The extent to which its relation would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate
values, generating business, creating new jobs, attracting
tourists, students, writers, historians, artists and artisans,
attracting new residents, encouraging study and interest
in American history, New Jersey history and the history of
Long Branch, stimulating interest and study in
architecture and design, educating citizens in American
culture and heritage, or making the municipality a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live;
[8] Such other matters as may appropriately affect the
decision considering the specific characteristics of the
property in question;
[9] The ownership, use and applicant's reason(s) for
requesting demolition;
[10] Any other applicable standards of review or guidelines as
defined in "The Secretary of the Intern Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties."
(c) Following the public hearing, the Commission shall make a
decision and act on the request for the demolition permit.
(2) Demolitions involving a site of historic interest. The Commission
shall conduct the procedures as outlined in Subsection F above,
except as follows:
(a) The Commission shall have a period not exceeding six months
in order to have an opportunity to seek a viable alternative to
demolition.
(b) The applicant shall not be required to notify the agencies set
forth in Subsection F(1)(a)[1] through [6].
(3) Demolitions in conjunction with a development application. In
those circumstances where the planned demolition is part of a
development application pending before the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, the hearing provided for in this section shall
be combined as part of the development application hearing held
before the reviewing board. The Commission shall be given notice
of the hearing and its members or representatives shall be allowed
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1067
to ask questions, request information and present evidence to the
reviewing board relating to the demolition. The Commission shall
further be afforded the opportunity of making a recommendation to
the reviewing board as to whether or not the demolition should be
allowed.
G. Relocations. In regard to an application to move any historic landmark,
or to move any improvement within an historic district, the application
shall be forwarded by the responsible municipal official to the
Commission.
(1) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
move or relocation. At least 10 days before such hearing, the
applicant shall give notice of the time, date, location and purpose of
the hearing to the agencies listed below by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by published notice in an official newspaper
of the municipality and shall present an affidavit attesting to such
notification prior to the hearing:
(a) Monmouth County Historic Commission.
(b) Monmouth County Heritage Committee.
(c) Monmouth Conservation Foundation.
(d) Monmouth County Historical Association.
(e) State Office of Historic Preservation.
(f) State Advisory Council of Historic Preservation.
(g) Monmouth County Park System.
(h) Any other local civic, social or community organization
concerned with historic preservation, deemed appropriate by
the Commission.
(2) The following matters shall be considered by the Commission:
(a) The historic loss to the site of original location and the historic
district as a whole;
(b) The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or
structure as its present site;
(c) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of
interest and values referred to in this section;
(d) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or
structure itself;
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-130
332:1068
(e) If it is to be moved from the City, the proximity of the proposed
new location to the City, including the accessibility to the
residents of the municipality and other citizens;
(f) Visual compatibility factors as set forth in this section.
(3) Following the public hearing, the Commission shall make a decision
and act on the request for relocation.
(4) In those circumstances where the planned relocation is part of a
development application pending before the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, the hearing provided for in this section shall
be combined as part of the development application hearing held
before the reviewing board. The Commission shall be given notice
of the hearing and its members or representatives shall be allowed
to ask questions, request information and present evidence to the
reviewing board relating to the relocation. The Commission shall
further be afforded the opportunity of making a recommendation to
the reviewing board as to whether or not the relocation should be
allowed.
H. Advice regarding nonhistoric properties.
(1) The Commission also serves in an advisory capacity in the review of
plans referred by the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment
or City Council pertaining to the exterior appearance of structures
that are not historic landmarks and not within an historic district.
The purpose and intent of this additional role of the Commission is
to assist other municipal boards in their review capacity, where
development is proposed in close proximity to areas and/or
structures of historic significance or because the owners or
applicants desire to construct improvements with historic design
and character. The goals of the Commission are to advise
applicants on how to amend and improve designs rather than to
impose individual design choices on any specific proposal.
(2) In the review of plans that have been referred to them, the
Commission will generally examine the following elements for
compatibility with the existing style, with existing adjoining
development and appropriateness:
(a) Building height.
(b) Bulk/scale.
(c) Placement of windows, doors, roof.
(d) Materials/textures and scales.
(e) Color.
(f) Signs.
§ 345-130 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-130
332:1069
§ 345-131. Violations and penalties.
(g) Fences, walls, other accessory structures on the site.
(h) Parking area layout, loading facilities.
(i) Landscaping.
(j) Driveways.
(k) Compatibility of all elements of the proposal.
(l) Any other exterior elements that would impact the
surroundings.
(3) When plans are referred to the Commission by the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment, the referral should include the time
schedule for the submission in order to enable the Commission to
make its review and, if necessary, meet with the applicant to
discuss adjustments, within the timing framework for the
submission, the dates of public hearings, Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment meetings, etc.
I. Removal or disturbance of objects or landmark detection devices.
(1) No person shall use any electrical, mechanical or other detectiontype
device to disturb, remove, locate objects in or on any Cityowned
historic landmark/site of historic interest or Improvement
within an historic district without giving written notice, as set forth
below, to the Municipal Clerk and the Commission and receiving
permission from the City Council to undertake the proposed
activity.
(2) The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall
set forth the name and address of the person giving notice as well
as the names and addresses of all persons involved in the on-site
use and shall set forth the date each use will occur and whether any
business, club or other organization is involved.
(3) The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall
be delivered to the Municipal Clerk and to the Secretary of the
Commission at least 30 days in advance of the proposed use. The
Commission shall consider the request and make a
recommendation to the City Council whether the request should be
approved, denied or approved with conditions. The City Council
shall then make the final decision and notify the applicant.
A. Any person who undertakes any activity affecting an historic landmark
or any improvement within an historic district which is regulated by
this article, without obtaining review by the Commission, shall be in
violation of this article.
§ 345-130 LONG BRANCH CODE § 345-131
332:1070
B. On any violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally serve a notice on
the owner describing the violation and demanding abatement within 10
days, and notify the owner or person(s) present that they must
immediately stop and cease any further activity whatsoever. Such
owner or other person(s) shall immediately stop any activity.
C. The Zoning Officer may also file a complaint in the City municipal court
and/or seek injunction relief or restraints in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
D. Each separate day a violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and
separate violation.
E. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
fine and penalty set forth in § 1-16 of the Code of the City of Long
Branch.
§ 345-131 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 345-131
332:1071
Appendix
Chapter A350
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A350-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A350-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.,
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47
U.S.C., Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the federal and state definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this chapter and is known as
Comcast of Monmouth County, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE OR OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA (PSA) — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The City of Long Branch, County of Monmouth,
State of New Jersey.
§ 345-131 LONG BRANCH CODE § A350-3
332:1072
§ A350-3. Findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A350-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A350-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A350-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A350-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along the public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of
the primary service area as set forth herein. Any extension of the cable
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board.
B. The consent granted herein is subject to an automatic renewal term of
10 years in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19.
C. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A350-3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § A350-7
332:1073
television system beyond the PSA will be made in accordance with the
Office of Cable Television's (OCTV) line extension policy (LEP). For purposes
of the LEP, the minimum density of homes-per-mile shall be 35.
§ A350-8. Construction requirements.
§ A350-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration: In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statues and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A350-7 LONG BRANCH CODE § A350-10
332:1074
§ A350-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A350-11. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A350-12. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A350-13. Commitments by company.
§ A350-14. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing twoway
or interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to
the BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions
A. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
B. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management facility
and public library in the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets.
C. A one-time technology grant of $70,000 paid with 12 months of
approval of the franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
D. Provide a dedicated digital educational access channel within 12
months of approval of the franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities.
§ A350-10 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § A350-14
332:1075
of such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall be borne by
the municipality.
§ A350-15. Emergency uses.
§ A350-16. Liability insurance.
§ A350-17. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A350-18. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this chapter
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A350-19. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A350-20. Local office. [Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 21-11]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System (EAS) rules
in accordance with applicable state and federal statues and regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
A. The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000
covering liability for any death, personal injury, property damages or
other liability arising out of its construction and operation of the cable
television system, and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the
amount of $5,000,000.
§ A350-14 LONG BRANCH CODE § A350-20
332:1076
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
Chapter A351
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
§ A351-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, 48:17-11 and 48:17-12,
permit and consent is hereby granted to Bell Atlantic New Jersey, Inc,
(the "Company"), its successors and assigns to install, operate, inspect,
maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications facilities and other
transmission or process equipment, including underground facilities, such
as conduits, manholes, cables, wires and all other facilities appurtenant
thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires, antennas, poles,
posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and distribution cabinets
and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, in, through, upon, along, over,
under and across all of the various public streets and ways, which include
the roads, avenues, rights-of-way, sidewalks, highest bridges, waterways
and other public places, and parts thereof, throughout their entire length,
and to effect the necessary street openings and lateral connections to
curb poles, property lines and other facilities in the City of Long Branch
(the "city") for said Company's local and through lines and other
communications facilities in connection with the transmission of its
business. In the event that any public street or way where the Company has
facilities is vacated by the city, the city agrees to reserve unto said Company
the rights granted the Company by the present ordinance.
§ A351-2. Placement of poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets and other
facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the city;
the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches of the face of
such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed upon by both parties,
or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts, pedestals,
cabinets or other facilities of the Company, its successors and assigns, and
where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or places in, upon,
along, adjacent or across the public streets and ways as may be mutually
agreed upon between the parties.
§ A351-3. Local and through communications facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities, such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances, within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
§ A350-20 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A351-3
A351:1077
the parties for said Company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways, and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the Company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A351-4. Notice given prior to work; permits; restoration of area
upon completion of work.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an area
covered by this ordinance, the Company shall give prior notice in writing
thereof to the city, through its designated representative, of its intention
to perform such work. The Company shall obtain such street opening or
excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any applicable
ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such area affected
by the Company in constructing its facilities shall be restored to as good
condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon. No public
streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall be
reasonable to execute the work.
§ A351-5. Indemnification of city.
The Company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
Company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the city, except
that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or concurring
negligence or fault of the Company and the city, the same shall be borne by
them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A351-6. Establishment or relocation of curbline.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed by
the city, the Company shall change the location of its aboveground facilities
covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so that the
same shall be back of and adjacent to the new curbline, so long as the city
§ A351-3 LONG BRANCH CODE § A351-6
A351:1078
has acted in accordance with applicable law and with reasonable care in
establishing the new curbline and providing notice thereof.
§ A351-7. Use of Company's property.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities
in the public streets and ways of the city may jointly use the Company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the Company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the Company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A351-8. Space provided for exclusive use of city.
§ A351-9. Transfer of interest to County.
If any or all of said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Monmouth of the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have
A. The Company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles,
so long as said poles are occupied by the Company, and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the city during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the city, which use shall be
limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol,
fire alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only, but for
no other uses or purposes either alone or in conjunction therewith, nor
for circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals,
nor for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a
means of transmitting any signal on a private, commercial or residential
location and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental
supplier; provided, further, that no such use or attachment by the city
shall interfere with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the
Company.
B. All costs or expenses incurred by the Company in connection therewith
shall be paid by the city. It shall be the obligation of the city to attach its
wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the Company, provided that before proceeding with said
work, either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to
perform such work, the city shall give the Company 30 days' prior
notice, in writing. All such work shall be performed under the
supervision of said Company. The city will indemnify and save harmless
the Company from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising
in any manner in connection with the city's wires or facilities or their
installation, maintenance, operation or removal or the city's use or
enjoyment of the Company's plant or facilities provided under this
section.
§ A351-6 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A351-9
A351:1079
such rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions
and limitations of use as apply herein to the city; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the city
and the Company for the full protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A351-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — Any form of municipality or government into which the city or any
part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed or merged.
§ A351-11. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired or operated by the Company, its predecessors,
successors or assigns within the city. This ordinance shall cancel and
supersede all prior consent ordinances between the city and the Company
regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A351-12. Obligation of Company.
The Company shall maintain its property with the city and shall comply with
applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper service at just
and reasonable rates and safeguard the public interest in continuous and
uninterrupted service with the city.
§ A351-13. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall be
construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provisions(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A351-14. Payment of expenses incurred; when effective.
The Company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within 30 days after the Company has received a bill for said
advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this ordinance,
the City Clerk shall provide the Company with written notice thereof by
certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the Company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A351-9 LONG BRANCH CODE § A351-14
A351:1080
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-98 9-23-1998 Street excavations
amendment
Ch. 297, Art. III
32-98 9-23-1998 Drug-free zones Ch. 158
33-98 9-23-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
34-98 10-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
35-98 10-27-1998 Sidewalk construction
and removal
amendment
Ch. 297, Art. II
36-98 10-27-1998 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
37-98 11-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
38-98 11-10-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
39-98 11-10-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
40-98 11-10-1998 Monmouth County
Mutual Aid Agreement
Ch. 70, Art. I
41-98 Salary NCM
42-98 12-8-1998 Repealing Section 14.3,
housing code, of the
1971 Code
Repealer only
43-98 12-8-1998 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 125
44-98 12-8-1998 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 173
45-98 Sale of property NCM
46-98 1-12-1999 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
47-98 1-12-1999 Towing amendment Ch. 316
48-98 1-12-1999 Urban Enterprise Zone
amendment
Ch. 94
§ A351-14 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1081
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
49-98 2-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
1-99 Bond NCM
2-99 Bond NCM
3-99 1-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
4-99 2-23-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
5-99 2-9-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
6-99 2-23-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
7-99 1-12-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
8-99 2-23-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
9-99 Bond NCM
10-99 2-23-1999 Smoke detectors
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
11-99 2-23-1999 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 173
12-99 2-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
13-99 2-23-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
14-99 2-23-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
15-99 2-23-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
16-99 Renumbering certain
streets
NCM
17-99 Sale of property NCM
18-99 3-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
19-99 3-23-1999 Personnel amendment Ch. 75
20-99 Personnel amendment Defeated
21-99 3-23-1999 Bond NCM
22-99 4-13-1999 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
23-99 4-27-1999 Garbage collection and
recycling amendment;
newspaper recycling
amendment
Ch. 293, Arts. I and II
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1082
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-99 5-11-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
25-99 5-11-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
26-99 6-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
27-99 6-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
28-99 6-23-1999 Sidewalk cafes and
restaurants
Ch. 181, Art. III
29-99 7-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
30-99 8-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
31-99 8-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
32-99 8-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
33-99 8-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
34-99 8-10-1999 Parks amendment Ch. 247
35-99 8-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
36-99 8-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
37-99 8-24-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
38-99 8-24-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
39-99 9-14-1999 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
40-99 Lease agreement NCM
41-99 11-9-1999 Trees amendment Ch. 319
42-99 11-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
43-99 11-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
44-99 11-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
1-00 Sale of property NCM
2-00 2-22-2000 Sale of property NCM
3-00 2-22-2000 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1083
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-00 3-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
5-00 3-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
6-00 Tabled
7-00 Tabled
8-00 4-11-2000 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
9-00 4-11-2000 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
10-00 4-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-00 4-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
12-00 5-9-2000 Taxicabs rates
amendment
NCM
13-00 5-9-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 173
14-00 5-9-2000 Bond NCM
15-00 Bond NCM
16-00 6-27-2000 Parks amendment Ch. 247
17-00 6-27-2000 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
18-00 6-27-2000 Cable Television
Commission
amendment
Ch. 15
19-00 6-27-2000 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
20-00 6-27-2000 Bond NCM
21-00 6-27-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
22-00 Not adopted
23-00 6-27-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
24-00 7-11-2000 Taxicab rates
amendment
NCM
25-00 7-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
26-00 7-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1084
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-00 7-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
28-00 7-25-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
29-00 Not adopted
30-00 8-8-2000 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
31-00 8-8-2000 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
32-00 8-8-2000 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
33-00 8-22-2000 Service contract NCM
34-00 8-22-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
35-00 8-22-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
36-00 10-10-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
37-00 10-10-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
38-00 10-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
39-00 10-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
40-00 10-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
41-00 10-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
42-00 10-24-2000 Personnel: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 75, Art. I
43-00 10-24-2000 Personnel: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 75, Art. I
44-00 10-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
45-00 11-9-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
46-00 11-9-2000 Bond NCM
47-00 11-28-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
48-00 11-28-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
49-00 12-12-2000 Space lease
amendment
NCM
50-00 12-12-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
51-00 12-12-2000 Towing amendment Ch. 316
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1085
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
52-00 12-26-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
53-00 12-26-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
54-00 12-26-2000 Parking Authority Ch. 72
55-00 12-26-2000 Salaries amendment NCM
56-00 12-26-2000 Appropriation NCM
57-00 1-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
1-01 1-23-2001 Acquisition of property NCM
2-01 1-23-2001 Acquisition of property NCM
3-01 2-13-2001 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
4-01 Bond NCM
5-01 2-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
6-01 3-13-2001 Dedication of property
amendment
NCM
7-01 3-13-2001 Street vacation NCM
8-01 3-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
9-01 3-27-2001 Towing amendment Ch. 316
10-01 3-27-2001 Peddling and soliciting:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
11-01 3-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
12-01 4-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
13-01 4-10-2001 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
14-01 4-10-2001 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
15-01 4-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
16-01 Sale of property NCM
17-01 5-8-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
18-01 5-22-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1086
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-01 5-22-2001 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
20-01 6-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
21-01 6-12-2001 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
22-01 6-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
23-01 6-12-2001 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
24-01 Bond NCM
25-01 Bond NCM
26-01 Bond NCM
27-01 8-14-2001 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
28-01 Bond NCM
29-01 8-28-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
30-01 8-28-2001 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 256
31-01 Bond NCM
32-01 Bond NCM
33-01 9-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
34-01 9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
35-01 9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
36-01 10-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
37-01 NCM
38-01 NCM
39-01 NCM
40-01 NCM
41-01 NCM
42-01 NCM
43-01 NCM
44-01 NCM
45-01 NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1087
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
46-01 12-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
1-02 NCM
2-02 NCM
3-02 3-26-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
4-02 4-9-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 316
5-02 NCM
6-02 4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
7-02 4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
8-02 4-23-2002 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
9-02 5-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
10-02 5-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-02 5-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
12-02 Bond NCM
13-02 Bond NCM
14-02 Bond NCM
15-02
through
29-02
NCM
30-02 7-23-2002 Arts Council Ch. 10
31-02 8-13-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
32-02
through
41-02
NCM
42-02 9-24-2002 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
43-02 NCM
44-02 10-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
45-02 10-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1088
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
46-02 10-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
47-02 10-22-2002 Redevelopment Plan Ch. 269
48-02
through
56-02
NCM
57-02 11-26-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
58-02
through
60-02
NCM
61-02 12-10-2002 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 345
62-02 12-30-2002 Taxicab rates
amendment
NCM
63-02
through
67-02
Street vacations NCM
68-02 1-14-2003 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 38
69-02 1-14-2003 Personnel amendment Ch. 75
1-03 1-28-2003 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
2-03 1-28-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
3-03 1-28-2003 Exceed index rate NCM
4-03 NCM
5-03 2-25-2003 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
6-03
through
8-03
NCM
9-03 3-25-2003 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
10-03 3-25-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1089
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-03 4-8-2003 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
12-03 4-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
13-03 4-22-2003 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
14-03 NCM
15-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
16-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
17-03 Bond NCM
18-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
19-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
20-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
21-03 6-10-2003 Massage parlors
amendment
Ch. 227
22-03 NCM
23-03 6-24-2003 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 25
24-03
through
27-03
NCM
28-03 8-12-2003 Parks amendment Ch. 247
29-03 NCM
30-03 9-26-2003 Hotel and motel room
occupancy tax
Ch. 306, Art. III
31-03 10-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
31-03
through
33-03
NCM
34-03 10-14-2003 Seasonal rentals
amendment
Ch. 271, Art. II
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1090
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
35-03 10-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
36-03 and
37-03
NCM
38-03 10-28-2003 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 173
39-03 NCM
40-03 12-9-2003 Solid waste and
recycling
Ch. 293
41-03 12-9-2003 Rental property:
seasonal rentals
amendment
Ch. 271, Art. I
42-03 NCM
43-03 12-30-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 316
1-04 1-27-2004 Hazardous substances
amendment
Ch. 193
2-04 1-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
5-04 3-23-2004 Personnel amendment Ch. 75
7-04 4-13-2004 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5; superseded by
Ord. No. 14-04
8-04 4-13-2004 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
9-04 4-13-2004 Fingerprint fees
amendment
Chs. 103; 227; 308
13-04 5-11-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
14-04 5-11-2004 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
15-04 NCM
16-04 5-25-2004 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 12-09
17-04 5-25-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 173
18-04 5-25-2004 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1091
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-04 6-8-2004 Contribution disclosure
in development
applications
Ch. 69
20-04 NCM
21-04 6-22-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
22-04 7-13-2004 Benefits for military
personnel
Ch. 75, Art. V
23-04 7-13-2004 Arts Council repealed Ch. 10
24-04 7-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
25-04 7-27-2004 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1
26-04 7-27-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
27-04 7-27-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 262
28-04 Bond NCM
29-04 Bond NCM
30-04 8-10-2004 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
31-04 NCM
32-04 8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
33-04 NCM
34-04 8-24-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
35-04 Removed from
agenda
36-04 Bond NCM
37-04 Bond NCM
38-04 10-12-2004 Drug-Free School
Zones amendment
Ch. 158
39-04 10-12-2004 Property maintenance
and rental property
amendment
Chs. 262 and 271
40-04 10-12-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1092
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
41-04 19-26-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
42-04 Sale of property NCM
43-04 Bond NCM
44-04 Interlocal agreement NCM
45-04 Bond NCM
46-04 Bond NCM
47-04 Salaries NCM
48-04 12-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
49-04 Interlocal agreement NCM
1-05 Budget appropriation NCM
2-05 2-8-2005 Affordable housing
Agency
Ch. 6, Art. I
3-05 2-8-2005 Enforcement of
affordable housing
Ch. 6, Art. II
4-05 2-8-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
5-05 Not adopted
6-05 Lease agreement NCM
7-05 2-22-2005 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 271
8-05 3-22-2005 Street vacation NCM
9-05 4-12-2005 Towing amendment Ch. 316
10-05 4-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-05 5-10-2005 Housing sale NCM
12-05 5-10-2005 Beach fees NCM
13-05 5-10-2005 Professional services
contracts
Ch. 19, Art. I
14-05 5-24-2005 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
15-05 5-24-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
16-05 6-28-2005 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1093
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-05 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
18-05 6-28-2005 Professional services
contracts amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
19-05 6-28-2005 Bond NCM
20-05 6-28-2005 Bond NCM
21-05 6-28-2005 Bond NCM
22-05 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
23-05 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
24-05 Eminent domain
acquisition
NCM
25-05 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
26-05 9-27-2005 Eminent domain
acquisition amendment
NCM
27-05 10-11-2005 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
28-05 10-11-2005 Salaries NCM
29-05 10-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
30-05 Tabled
31-05 10-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
32-05 10-25-2005 Tax exemption
amendment
NCM
33-05 Lease agreement NCM
34-05 Bond NCM
36-05 12-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
37-05 12-27-2005 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
1-06 Bond NCM
2-06 Bond NCM
3-06 1-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
4-06 2-28-2006 Penalties amendment Ch. 1, Art. I
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1094
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-06 Acquisition of property NCM
6-06 3-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
7-06 Bond NCM
8-06 Lease NCM
9-06 4-11-2006 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendments
Chs. 300, 345
10-06 4-11-2006 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
11-06 4-25-2006 Sidewalk cafes and
restaurants amendment
Ch. 181, Art. III
12-06 4-25-2006 Parks amendment Ch. 247
13-06 4-25-2006 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
14-06
15-06
16-06 7-25-2006 UEZ Corporation
Bylaws amendment
Ch. 94, Editor's Note
only
17-06 8-22-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
18-06 8-22-2006 Urban Enterprise Zone
amendment
Ch. 94
19-06 Bond NCM
20-06 Bond NCM
21-06 Sale of property NCM
22-06 10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
23-06 Lease amendment NCM
24-06 Bond NCM
25-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
26-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
27-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
28-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
29-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
30-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
31-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
32-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1095
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
33-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
34-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
35-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
36-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
37-06 Right-of-way dedication NCM
38-06 Lease agreement NCM
39-06 12-12-2006 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
40-06 Salaries NCM
41-06 1-9-2007 Fire zone NCM
1-07 1-23-2007 Exceed budget cap NCM
2-07 2-13-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
3-07 3-13-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
4-07 3-13-2007 Administration and
government and
marriage licenses
amendment
Chs. 5; 224
5-07 3-13-2007 Administration and
government
amendment
Ch. 5
6-07 Pending
7-07 3-27-2007 Solid waste and
recycling amendment
Ch. 293
8-07 3-27-2007 Illicit storm sewer
connections
Ch. 296, Art. I
9-07 Defeated
10-07 Defeated
11-07 3-27-2007 Littering amendment Ch. 215
12-07 3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
13-07 Bond NCM
14-07 3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
15-07 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1096
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-07 4-10-2007 Tennis courts
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 312; 345
17-07 4-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
18-07 Beaches amendment Defeated
19-07 4-24-2007 Vacation of property NCM
20-07 4-24-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
21-07 5-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
23-07 6-12-2007 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
24-07 6-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
25-07 7-10-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
26-07 7-10-2007 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
27-07 7-10-2007 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
28-07 7-10-2007 Parks amendment Ch. 247
29-07 8-14-2007 Land acquisition NCM
30-07 8-28-2007 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
31-07 8-28-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
32-07 8-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
33-07 8-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
34-07 9-11-2007 Affordable housing:
Municipal Housing
Liaison
Ch. 6, Art. II
35-07 9-11-2007 Towing amendment Ch. 316
36-07 9-25-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
(stormwater
management)
Ch. 300
37-07 10-9-2007 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1097
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
38-07 10-9-2007 Bond NCM
39-07 10-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
40-07 Tax abatement for
redevelopment area
NCM
41-07 Payment in lieu of taxes
for project
NCM
42-07 11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
43-07 11-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
44-07 12-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
45-07 Salary NCM
46-07 12-26-2007 Lease space
amendment
NCM
47-07 12-26-2007 Mercantile licenses
amendment
Ch. 230
48-07 12-26-2007 Payment in lieu of taxes
for project
NCM
49-07 12-26-2007 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
50-07 12-26-2007 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 181
51-07 12-26-2007 Dogs amendment Ch. 109, Art. I
1-08 Exceed budget cap NCM
2-08 1-22-2008 Subdivision of land
amendment
(stormwater
management
amendment)
Ch. 300
3-08 Bond NCM
4-08 Easement NCM
5-08 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
6-08 Bond NCM
7-08 Defeated
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1098
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-08 5-13-2008 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
9-08 Bond NCM
10-08 6-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-08 7-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
12-08 Not adopted
13-08 7-8-2008 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
14-08 7-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
15-08 7-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
16-08 7-22-2008 Street vacation NCM
17-08 8-26-2008 Eligibility for defined
contribution retirement
program
Ch. 75, Art. VI
18-08 8-26-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
19-08 8-26-2008 Execution of
confirmatory deeds
NCM
20-08 11-12-2008 Easement vacation NCM
21-08 10-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
22-08 10-28-2008 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
23-08 11-25-2008 Lease of space
amendment
NCM
24-08 11-25-2008 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
25-08 12-29-2008 Salaries NCM
26-08 12-29-2008 Reappropriation NCM
27-08 1-13-2009 Bond NCM
28-08 1-13-2009 Bond NCM
1-09 5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-09 3-10-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
3-09 3-10-2009 Bond NCM
4-09 4-14-2009 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
5-09 4-14-2009 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1099
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-09 5-12-2009 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 300
7-09 5-12-2009 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
8-09 5-12-2009 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
9-09 5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
10-09 6-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-09 7-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
12-09 7-14-2009 Flood damage
prevention
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1-13
13-09 7-14-2009 Appropriation NCM
14-09 7-28-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
15-09 9-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
16-09 9-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
17-09 9-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
18-09 10-13-2009 Bond NCM
19-09 10-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
20-09 11-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
21-09 11-24-2009 Leasing of firehouses NCM
22-09 12-8-2009 Salaries NCM
23-09 12-8-2009 Bond NCM
24-09 12-29-2009 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
25-09 12-29-2009 Design Guidelines
Handbook 6
NCM
26-09 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
27-09 1-26-2010 Loitering amendment Ch. 218
1-10 2-9-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
2-10 2-9-2010 Exceed budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1100
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-10 5-12-2010 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
4-10 6-8-2010 Parks: fees; insurance
requirement
Ch. 247, Art. II
5-10 6-29-2010 Bond NCM
6-10 6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
7-10 6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
8-10 6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
9-10 7-27-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
10-10 7-27-2010 Bond NCM
11-10 8-24-2010 Personnel: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 75, Art. I
12-10 9-28-2010 Raffles Ch. 105
13-10 9-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
14-10 10-12-2010 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
15-10 10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
16-10 11-9-2010 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
17-10 11-9-2010 Lease agreement Repealed by Ord. No.
25-10
18-10 11-23-2010 Temporary sale of
beach badges
NCM
19-10 12-14-2010 Massage parlors
amendment
Ch. 227
20-10 12-14-2010 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
21-10 12-14-2010 Pawnbrokers
amendment
Ch. 250
22-10 12-14-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
23-10 12-31-2010 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1101
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-10 12-31-2010 Parks: park use
regulations amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
25-10 1-11-2011 Repeal of Ord. No.
17-10
NCM
26-10 1-11-2011 Lease agreement NCM
1-11 1-25-2011 Cable television
franchise
Ch. A350
2-11 1-25-2011 Environmental
Commission
amendment
Ch. 35
3-11 2-8-2011 Appropriation NCM
4-11 2-8-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
5-11 Not adopted
6-11 2-22-2011 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 5
7-11 3-8-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
8-11 3-8-2011 Parks: fees; insurance
requirement
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. II
9-11 4-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
10-11 4-26-2011 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
11-11 5-24-2011 Dogs amendment Ch. 109, Art. I
12-11 5-24-2011 Personnel: positions
considered members of
UFCW Local 125
collective bargaining
agreement
Ch. 75, Art. VII
13-11 6-14-2011 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 147
14-11 6-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
15-11 6-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
16-11 6-14-2011 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1102
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-11 6-28-2011 Bond NCM
18-11 6-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
19-11 6-28-2011 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
20-11 6-28-2011 Solid waste and
recycling amendment
Ch. 293
21-11 6-28-2011 Cable television
franchise amendment
Ch. A350
22-11 6-28-2011 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
23-11 6-28-2011 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I
24-11 7-12-2011 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
25-11 7-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
26-11 7-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
27-11 7-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
28-11 8-9-2011 Financial agreement
for Woodrow Wilson
Urban Renewal Project
NCM
29-11 8-23-2011 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
30-11 Tabled
31-11 8-23-2011 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
32-11 9-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
33-11 9-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
34-11 10-11-2011 Lease agreement NCM
35-11 10-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
36-11 11-9-2011 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
37-11 11-9-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 262, Art. II
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1103
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
38-11 Not adopted
39-11 11-22-2011 Salaries NCM
40-11 12-27-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
41-11 12-27-2011 Bond NCM
42-11 12-27-2011 Bond NCM
43-11 12-27-2011 Bond NCM
1-12 Not adopted
2-12 2-28-2012 Fire loss insurance
claims
Not codified
3-12 2-28-2012 Bond NCM
4-12 3-13-2012 Bond repealer NCM
5-12 4-10-2012 Tax exemption NCM
6-12 4-10-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
7-12 4-24-2012 Bond NCM
8-12 4-24-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
9-12 4-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
10-12 Not adopted
11-12 6-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
12-12 6-26-2012 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
13-12 6-26-2012 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
14-12 8-14-2012 Redevelopment: Lower
Broadway Corridor
Sector
Ch. 269, Art. II
15-12 8-28-2012 Bond NCM
16-12 8-28-2012 Bond NCM
17-12 8-28-2012 Bond NCM
18-12 8-28-2012 Tax exemption NCM
19-12 8-28-2012 Tax exemption NCM
20-12 8-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
21-12 8-28-2012 Storm sewers: private
storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 296, Art. II
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1104
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-12 10-9-2012 Secondhand dealers Ch. 250
23-12 12-11-2012 Leasing of space for
fire trucks
NCM
24-12 12-11-2012 Salaries NCM
25-12 1-8-2013 Street vacation NCM
26-12 1-8-2013 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 69
1-13 1-22-2013 Flood damage
prevention
Superseded by Ord.
No. 11-18
2-13 2-26-2013 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
3-13 3-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
4-13 4-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
5-13 5-14-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
6-13 5-14-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
7-13 5-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
8-13 6-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
9-13 7-9-2013 Bond NCM
10-13 10-22-2013 Bond NCM
11-13 10-22-2013 Bond NCM
12-13 10-22-2013 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
13-13 11-26-2013 Lease agreement NCM
14-13 11-26-2013 Salaries NCM
15-2013 11-26-2013 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
16-2013 11-26-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
17-2013 12-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
18-2013 12-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
19-2013 12-30-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
1-14 1-28-2014 Bond NCM
2-14 2-11-2014 Tax exemption NCM
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1105
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-14 2-11-2014 Tax exemption NCM
4-14 3-11-2014 Reappropriation NCM
5-14 3-11-2014 Reappropriation NCM
6-14 Tabled
7-14 4-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
8-14 4-8-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
9-14 5-15-2014 Parking lots and meters
amendment; vehicles
and traffic amendment
Chs. 244; 325
10-14 5-15-2014 Bond NCM
11-14 Street vacation NCM
12-14 5-27-2014 Parks: park use
regulations
amendment; fees;
insurance requirement
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I and II
13-14 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
14-14 5-27-2014 Renewable energy
systems: solar energy
systems
Ch. 320, Art. I
15-14 5-27-2014 Renewable energy
systems: small wind
energy systems
Ch. 320, Art. II
16-14 6-10-2014 Bond NCM
17-14 6-24-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
18-14 7-8-2014 Reappropriation NCM
19-14 8-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
20-14 9-9-2014 Authorizing sale of 20
taxicab medallion
licenses
Ch. 308, footnote only
21-14 Removed
22-14 10-28-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
23-14 10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1106
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-14 11-25-2014 Bond NCM
25-14 11-25-2014 Lease agreement NCM
1-15 2-10-2015 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
2-15 2-24-2015 Towing amendment Ch. 316
3-15 2-24-2015 Bond NCM
4-15 2-24-2015 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
5-15 4-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
6-15 5-12-2015 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
7-15 5-12-2015 Bond NCM
8-15 5-12-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
9-15 6-9-2015 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
10-15 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
11-15 7-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
12-15 7-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
13-15 9-5-2015 Grant of tax exemption NCM
14-15 10-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
15-15 12-22-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
16-15 1-12-2016 Fire prevention
amendment; adoption
of BOCA standards
amendment
Ch. 173; Ch. 262, Art.
II
17-15 1-12-2016 Salaries NCM
1-16 4-12-2016 Easement Not adopted
2-16 4-12-2016 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
3-16 5-10-2016 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
4-16 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1107
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-16 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
6-16 5-24-2016 Massage parlors
amendment
Ch. 227
7-16 5-24-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
8-16 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
9-16 6-28-2016 Bond NCM
10-16 7-12-2016 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
11-16 7-12-2016 Tax exemption
agreement
NCM
12-16 7-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
13-16 7-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
14-16 7-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
15-16 7-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
16-16 8-23-2016 Dedication of property NCM
17-16 8-23-2016 Dedication of property NCM
18-16 8-23-2016 Dedication of property NCM
19-16 8-23-2016 Street vacation NCM
20-16 8-23-2016 Right-of-way dedication NCM
21-16 8-23-2016 Sale of property NCM
22-16 8-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
23-16 8-23-2016 Street vacation NCM
24-16 9-13-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 308
25-16 11-22-2016 Bond NCM
26-16 11-22-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103
27-16 11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1108
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
28-2016 11-22-2016 Administration of
government
amendment;
redevelopment: Lower
Broadway Corridor
Sector amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 269, Art. II;
Ch. 345
1-17 1-24-2017 Security: senior citizen
apartment buildings
amendment
Ch. 279, Art. I
2-17 1-24-2017 Animals: dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I
3-17 2-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
4-17 4-11-2017 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
5-17 4-11-2017 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
6-17 4-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
7-17 4-11-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
8-17 5-23-2017 Parking lots and meters
amendment
Ch. 244
9-17 6-13-2017 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
10-17 6-13-2017 Vacation of property NCM
11-17 6-27-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 78
12-17 6-27-2017 Street vacation NCM
13-17 6-27-2017 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45
14-17 7-25-2017 Beaches amendment Ch. 116
15-17 7-25-2017 Parks: park use
regulations
Ch. 247, Art. I
16-17 7-25-2017 Signs amendment Ch. 284
17-17 7-25-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
18-17 8-22-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1109
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-17 8-22-2017 Bond NCM
20-17 9-12-2017 Solid waste and
recycling amendment
Ch. 293
21-17 9-26-2017 Bond NCM
22-17 9-26-2017 Financial agreement NCM
23-17 9-26-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 345
24-17
through
28-17
NCM
29-17 11-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
30-17 11-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
31-17 11-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
32-17 12-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 325
33-17 12-11-2017 Leasing of space for
fire trucks
NCM
34-17 12-28-2017 Salaries NCM
35-17 1-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
1-18 2-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2-18 3-27-2018 Taxicabs Amendment Ch. 308
3-18 3-27-2018 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
4-18 4-24-2018 Subdivision of Land
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 300; Ch. 345
5-18 4-24-2018 Easement NCM
6-18 4-24-2018 Tax Exemption NCM
7-18 4-24-2018 Tax Exemption NCM
8-18 4-24-2018 Bond NCM
9-18 4-24-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 345
10-18 4-24-2018 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 103
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1110
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-18 5-10-2018 Flood Damage
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 177
12-18 6-12-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 78
13-18 8-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
14-18 8-8-2018 Tax Exemption NCM
15-18 8-8-2018 Street Vacation NCM
16-18 8-8-2018 Street Vacation NCM
17-18 8-8-2018 Dedication of Property NCM
18-18 8-8-2018 Mercantile Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 230
19-18 9-26-2018 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 5
20-18 9-26-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
21-18 11-15-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 173
22-18 Not introduced
23-18 11-15-2018 Tax Exemption NCM
24-18 11-15-2018 Property Maintenance:
Abandoned Property
List
Ch. 262, Art. III
25-18 11-15-2018 Property Maintenance:
Maintenance of Vacant
and Abandoned
Properties During
Foreclosure
Ch. 262, Art. IV
26-18 11-15-2018 Property Maintenance:
Registration of Vacant
Properties
Ch. 262, Art. V
27-18 12-26-2018 Lease of Carousel NCM
28-18 12-26-2018 Salaries NCM
29-18 12-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 345
30-18 1-9-2019 Solid Waste and
Recycling Amendment
Ch. 293
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1111
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-18 1-9-2019 Solid Waste and
Recycling Amendment
Ch. 293
1-19 2-27-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 103
2-19 3-27-2019 Financial Agreement NCM
3-19 3-27-2019 Bond NCM
4-19 3-27-2019 Heavy Equipment Use Ch. 195
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
5-19 4-24-2019 Balloons,
Intentional Release
of
Ch. 110 2
6-19 4-24-2019 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 2
7-19 5-22-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting: General
Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 256, Art.
I
2
8-19 6-12-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 78 2
9-19 6-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 345 2
10-19 6-12-2019 Taxation: Property
Tax Exemptions for
100% Disabled
Veterans
Ch. 306, Art.
IV
2
11-19 6-26-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 2
12-19 6-26-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 2
13-19 6-26-2019 Parking Lots and
Meters Amendment
Ch. 244 2
14-19 26-2019 Salaries NCM
15-19 7-24-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 2
16-19 8-14-2019 Street Vacation NCM 3
17-19 10-23-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 103 3
§ DL-1 LONG BRANCH CODE § DL-1
A351:1112
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-19 11-13-2019 Bond NCM 3
19-19 12-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 3
20-19 1-9-2020 Single Use Plastic
Bags
Ch. 111 3
1-20 1-22-2020 Salaries NCM 3
2-20 1-22-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 3
3-20 1-22-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325 3
4-20 2-12-2020 Dedication of Land NCM 3
5-20 2-12-2020 Street Vacation NCM 3
6-20 2-12-2020 Street Vacation NCM 3
7-20 2-12-2020 Dedication of Land NCM 3
8-20 2-12-2020 Dedication of Land NCM 3
9-20 2-12-2020 Street Vacation NCM 3
10-20 2-26-2020 Administration of
Government
Amendment;
Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment;
Animals
Amendment; Food
Establishments,
Retail Amendment;
Massage Parlors
Amendment;
Mercantile Licenses
Amendment; Solid
Waste and
Recycling
Amendment;
Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment;
Swimming Pools
Amendment
Ch. 5; Ch.
103; Ch. 109;
Ch. 181; Ch.
227; Ch. 230;
Ch. 293; Ch.
297; Ch. 303
3
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A351:1113