Part I, General Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 41-2001]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Millville of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Commissioners as
contained in the Revised General Ordinances of City of Millville 1989, as
amended, have been supplemented, revised and recodified into chapters,
articles and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. The Code shall
consist of Chapters 1 through 77, and are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of Millville," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code." The chapters and sections of the
1989 Revised General Ordinances are hereby distributed and renumbered
in the 2001 Code of the City of Millville as indicated on the Derivation Table
attached to and made a part of this ordinance.1
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
including the 1989 Revised General Ordinances, except such ordinances as
are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
35-2017]
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Millville
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Millville" shall
1. Editor's Note: Said Derivation Table is on file in the City offices.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing. [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 35-2017]
The Clerk of the City of Millville, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date. [Amended 10-3-2017 by
Ord. No. 35-2017]
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book. [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 35-2017]
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the Board of Commissioners. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Millville to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
§ 1-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 1-10
1:4
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 16, 2001.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the City's indebtedness.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, necessitated by the recodification into a new chapter and
article numbering system, to become effective upon the effective date
of this ordinance:
Chapter 1, General Provisions
Article II, Definitions and Construction
The following sections of former Chapter I, General, are deleted as
duplicative provisions exist in this ordinance or they are no longer
applicable under the organization and formatting of the 2001 Code:
A. Section 1-1, Short Title.
B. Section 1-4, Severability.
C. Section 1-5, Revised General Ordinances of the City of Millville
to be maintained by the City Clerk.
D. Subsection b, Divisions of the Revision, in Section 1-3,
Construction.
Section 1-15, the definition of "New Jersey Statutes Annotated or
Revised Statutes of New Jersey" is amended to delete "or Revised
Statutes of New Jersey" as the 2001 Code only uses N.J.S.A.
references.
Chapter 2, Administration
Article XI, Shade Tree Commission
§ 1-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 1-14
1:6
Section 2-49 is amended to delete former Subsection f reading as
follows: "This section shall be enacted under Chapter II, subsection
2-9.3 of the Municipal Code of the City of Millville and deleted from
Chapter XII, subsection 12-4.12 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Millville."
Chapter 11, Bureau of Permits and Inspections
Original Section 9-1, Bureau of Permits and Inspections, is deleted.
See now Article I of Chapter 11, Bureau of Permits and Inspections
Established.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Construction
[Adopted 3-20-1990 as Sections 1-1 through 1-5 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the City of Millville 1989]
§ 1-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the definitions contained in this section shall apply:
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of the City of Millville.
CITY — The City of Millville in the County of Cumberland and State of New
Jersey.
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The municipal clerk duly appointed pursuant to
law.
COUNTY — The County of Cumberland, State of New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the City government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the City government assigned to such
organizational unit by the City Council.
LAWS — Laws of the State of New Jersey.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES ANNOTATED (N.J.S.A.) — The official statute law
of the State of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OFFICER or OFFICIAL — The title of an officer or official shall be construed
as if the words "of the City of Millville" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any park, cemetery, school, yard or open space adjacent
thereto, and all rivers or other waterways.
SEAL — The City or corporate seal.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION OF A PERSON — Includes a mark when the
person cannot write.
STATE, THE STATE or THIS STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT; OCCUPANT — When applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part
of such buildings or lands, either alone or with others.
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Construction.
A. For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, the following definitions and rules of construction
shall be observed, except as the context may otherwise require:
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future, the present.
(2) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(3) The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.
(4) "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
(5) The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are
closed, that day shall be excluded.
(6) "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material
which is in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 1-16
1:10
(7) Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
(8) "And" may be read as "or" and "or" may be read as "and" where the
sense requires it.
(9) All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such persons or officers.
(10) Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code
shall be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as
amended, whether or not such designation is included in the
citation.
B. Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department of the City to do some act or make certain
inspections it shall be construed to authorize the head of the
department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the
terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
C. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of
this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater
restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed
by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or
regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
D. Name of official or officer. Whenever reference is made to an official,
board, commission, department, etc., by title only, it shall be construed
as though the words "of the City of Millville" were added.
E. Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to such meaning.
F. Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean
next before and next after, respectively.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 3-20-1990 as Section 1-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the City of Millville 1989]
§ 1-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this Code, or other
ordinance of the City unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
and every offense, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
90 days, or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or
any combination thereof, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance
of the City exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in the general penalty clause
of this section is not intended to state an appropriate penalty for each
and every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or
no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or a
particular violation.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Public Notary Service
[Adopted 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
§ 1-18. Public notary service and fees.
A. The office of the City Clerk is hereby authorized to provide notary
services to the public which shall be limited to five documents per
person.
B. A fee shall be charged in the sum of $2.50 per document notarized.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:15
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Permits and Inspections — See Ch.
11.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 46.
§ 1-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 1-18
1:16
ARTICLE I
Administrative Code Established
§ 2-1. Citation.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the City of Millville."
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:17

ARTICLE II
Board of Commissioners
§ 2-2. Election and organization. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.
5-2012]
§ 2-3. Departments and distribution of powers.
The Board of Commissioners shall have all the administrative, executive,
judicial and legislative powers and duties of the City, and shall have
complete control over the affairs of the City. The administrative, executive,
judicial and legislative powers, authority and duties of the City shall be
distributed into and among five departments as follows:
§ 2-4. Jurisdiction of Board of Commissioners over departments and
officers.
The Board of Commissioners shall determine the powers and duties to be
performed by each department and shall assign such powers and duties to
each department as it may deem appropriate. The Board of Commissioners
shall prescribe the powers and duties of all officers and employees and
may assign particular officers and employees to one or more departments
and may require any officer or employee to perform duties in two or more
departments if the work required of such officer or employee in such
different departments be similar in character. The Board of Commissioners
also shall make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary or
proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the business of the City.
A. The City of Millville shall conduct nonpartisan regular municipal
elections on the day of the general election in November beginning with
the calendar year 2013.
B. The Board of Commissioners of the City of Millville shall consist of five
Commissioners, who shall be elected at large by the voters of the
municipality at a regular municipal election and shall serve for a term
of four years beginning on the earliest date authorized by state law
following the election. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 19-2013]
C. The Board of Commissioners currently holding office shall continue in
office until the reorganization of a new Commission is made following
the general election in November of 2013, when their term in office
shall expire.
A. Department of Public Affairs.
B. Department of Revenue and Finance.
C. Department of Public Safety.
D. Department of Public Works.
E. Department of Parks and Public Property.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:19
§ 2-5. Assignment of Commissioners to departments. [Amended
2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2016]
At the annual reorganization meeting held in the first week of January
following the November election of the Board of Commissioners or any
members thereof, the Board shall designate by a majority vote one
Commissioner to be Director of the Department of Public Affairs, one
Commissioner to be Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance,
one Commissioner to be Director of the Department of Public Safety, one
Commissioner to be Director of the Department of Public Works, and one
Commissioner to be Director of the Department of Parks and Public
Property.
§ 2-6. Meetings and procedures. [Amended 2-16-2015 by Ord. No.
4-2016]
A. The Board of Commissioners shall hold an annual reorganization
meeting during the first week of January pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:45A-1.
B. Regular meetings. The Board of Commissioners shall hold its regular
meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month. When the time
for any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, as prescribed by law, the
meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day
which is not a legal holiday.
C. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Board of Commissioners may
be held on call of the Mayor or any two Commissioners in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:72-13.
D. Quorum. A majority of all members of the Board of Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting, but a lesser
number than a quorum may adjourn the meeting. If no member of the
Board of Commissioners is present within 1/2 hour after the appointed
time of any meeting, the City Clerk shall adjourn the meeting.
E. Procedure. Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, the proceedings at the meetings of the Board of
Commissioners shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Order. The City Attorney shall be the ex officio parliamentarian and
shall be prepared to give his opinion on any question of procedure at
the request of any Commissioner.
F. Attendance. All regular and special meetings of the Board of
Commissioners shall be open to the public. The City Attorney, the City
Clerk and any other municipal officer or employee shall attend such
meetings if requested by any Commissioner.
G. Agenda. The agenda for each regular and special meeting of the Board
of Commissioners shall be prepared by the City Clerk. Except for
emergency matters which may be added to the agenda at any time, the
agenda for each regular meeting or special meeting of the Board of
Commissioners shall include only those matters of business as have
§ 2-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-6
1:20
been presented or delivered to the City Clerk not later than 24 hours
preceding the meeting. As soon as the agenda for each meeting is
prepared, the City Clerk shall deliver a copy to each Commissioner.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:21

ARTICLE III
Mayor
§ 2-7. Selection of Mayor by Commissioners.
At the first regular meeting after their election, the Board of Commissioners
shall choose one of their number to preside at all meetings of the Board.
That person shall be designated "Mayor."
§ 2-8. Powers of Mayor.
The Mayor shall be president of the Board of Commissioners and shall
preside at its meetings, but he shall have no power to veto any measure.
§ 2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:23

ARTICLE IV
City Offices
§ 2-9. City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk.
§ 2-10. City Administrator. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010;
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 10-2016]
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a
City Clerk for a term of three years who shall have tenure after three
consecutive years in office and reappointment.
B. The City Clerk shall perform those duties authorized by state law, and
such other duties authorized by the governing body of the City. The City
Clerk shall receive a salary as set forth in the Annual Salary Ordinance.
C. There is hereby created the office of Deputy City Clerk who shall
perform those duties assigned by the City Clerk. During the absence or
disability of the City Clerk, the Deputy City Clerk shall have all the
powers of the City Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties of
that office.
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, the City Clerk shall have the following
powers and duties to perform:
(1) Act as secretary of the municipal corporation, custodian of the
municipal Seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts,
and archival records of the municipal corporation;
(2) Act as secretary to the governing body, prepare meeting agendas at
the discretion of the governing body, be present at all meetings of
the governing body, keep a journal of the proceedings of every
meeting, retain the original copies of all ordinances and
resolutions, and record the minutes of every meeting;
(3) Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
municipality, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes;
(4) Serve as chief registrar of voters in the municipality, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes;
(5) Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance
of applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses
and permits, except where statute or municipal ordinance has
delegated that responsibility to some other municipal officer;
(6) Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes;
(7) Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by
statute, regulation or by municipal ordinance or regulation.
§ 2-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:25
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., the office of the City
Administrator is hereby created. The City Administrator shall exercise
those executive responsibilities of the municipality as delegated herein.
B. The City Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
governing body of the municipality pursuant a resolution. The term of
office of the City Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the governing
body.
C. The City Administrator may be removed from office only by a 2/3 vote of
the governing body pursuant to a resolution. The resolution of removal
shall become effective three months after its adoption by the governing
body. The governing body may provide that the resolution shall have an
immediate effect; provided, however, that the governing body shall
cause to be paid to the Administrator any unpaid balance of his or her
salary plus the next three calendar months following the adoption of the
resolution.
D. The City Administrator shall receive a salary as set forth in the Annual
Salary Ordinance. The office of City Administrator may be filled by
resolution on either a full-time or part-time basis as may be determined
by the governing body to be in the best interest of the municipality.
E. The City Administrator shall, at a minimum, be experienced in local
government affairs and administration as well as having demonstrated
managerial talent and experience.
F. The City Administrator is the Chief Administrative Officer of the
municipality and is responsible for the efficient administration of all of
the affairs of the municipality. As such, the person appointed to this
position shall be responsible for the following duties:
(1) Assist Commissioners. Assist individual Commissioners when
requested to do so to carry out the functions and mission of their
respective departments.
(2) Budget. Cooperate with the Chief Financial Officer in the drafting
and revision of the proposed annual budget as directed by the
Director of Revenue and Finance.
(3) Collective bargaining negotiations. Participate in negotiations with
employee collective bargaining units.
(4) Delivery of municipal services. Coordinate, direct and plan,
through the department heads and superintendents, the various
activities, affairs and services of the municipality as determined by
the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Efficient operation of departments. Provide the appropriate level of
coordination, direction, information and support to department
heads to effectuate the efficient operation of their departments.
§ 2-10 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-10
1:26
§ 2-11. City Attorney and Assistant City Attorney.
(6) Liaison. Serve as liaison between the Board of Commissioners,
department heads, and the various agencies of other governmental
authorities such as county, state and federal to advance the
activities, goals, plans, and services of the municipality and to
facilitate the daily work of the administrative staff.
(7) Ordinances and resolutions. Recommend the adoption of
ordinances and resolutions deemed necessary and appropriate for
the best interests of the municipality.
(8) Organizational structure. Help establish and maintain an
organizational structure for the various departments and units of
municipal government in the interest of the economical and
efficient conduct of the municipal affairs governed by the Board of
Commissioners.
(9) Personnel policies. Administer, enforce and interpret the personnel
policies adopted by the Board of Commissioners, and oversee the
process of promotion, demotion, discipline and discharge of any
and all officers and employees of the municipality. However, the
Commissioner who is assigned as the Director of a particular City
Department as per § 2-5 shall be considered as the appointing
authority for all purposes in that Department including the signing
of personnel forms for employees of said department.
(10) Reports. Provide regular reports to the Board of Commissioners on
municipal operations, plans and projects.
G. The City Administrator shall be assigned to the Department of Revenue
and Finance, but shall have responsibility to and duties regarding all
agencies and departments within the City.
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a
City Attorney for a term of one year who shall be the chief legal officer
of the City.
B. The City Attorney shall perform those duties authorized by the
governing body of the City. He shall receive a salary as set forth in the
Annual Salary Ordinance, and such additional compensation for special
services as set forth in a professional service contract approved by
resolution of the governing body of the City.
C. The governing body of the City may appoint an Assistant City Attorney
to hold office for and during the term of the City Attorney.
D. The Assistant City Attorney shall perform those duties authorized by the
governing body of the City and assigned to him by the City Attorney.
The Assistant City Attorney shall receive a salary as set forth in the
Annual Salary Ordinance, and such additional compensation for special
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11
1:27
§ 2-12. City Engineer.
§ 2-13. Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-14. Tax Collector.
§ 2-15. Tax Assessor.
services as set forth in a professional service contract approved by
resolution of the governing body of the City.
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a
City Engineer for a term of three years who shall be the chief
engineering officer of the City.
B. The City Engineer shall perform those duties authorized by the
governing body of the City. He shall receive a salary as set forth in the
Annual Salary Ordinance, or as set forth in a professional service
contract approved by resolution of the governing body of the City.
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a
Chief Financial Officer for a term of four years who shall have tenure
after four consecutive years in office and reappointment.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall perform those duties authorized by
state law, and such other duties authorized by the governing body of the
City. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive a salary as set forth in the
Annual Salary Ordinance.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1, the Chief Financial Officer shall be
responsible for the proper financial administration of the City under the
Local Government Supervision Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-1 et seq.), the
Local Bond Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.), the Local Budget Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.), the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1
et seq.), the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq.), and
such other statutes and such rules and regulations promulgated by the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services, the Local
Finance Board, or any other state agency as may pertain to the financial
administration of the City.
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a Tax
Collector for a term of four years who shall have tenure after four
consecutive years in office and reappointment.
B. The Tax Collector shall perform those duties authorized by state law,
and such other duties as shall be authorized by the governing body of
the City. The Tax Collector shall receive a salary as set forth in the
Annual Salary Ordinance.
A. Pursuant to state law, the governing body of the City shall appoint a Tax
Assessor for a term of four years who shall have tenure after four
consecutive years in office and reappointment.
§ 2-11 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-15
1:28
B. The Tax Assessor shall perform those duties authorized by state law,
which shall include preparing the assessment rolls and extending the
tax duplicates with the amount of tax compted on each assessment
together with such other duites authorized by the governing body of the
City. The Tax Assessor shall receive a salary as set forth in the Annual
Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-15
1:29

ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 2-16. Municipal Court established.
§ 2-17. Judge of Municipal Court.
A. The Municipal Court of the City of Millville is hereby established. The
Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the name of the
Court.
B. The territorial jurisdiction of the Court shall be the territory embraced
within the City of Millville, and the Court shall have the subject matter
jurisdiction as provided in the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
C. The practice and procedure of the Court shall be substantially as
provided by N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 and 2A:8-41 both inclusive, subject to such
rules as the Supreme Court shall promulgate and make applicable to
the Municipal Courts, which rules shall supersede (so far as they
conflict with) statutory and common law regulations theretofore
existing.
D. The Board of Commissioners may provide by resolution for such court
personnel as may be necessary for the proper operation of the
Municipal Court and shall provide for their compensation.
E. The Board of Commissioners shall provide for the necessary
accommodations and supplies for the Municipal Court.
A. The Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Court Judge who shall
be an attorney at law qualified to serve under the rules of the New
Jersey Supreme Court. Pursuant to state law, the Judge of the Municipal
Court shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners to serve a term
of three years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualify.
[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
B. He shall be paid a salary as stated in the Annual Salary Ordinance,
which salary shall be paid at the same times and in the same manner as
the salaries of other officials of the City are or shall be paid, and which
salary shall be in lieu of any and all other fees and shall not be
diminished during his term of office.
C. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall, before entering upon the
performance of the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath in
substantially the same manner as provided in N.J.S.A. 41:2A-6 and
41:1-3.
D. The Municipal Court Judge, who shall be an attorney at law, shall not
practice law in, nor upon any appeal from, any Municipal Court in the
County of Cumberland.
§ 2-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:31
§ 2-18. Administrator of Municipal Court.
E. Whenever the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be unable to sit, he
may designate any other judge of any Municipal Court or an attorney at
law of this state to sit for him temporarily and hold the Municipal Court.
Any such designation shall be in writing and shall be filed in the Court,
and any such person so designated, while sitting temporarily, shall have
all of the powers of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
A. Appointment. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court
who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners. He shall receive
a salary as provided by the Annual Salary Ordinance and which shall be
in lieu of any fees.
B. Municipal Court Administrator to devote entire time to duties. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall daily during business hours devote
his entire time and attention to the duties of his office, and to such other
duties as may be assigned to him by the Board of Commissioners.
C. Accounts of Municipal Court Administrator. The accounts of the
Municipal Court Administrator shall be kept and moneys accounted for
substantially as provided by the Administrative Director of the Courts.
D. Municipal Court Administrator to take oath and give bond. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall before entering upon the duties of
his office take and subscribe an oath in substantially the same manner
as provided by N.J.S.A. 41:1-3. He shall before entering upon the duties
of his office enter into a bond to the City in substantially the same form
as provided by the Administrative Director of the Courts.
E. Municipal Court Administrator to be custodian of records. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall be legal custodian of, and
responsible for, all books, papers, records, seal, moneys and other
property appertaining to the Municipal Court of Millville.
F. Municipal Court Administrator to keep docket. The Municipal Court
Administrator shall keep a docket which shall be a record of all
proceedings in the Municipal Court, and entries in this docket, when a
civil action or proceeding is commenced, shall be substantially as
provided by the Administrative Director of the Courts. When a criminal
or quasi-criminal action or proceeding is commenced, the docket shall
contain the following:
(1) A true copy of the charge;
(2) The date of service upon the defendant;
(3) The amount of bond required;
(4) The pleas of the defendant;
(5) The disposition of the cause; and
§ 2-17 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-18
1:32
§ 2-19. Municipal Public Defender. [Amended 7-21-2009 by Ord. No.
24-2009]
(6) Any and all other proceedings.
G. Municipal Court Administrator authorized to hold to bail. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall have the power in criminal cases to hold
defendants to appear before the court having jurisdiction to hear the
matter by taking recognizances of bail with surety or sureties in such
reasonable sum as he may deem fit and to forward the same to the said
court before the time of appearance therein mentioned, which said
power shall be exercisable in the same manner and subject to the same
limitations as in the case of the Judge of the court before which any
such defendant shall be required to appear.
H. Municipal Court Administrator not to receive fee for drawing papers,
etc. The Municipal Court Administrator shall not receive any fee or
reward for drawing any papers, or for rendering or promising to render
special services in connection with any action brought in the Municipal
Court.
I. No charge for filing of papers of City. No charge shall be made by the
Administrator of the Municipal Court for the filing or service of any
papers for which a fee is provided by law for civil cases in the Municipal
Court of Millville where the party filing the paper or requesting the
service is the City or a City official acting in his official capacity, or a
City department, board, body or commission.
J. Disposition of fines and costs. The costs and fees charged against
defendants in the Municipal Court, when collected, shall be turned over
to the Chief Financial Officer. The amount of such fees and costs shall
be as provided by law, and the fines and penalties imposed in the
Municipal Court shall be disposed of as provided by law.
K. Appointment of temporary Deputy Administrator. In the event of illness,
absence or disability of the Clerk, the Judge may appoint a Deputy
Administrator who shall be sworn to be faithful to the performance of
the duties of the office. Such Deputy shall sign the name of the
Administrator to and issue any writs or documents of this Court during
such illness, absence or disability of the Administrator, and any writs or
documents so signed and issued shall be as valid in law as if signed and
issued personally by such Administrator. The Administrator shall be
responsible for the acts of such Deputy Administrator. During the
illness, absence or disability of the Administrator, the Deputy
Administrator shall succeed to the emoluments of office of the
Administrator and shall be subject to the provisions of this article
pertaining to the Administrator. Such appointee shall have the approval
of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19
1:33
A. Legal authority. The Office of Municipal Public Defender is hereby
established in accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
2B:24-1 et seq.
B. Appointment. The Municipal Court of the City of Millville shall have at
least one municipal public defender appointed by the governing body of
the municipality in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and
resolutions. Any municipal court with two or more municipal public
defenders shall have a Chief Municipal Public Defender who shall be
appointed by the governing body of the municipality. The Chief
Municipal Public Defender shall have authority over other municipal
public defenders serving that court with respect to the performance of
their duties.
C. Qualifications. A municipal public defender shall be an attorney at law
of this state in good standing and shall serve for a term of one year from
the date of his or her appointment. A municipal public defender may
continue to serve in office pending reappointment or the appointment
of a successor. A municipal public defender need not reside in the
municipality where he or she acts as a municipal public defender.
D. Additional municipal public defenders. The municipality may appoint
additional municipal public defenders as necessary to administer
justice in a timely and effective manner in the Municipal Court. The
appointment shall be made in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances and resolutions. Appointments to fill vacancies in the
position of municipal public defender shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of applicable state law as soon as practicable.
E. Removal from office. A municipal public defender may be removed from
office by the governing body of the municipality for good cause shown
and after a public hearing and upon due notice and an opportunity to be
heard. Failure to reappoint a municipal public defender for a second or
subsequent term does not constitute a removal from office within the
meaning of the applicable state law.
F. Compensation. A municipal public defender shall receive
compensation, either on an hourly, per diem, annual or other basis, as
the municipality may provide. The ordinance, resolution or agreement
setting compensation shall set forth any additional compensation to be
paid for interlocutory appeals in the Superior Court.
G. Duties of public defender. It shall be the duty of the municipal public
defender to represent any defendant charged with an offense in the
Municipal Court who is an indigent municipal defendant entitled to
representation in accordance with applicable law. This duty shall be
carried out except in the case of temporary unavailability or conflict of
interest. All necessary services and facilities of representation,
including both expert and lay investigation and testimony, as well as
other preparation, shall be provided. The municipality shall be
responsible for payment of services pursuant to applicable state law.
§ 2-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-19
1:34
§ 2-20. Discovery in Municipal Court.
The factors of need and real value to a defendant may be weighed
against the financial constraints of the municipality in determining
the necessary services and facilities of representation. The final
determination as to necessity of services required shall be made by the
court.
H. Defendant is entitled to a public defender. If there is a vacancy in the
Office of Municipal Public Defender, if the municipal public defender is
temporarily unavailable or if a finding of conflict of interest precludes
the municipal public defender from representing an indigent defendant,
the Municipal Court shall appoint a qualified attorney to represent the
indigent defendant.
I. Eligibility for services of public defender. Eligibility for services of the
municipal public defender shall be determined by the Municipal Court
on the basis of the need of the defendant, except as otherwise provided
by state law. The need shall be measured according to applicable state
law and guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court.
J. Partial payment for services. If the defendant has, or reasonably
expects to have, means to meet some part of the cost of the services
rendered, the defendant shall be required to reimburse the municipality
that part of the cost of the services rendered. The payment may be
made by a single payment or in installments in such amount as the
defendant can be reasonably expected to pay. However, no default or
failure to make payments shall affect or reduce the rendering of
services.
K. Authority to collect moneys. The authority to collect moneys from the
defendant is set forth in Subsections 13 through 16 of the applicable
state statute. The municipal attorney is authorized to compromise and
settle any claim for services performed pursuant to this act whenever
the financial circumstances of the person receiving the services are
such that the best interest of the state will be served by compromise
and settlement.
L. Application fee. A person applying for representation by a municipal
public defender or court-approved counsel shall pay an application fee
of not more than $200. The Municipal Court may waive the application
fee, in whole or in part, only if the court determines upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee represents
an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The
municipal court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time not to exceed four months.
A. The Municipal Prosecutor is responsible for providing discovery to the
defendant in the Millville Municipal Court.
§ 2-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:35
B. The Municipal Prosecutor is authorized to charge a fee for the
discovery requests made by the individual defendants or attorneys
representing individual defendants in the Municipal Court. Said fee
shall be charged in accordance with the Public Open Record Act,
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. See also Article XIII of this chapter. [Amended
2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
§ 2-20 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-20
1:36
ARTICLE VI
Emergency Management Council
[Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 37-2001]
§ 2-21. Statutory authority and creation.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41, the local
Emergency Management Council is hereby created. It shall be composed of
nine members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office at
the will and pleasure of the appointing authority.
§ 2-22. Powers and duties of Local Emergency Management
Council.
§ 2-23. Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator.
The Director of Public Safety shall appoint a municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator from among the residents of the City, who shall
serve for a term of three years. As a condition of his appointment and his
right to continue for the full term of his appointment, he shall complete the
training required by N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1.
§ 2-24. Powers and duties of municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator.
A. The local Emergency Management Council shall assist the City in
establishing the various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the
requirement of all local emergency management activities in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the governor
of the state. The local Emergency Management Council is authorized,
within the limits of appropriations, to establish an adequate
organization to assist in supervising and coordinating the emergency
management activities of the City.
B. The local Emergency Management Council shall prepare a written
Emergency Operations Plan with all appropriate annexes necessary to
implement the plan. The plan shall conform to all relevant federal and
state statutes, rules and regulations concerning emergency operations
and shall include the identification of significant hazards affecting the
City. The plan shall be based upon planning criteria, objectives,
requirements, responsibilities and concepts of operation for the
implementation of all necessary and appropriate protective or remedial
measures to be taken in response to an actual or threatened emergency
as determined by the State Director of Emergency Management. The
Plan shall be reviewed and updated at least every two years.
A. The municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member
of the local Emergency Management Council and shall serve as its
Chairman. He shall be responsible for the planning, activating,
§ 2-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:37
coordinating and the conduct of emergency management operations
within the City.
B. Whenever the municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall
determine that a disaster has occurred or is imminent within the City,
he shall proclaim a state of local disaster emergency. In accordance
with the regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency
Management, he shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders
as may be necessary to implement and carry out emergency
management operations and to protect the health, safety, and resources
of the residents of the City.
§ 2-24 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-24
1:38
ARTICLE VII
Housing Authority
[Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 37-2001]
§ 2-25. Statutory authority and creation.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17, the Housing
Authority of the City of Millville is hereby created as a body corporate and
shall have those powers authorized by state law.
§ 2-26. Members of the Housing Authority.
§ 2-27. Certification of appointment.
A certificate of appointment or reappointment of any member shall be filed
with the City Clerk, and that certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the
due and proper appointment of that member.
§ 2-28. Powers of the Housing Authority.
The powers of the Housing Authority shall be vested in the members thereof
in office from time to time. Four members shall constitute a quorum of
the Authority for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its
powers and all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon
the affirmative vote of the majority, but not less than four of the members
present, unless the bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger number.
The Authority shall select a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its
members, and shall employ an Executive Director who shall be its Secretary.
§ 2-29. Members to serve without compensation.
No member of the Housing Authority shall receive compensation for their
services, but he or she shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual
expenses necessarily incurred in the discharge of the duties of membership,
including travel expenses.
A. The Housing Authority shall consist of seven members who shall be
appointed as follows: five members shall be appointed by the governing
body of the City; one member shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
City; and one member shall be appointed by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs.
B. The members shall serve for terms of five years and until their
respective successors have been appointed and qualified. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments were
made, but for the unexpired term. No more than one member of the
Housing Authority may be an officer or employee of the City.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-30
1:39
§ 2-30. Removal from office.
A member of the Housing Authority may be removed from office by the
governing body of the City or the officer by whom the member was
appointed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office. But
a member may be removed only after he or she has been given a copy of
the charges at least 10 days prior to a hearing thereon and has had the
opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. In the event of the removal
of any member of the Housing Authority, a record of the proceedings,
together with the charges and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk.
§ 2-30 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-30
1:40
ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)2
§ 2-31. through § 2-35. (Reserved)
2. Editor’s Note: Former Art. VIII, Industrial Commission, amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
37-2001, was repealed 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 18-2018.
§ 2-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31
1:41

ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)3
3. Editor's Note: Former Art. IX, Local Assistance Board, was repealed 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
37-2001.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31
1:43

ARTICLE X
Purchasing Board
[Amended 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]
§ 2-36. Statutory authority and creation.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9, the Purchasing
Board of the City of Millville is hereby created having the powers
enumerated in the statute, subject to the limitations set forth herein.
§ 2-37. Members of the Purchasing Board.
§ 2-38. Advertisement for bids.
All advertisements for bids pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. shall
designate the time and place of the meeting at which the Purchasing
Board shall receive bids. Whenever possible, the advertisement for bids
shall determine an hour for receiving bids between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 3:30 p.m. from Monday through Friday, and no bids shall be opened
previous to the hour designated in the advertisement and none shall be
received thereafter.
§ 2-39. Duties.
§ 2-40. Limitations.
The Purchasing Board shall not exercise those powers and duties reserved
to the Purchasing Agent by state law.
A. The Purchasing Board shall consist of five members which shall include
the City Clerk, City Engineer, Chief Financial Officer and two other
administrators selected by the City Clerk.
B. The governing body reserves the right to appoint all five members of
the Purchasing Board by resolution if it so chooses.
A. The Purchasing Board shall be authorized to receive such bids as may
be presented and immediately proceed to unseal them and publicly
announce the contents in the presence of the parties bidding or their
agents, if they choose to be then and there present.
B. The Purchasing Board shall keep accurate and complete minutes on all
bids received and shall comply with the applicable provisions of state
law. The Purchasing Board shall make proper record of the prices and
terms of all bids in the minutes of the body.
C. After the bids are received, read and recorded, they shall be turned
over to the City Engineer for tabulation and recommendation to the City
Commission.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40
1:45

ARTICLE XI
Shade Tree Commission
§ 2-41. Statutory authority and creation. [Amended 11-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 32-2002]
In accordance with the provisions N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., the Shade Tree
Commission of the City of Millville is hereby created having the powers
enumerated in these statutes.
§ 2-42. Members of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 2-43. Trimming of trees. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
41-2001]
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by the Mayor in the manner and for the terms specified by
state law.
B. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the
full term of five years, to take effect on January 1 of the year of
appointment.
C. Appointments to fill vacancies occurring on the Commission shall be for
the unexpired term.
D. The Mayor is authorized to appoint two alternate members who shall be
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," who shall serve
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or
members.
E. The initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be five years which shall
commence on January 1 of the year of appointment. The initial term of
Alternate No. 2 shall be four years which shall commence on January 1
of the year of appointment. All subsequent appointments shall be for
five years.
A. The owner of lands abutting all streets, lanes and alleys of the City, shall
between February 1 and July 1 of each year, cut off all limbs and
branches and trim said trees to not less than 10 feet in height
measuring from the curb or sidewalk where each tree is standing.
B. Whenever the Shade Tree Commission shall determine that a tree
needs to be trimmed in accordance with the previous subsection, the
Shade Tree Commission shall notify, in writing, the owner of the land to
effect the necessary trimming. Said trimming shall be made within 30
days from the date of service of the written notice.
C. In the event that a tree is not trimmed within 30 days after written
notice has been served on the landowner to effect the trimming, the
Shade Tree Commission may procure the trimming at its own expense.
All costs expended therefor shall become a lien upon the real estate of
§ 2-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43
1:47
§ 2-44. Removal of trees.
the landowner in the same manner as taxes are a lien. The cost thereof
shall be certified to the Tax Collector, and said costs shall be included
in the next tax bill rendered to the landowner.
D. In the event that the landowner has failed to effect the necessary
trimming of the trees within 30 days of the service of the written notice,
a formal complaint may be filed by the Shade Tree Commission against
the landowner with the Municipal Court for enforcement of this section.
The Municipal Court, in its discretion, may impose penalties as
prescribed by Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, General
Penalty, and in addition, may impose restitution in favor of the Shade
Tree Commission for all moneys expended to effect the trimming of the
trees.
E. This section shall not apply to trees abutting the streets, lanes and
alleys owned by the State of New Jersey or the County of Cumberland
unless the State Department of Transportation or the County of
Cumberland shall assent to the trimming of the trees.
A. The owner of land abutting any street, lane or alley of the City shall
remove any tree, or part thereof, that is dangerous to public safety.
B. Whenever the Shade Tree Commission shall determine that a tree, or
part thereof, must be removed because it is dangerous to public safety,
the Shade Tree Commission shall notify, in writing, the owner of the
land abutting the street, lane or alley of the City where the tree is
located to effect the removal. Said removal shall be made within 30
days from the date of service of the written notice.
C. In the event that a tree, or part thereof, is not removed within 30 days
after written notice has been served on the landowner to effect the
removal, the Shade Tree Commission may procure the removal at its
own expense. All costs expended therefor shall become a lien upon the
real estate of the landowner in the same manner as taxes are a lien. The
cost thereof shall be certified to the Tax Collector, and said costs shall
be included in the next tax bill rendered to the landowner.
D. In the event that the landowner has failed to effect the necessary
removal of the tree within 30 days of the service of the written notice, a
formal complaint may be filed by the Shade Tree Commission against
the landowner with the Municipal Court for enforcement of this section.
The Municipal Court, in its discretion, may impose penalties as
prescribed by Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, General
Penalty, and in addition, may impose restitution in favor of the Shade
Tree Commission for all moneys expended to effect the removal of the
trees.
E. This section shall not apply to trees abutting the streets, lanes and
alleys owned by the State of New Jersey or the County of Cumberland
§ 2-43 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-44
1:48
unless the State Department of Transportation or the County of
Cumberland shall assent to the removal of the trees.
§ 2-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44
1:49

ARTICLE XII
Cooperative Pricing Agreement
§ 2-45. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the City of Millville."
§ 2-46. Authorization to enter agreement with county.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the City of Millville is
hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the
County of Cumberland for the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
§ 2-47. County compliance with statute.
The County of Cumberland entering into contracts on behalf of the City of
Millville shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 2-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47
1:51

ARTICLE XIII
Public Access to Government Records4
§ 2-48. Policy. [Amended 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 40-2019]
The City presently provides public records to citizens, residents and other
applicable individuals on an as-needed basis as such requests come to
individual departments. The City recognizes the need to provide these
individuals with good customer service while still upholding the laws which
pertain to proper dissemination of government records. The City now
wishes to create a centralized policy as to determining whether records are
public in nature; the viability and consequences of the Open Public Records
Act N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et seq., and Common Law Right of Access, and to
determine how, when and if the public can obtain such records.
§ 2-49. Requests for public records. [Added 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
40-20195]
Public officials need to examine both statute and common law in making
a determination whether a request from the public for documents is valid.
Even if the document would be exempt under statute, and in particular the
Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et seq.), it may well be that
the public has a right to the document based on the Common Law Right of
Access. All records requests can be made during regular business hours. If
a request for records is made via electronic mail or facsimile after regular
business hours, the request is considered received the following business
day.
A. Requests for government records made under the Open Public Records
Act N.J.S.A. 47:1-1.1 et seq., must be done so in writing to the City Clerk
who is the Records Custodian for the City. A response in writing is
required within seven business days. All other Open Public Records Act
requirements listed under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et seq., must be followed
in accordance with state law for these requests. These types of requests
put the burden on the Records Custodian of justifying withholding the
documents requested. It defines records broadly and imposes time
limits for making the records available.
(1) All departments are to respond to the City Clerk by the fifth
business day for responses to requests made under the Open Public
Records Act (OPRA) to ensure enough time for proper review,
redactions, if necessary, or denial of record(s).
(2) Department heads shall notify the City Clerk, in writing, as soon as
it is determined that an extension of time is necessary to produce
requested documents under OPRA. A reason for same shall be
provided to the City Clerk, also in writing.
4. Editor's Note: See also Art. XVIII, Retention and Destruction of Public Records.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 2-49, Custodian of records and
records request form.
§ 2-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-49
1:53
B. Requests for government records made under Common Law Right of
Access require the requester to have a legally recognized interest in the
subject matter contained in the material; then the material must be
disclosed if the individual's right of access outweighs the City's interest
in preventing disclosure.
(1) Requests under common law can be made to the respective
department which houses the record. If there are questions
concerning the possible need to withhold or redact the record, the
department head shall first seek the guidance of the City Clerk.
(2) Every effort should be made to provide records requested under
Common Law Right of Access in a timely manner. The requester
shall be provided a tentative date for when the records can be
expected to be produced. This tentative date shall factor in whether
records will need to be retrieved from off-site storage.
C. All requests for records shall be as specific as possible to the City.
D. All requests for records, except for requests by City employees/officials,
or records requests made under the Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1.1) shall be subject to the City's policy as to copying costs.
E. The following records, or types of records, which are not public and
shall not be made available to the public include but are not limited to
the following:
(1) All records exempted by state and/or federal statutes, rules and/or
regulations;
(2) All records exempted by presidential and/or gubernatorial
executive order;
(3) All records which are not included in the definition of "public
record" pursuant to the Open Public Records Act pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et seq.
(4) City Commission open session minutes shall not be considered
public records until such time as they are approved by the City
Commission. City Commission closed session minutes shall not be
considered public records until such time as they are approved by
the City Commission and the matter(s) in question have been
concluded pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(5) Not all request for records do, in fact, lead to the copying, review
and/or release of such records. A record may be a public record
under common law but may not be a public record under the Open
Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1 et seq.) or it may be or may
not be a public record under any other legal statute, rules,
regulations and/or court decision. The City Clerk shall seek the
opinion of the City Attorney as to whether or not a record is public
§ 2-49 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-49
1:54
§ 2-50. through § 2-50.3. (Reserved)6
§ 2-50.4. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of government
records. [Amended 1-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005; 2-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 7-2005; 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 35-2007; 12-2-2014 by Ord. No.
41-2014; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No.
27-2017]
Copies of government records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by
law or regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall
be as set forth below, which is the estimated actual cost of duplicating the
record. However, where the actual costs for duplication of a record exceeds
the rates set below, the actual cost shall be imposed.
if there is any question as to its release. The City Clerk's actions on
this type of matter shall be guided by such legal opinion.
A. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in
size.
(1) One to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleven to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
(3) All over 20: $0.25 per page.
B. Large-size paper documents and maps.
(1) Crime map: $3 per page.
(2) Drug-Free Zones Map: $3 per page.
(3) Street map: $3 per page.
(4) Tax Maps: $3 per page.
(5) Ward and district map: $3 per page.
(6) Zoning Map: $3 per page.
(7) Engineering plans: $3 per page.
(8) Site plan: $3 per page.
(9) Subdivision plat: $3 per page.
C. Certified copies of documents.
(1) Vital statistics documents:
(a) Birth certificate: $15 each.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 2-50, Inspection and copying of public records; § 2-50.1, Time
limits for compliance; § 2-50.2, Posting of appeals procedure; and § 2-50.3, Viewing of
government records; removal prohibited; were repealed 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 40-2019.
§ 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-50.4
1:55
(b) Marriage certificate: $15 each.
(c) Death certificate: $25 (for first certificate); additional death
certificates: $2 each.
D. Police reports and photographs.
(1) Police accident reports if requested and picked up in person: same
as in Subsection A above.
(2) Police accident reports when requested other than in person: same
as in Subsection A above and an additional fee of $5 pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-131, plus actual cost of postage and $0.25 for the
envelope.
(3) Photographs: $1 per photograph.
E. Electronic records.
(1) CD: $25.
(2) DVD: $25.
F. Fire reports and photographs.
(1) Fire reports if requested and picked up in person: same as in
Subsection A above.
(2) Fire reports when requested and sent by mail: same as in
Subsection A above, plus actual cost of postage and $0.25 for the
envelope.
(3) Photographs: $1 per photograph.
G. Municipal searches.
(1) Assessment search: $10.
(2) Lien search: $10.
H. List of names and addresses of property owners.
(1) Notice of hearing requiring public notice to property owners
located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the
subject of the hearing: $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater
for the list.
(2) Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
proposing a change to the classification of a zoning district to
property owners located within 200 feet in all directions of the
boundaries of the district: $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is
greater for the list.
(3) Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
proposing a change to the boundaries of a zoning district to
§ 2-50.4 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-50.4
1:56
property owners located within 200 feet in all directions of the
proposed new boundaries of the district which is the subject of the
hearing: $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater for the list.
I. Preprinted documents, if available.
(1) Land Use and Development Regulations: $50.
(2) Master Plan: $50.
J. A special service charge shall be imposed where the nature, format,
manner of collation or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary
business size or where such record involves an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request. The
requester shall have the opportunity to review and object to the special
service charge prior to it being incurred. The special service charge
shall be calculated on the base hourly rate set in the Salary Ordinance
for the City employee performing the task times the number of hours it
took to perform the task.
K. A deposit shall be paid by the requester at the time that the request for
copying of government records is made. The amount of the deposit shall
equal the total estimated cost of filling the request.
§ 2-50.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-50.4
1:57

ARTICLE XIV
Disbursements of Funds
§ 2-51. Receipts paid to Chief Financial Officer.
All moneys received from any source by or on behalf of the City or by any
board or department thereof, except school moneys, shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-52. Detailed bill with affidavit.
It shall not be lawful for the Board of Commissioners or the Chief Financial
Officer of the City to pay out or disburse any of the moneys of the City of
Millville to any person, unless the person claiming or receiving such moneys
shall first present to the Board of Commissioners a detailed bill of items of
demand, specifying particularly how the bill is made up, with the affidavit
of the party claiming the money, provided that, in the case of a corporation,
the affidavit shall be made by some officer or agent of the corporation
appearing to have knowledge of the facts sworn to.
§ 2-53. Disbursement of moneys.
All warrants for the disbursement of moneys of the City shall be drawn by
the Chief Financial Officer and signed by the Mayor, and countersigned by
the Director of Revenue and Finance and the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-54. Approval of Board of Commissioners. [Amended 5-21-2019
by Ord. No. 30-2019]
A. No moneys shall be paid by any officer of this City to any person, firm or
corporation except as above provided until such payments shall have
been submitted to the Commissioner or, in event of absence, the
designated backup Commissioner, assigned to the department having
the greatest relevancy of such payment for his/her approval or
disapproval. It shall be the duty of the Commissioner or, in event of
absence, the designated backup Commissioner, within 10 days after
receipt of any claim, if approved by him/her, to deliver the same to the
officer entitled thereto, with such approval noted, and if disapproved by
him/her, to deliver the same with reasons for his disapproval to the
proper officer.
B. In the event a regularly scheduled City Commission meeting is not held
as scheduled due to cancellation or lack of quorum, the Chief Financial
Officer or designee is hereby authorized to issue payments on any
recurring account as deemed necessary and appropriate with such
payments being submitted for subsequent approval by the Board of
Commissioners at its next meeting. [Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
43-2019]
§ 2-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-55
1:59
§ 2-55. Maintaining schedule of salaries.
The City Clerk or department clerk is hereby authorized to keep payrolls
containing a schedule of the salaries and compensations of the officers
and permanent employees in the various municipal departments, certified
by the Director of Revenue and Finance or other proper officer, and draw
warrants for the salaries and compensation of these officers and permanent
employees on weekly or monthly periods according to resolutions passed by
the Board of Commissioners relative to their employment.
§ 2-56. Payroll schedules.
§ 2-57. Certain sections not to be disregarded; printed copies.
It shall not be lawful for the Board of Commissioners or for any Director of
any department of the City government or any officer thereof to disregard
any provisions of §§ 2-52, 2-55 and 2-56 of this chapter, and the same
shall remain in force until duly amended, supplemented or repealed by
ordinance of the Board of Commissioners. Printed copies of §§ 2-52, 2-55
and 2-56 shall be provided by the Clerk and posted conspicuously at some
proper place or places in the City Hall, and it shall be the duty of the
Clerk to furnish a printed copy hereof to any newly appointed or elected
Commissioner upon his taking office.
A. A payroll shall be made up each week, approved by the director of the
proper department and verified by affidavit according to law, containing
a schedule of the claims against the City for labor rendered, or for
teams or motor trucks or other vehicles furnished, to the City
government for the preceding fiscal City week, ending on Saturday of
that week, which schedules, in all cases where claim is made for the
hire of any team, truck or other vehicle, shall set forth the name of the
true owner thereof and, where drivers are furnished with any team or
truck or other vehicle hired by the City, shall set forth the full name of
such driver and, where assistants or helpers have been furnished to
work with any team, truck or other vehicle hired by the City, the full
name of the assistants or helpers shall also be scheduled.
B. All such schedules shall set forth the particular days, or fractional parts
of a day specified in hours, that any employees have worked for the City.
C. To the end that all claims for labor and for teams, trucks, or other
vehicles hired may be properly audited, the weekly claims or schedules
must be filed with the City Clerk not later than Monday evening of the
week when the claims accrued, or the same shall not be paid at the
regular meeting of the Board held that week, but shall in all cases lie
over for audit until the next regular meeting of the Board.
§ 2-55 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-58
1:60
§ 2-58. Weekly payment of salaries and wages.7
Salaries, wages and compensations for services shall be paid weekly.
§ 2-59. State employees retirement system.
The City approves the membership in the state employees retirement
system of all City officials of Millville who are elected or appointed for fixed
terms.
7. Editor's Note: See also Article XX of this chapter.
§ 2-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-59
1:61

ARTICLE XV
Local Government Ethics Law
§ 2-60. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., known as the
"Local Government Ethics Law." The terms and provisions of these statutes
are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if they were set
forth with particularity.
§ 2-61. Local Finance Board acting as Ethics Board.
The governing body of the City of Millville does not desire to establish
a Local Ethics Board. Therefore, the Local Finance Board in the Division
of Local Government Service in the Department of Community Affairs has
jurisdiction to govern and guide the conduct of public officials, officers
and employees regarding alleged violations of the provisions of the Local
Government Ethics Law.
§ 2-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61
1:63

ARTICLE XVI
Purchasing and Encumbrance System
[Amended 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 6-2015]
§ 2-62. Title.
The following shall be known as the "Purchasing Ordinance of 2015."
§ 2-63. Powers and duties of Purchasing Department agents.
§ 2-64. Purchasing process.
A. The purchasing function involves the procurement of materials,
supplies, equipment, and services at the lowest possible cost. These
costs are consistent with the quality needed to meet the required
standards.
B. The Purchasing Department is responsible for administering
purchasing policies, as approved by the City Commissioners; approving
term contracts less than bid requirement, analyzing prices paid for
materials, equipment, supplies and services and generally defining how
to generate cost savings and coordinate purchasing procedures for the
City of Millville.
C. The Purchasing Agent or Chief Financial Officer are the only persons
authorized by the City Commissioners to make purchases for the City of
Millville. No department has the authority to obligate the City to buy
from a particular vendor even if the purchase is being made for a state
contract item/service or from an apparent sole source vendor.
A. The requisition to purchase serves to inform the Purchasing
Department of the needs of the user department and to correctly define
the material requested. In addition, the first approval signifies the
authority to charge a specific budget account and that there are
sufficient funds available in the account specified.
B. No employee or official of the City shall incur any liability on the part of
the City unless same shall have been properly authorized by a purchase
order. In addition, the following requirements shall also be complied
with:
(1) It is the responsibility of each department to write clear and
accurate description of materials and equipment to be purchased
and purpose for which they are intended.
(2) If the purchase is of a technical nature, specifications should
accompany the requisition. Requisitions must not give
specifications that will favor one supplier to the exclusion of all
others.
§ 2-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-64
1:65
§ 2-64.1. Emergency purchases.
Emergency purchases are to be initiated only when property, equipment or
life is endangered through unexpected circumstances as stated in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6. If an emergency should arise during a time when the Purchasing
Department is closed, the department head shall act to secure the
necessary materials or services. All invoices and a detailed explanation of
the emergency shall be forwarded to the Purchasing Department on the
next business day.
§ 2-64.2. Change orders.
(3) Under no circumstances is the Purchasing Department to be
obligated to a vendor for anything except the opportunity to offer
for sate any goods and/or services the City may wish to purchase.
(4) For purchases in excess of $36,000, please contact the Purchasing
Agent to prepare specifications to obtain sealed bids.
(5) For all purchases in excess of $1,000 but less than $36,000, the
department will submit two detailed quotes. At the discretion of the
Purchasing Department, a third quote may be obtained. Should the
third quote be less than the two quotes submitted, it will be
forwarded to the user department for review and comment. The
Purchasing Agent or Chief Financial Officer will make the final
decision based on the Local Public Contracts Law8 and in the best
interest of the City of Millville.
(6) For purchases less than $1,000, it will be at the discretion of the
Purchasing Agent or Chief Financial Officer whether to obtain
additional quotes.
(7) Any requisition without a detailed description will be returned to
the user department for further details.
(8) After the requisition has had third approval, a purchase order will
be issued and the material or service can be ordered at that time,
except in case of an emergency.
(9) Each Commissioner shall designate in writing and file with the
Chief Financial Officer's office and with the Purchasing Agent the
name of the person or persons in the respective departments who
shall be authorized to give first approval for requisitions and sign
purchase orders.
A. A change order is a property prepared document authorized by the
governing body which directs and authorizes a contractor, consultant or
other vendor performing work for or supplying materials and supplies
to a local unit pursuant to a contract to change the quantity or
character of work, service or materials to be performed, rendered or
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 2-64 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-64.2
1:66
§ 2-64.3. Professional services.
Professional services in excess of $17,500 shall be awarded through a fair
and open process. In a case when the need is critical, with the approval of
the Board of Commissioners, exceptions can be approved on an individual
basis.
§ 2-64.4. Procurement cards.
Procurement cards may only be used when vendors require payment in
advance for the delivery of certain goods or services that cannot be
obtained from other sources at comparable price. The circumstances which
qualify the use of a procurement card are as follows:
furnished from that originally specified or estimated and to
correspondingly change the payment due therefor. (N.J.A.C. 5:30-11.2).
B. Responsibility required by these rules to be exercised specifically by the
governing body, including authorization of change orders, shall not be
delegated except for minor field (site) modifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:30-11.4.
C. Minor field modifications that net less than 5% of the original contract
price and that do not affect the overall scope of work of the contract
may be authorized by the Municipal Engineer after obtaining a
certification of funds from the Chief Financial Officer. Prior to issuing
the change order, the Engineer shall issue a certification to his
Commissioner, the CFO, and the Administrator in which he shall advise
of the need and cost of the change order and in which he shall certify
that the change order is in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:30-11.3(a)4 and 5
and 5:30-11.4.
D. At the next Commission meeting, a resolution for this change order
shall be prepared for the governing body's approval.
A. An individual transaction shall not exceed 15% of the bid threshold.
B. Comparable pricing is not otherwise obtainable for goods and services
to be available at the time and place required.
C. The cost of purchases is comparable to costs available from other
vendors who can provide the required goods and services in a timely
manner.
D. Items are purchased in a transaction where vendor certification would
not normally be readily available at the time of purchase.
E. The vendor requires immediate payment and the Purchasing Agent or
City Administrator has approved such use for a purchase from a
particular vendor for a particular item.
F. Purchase is from a "big box" or other store that does not accept
vouchers, purchase orders or checks.
§ 2-64.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-64.5
1:67
§ 2-64.5. Procurement card program.
A. Purchasing cards or electronic transactions will not change or eliminate
any provision of the Local Public Contracts Law9 and will be
administered in accordance with the rules enumerated in N.J.S.A.
40A:5-16(c) notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16(a) or
N.J.A.C. 5:30-9A.1 et seq.
B. Purchasing cards will only be distributed to essential administrative
personnel, department heads or supervisors and/or assistant
supervisors on a per needed basis, which shall be determined by the
City Administrator in consultation with the Purchasing Agent and/or
Chief Financial Officer.
C. All authorized procurement card users will be required to complete
training on the policies and procedures governing the use of the
procurement card and shall complete and sign a contract of
understanding that includes the financial and legal responsibility for
misuse.
D. Procurement cards shall be issued in the name of a specific individual
but under no circumstance shall be used to purchase personal property
or services, including travel and dining expense.
E. Limits on cards will be established by amount, time and category of
usage permissible. An authorized procurement card user is prohibited
from using p-card to conduct personal business or for any
circumstances that are not authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16(c) or N.J.A.C.
5:30-9A.1.
F. Procurement card. It will be incumbent on the Purchasing Agent to
reconcile all p-card transactions with receipts and invoices to document
a transaction. It will be incumbent for the CFO to reconcile card activity
along with payments made to the issuing financial institution.
(1) Violations of policies governing the use of procurement cards shall
result in appropriate remedial or disciplinary action without regard
to the position held by the card user. Any violation of the policies
governing use of the procurement card will result in immediate
forfeiture of the ability to use such card and may result in other
disciplinary action including but not limited to suspension,
termination and criminal prosecution. The City will also retain all
rights to any funds misappropriated and will seek restitution of said
funds through garnishment of wages, forfeiture of benefits and
legal actions in a court of law.
(2) Under no circumstance shall any p-card or electronic transaction
be used for personal use!
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 2-64.5 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-64.5
1:68
ARTICLE XVII
Retention and Destruction of Public Records10
§ 2-65. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq. known as the
"Destruction of Public Records Law." The terms and provisions of these
statutes are adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if they were
set forth with particularity.
§ 2-66. Records retention and disposal schedule.
The Bureau of Archives and History in the Department of Education has
established a records retention and disposal schedule which sets forth the
records, title and description of public records and the dates agencies
must retain these records. The City of Millville hereby adopts the records
retention and disposal schedule promulgated pursuant to these statutes and
regulations.
10.Editor's Note: See also Art. XIII, Copies of Public Records, of this chapter.
§ 2-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-66
1:69

ARTICLE XVIII
Returned Checks
§ 2-67. Service charge.
A service charge in the amount of $20 shall be imposed on any taxes, fees
or other municipal charges due to the City of Millville where check or draft
has been submitted to the City toward the payment of such taxes, fees or
other municipal charges and such check or draft is returned for insufficient
funds. The Board of Commissioners authorizes the appropriate municipal
officer to demand that future payments be tendered in cash or by certified
or cashier's check on any account where a check tendered for payment
on such account is returned for insufficient funds. In addition, the service
charge aforesaid may be collected in any manner authorized by P.L. 1990,
c. 105.11
§ 2-68. Relationship of charge to costs.
It is hereby determined that the amount of such service charge is equal to
the approximate amount of the City's administrative or other related costs
where a check or draft has been returned for insufficient funds.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:5-18.
§ 2-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-68
1:71

ARTICLE XIX
Salaries and Compensation
§ 2-69. Salaries of officers and employees.
The currently effective ordinances fixing the salaries and rates of
compensation of officers and employees of the City of Millville shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 2-70. Collective bargaining agreements.
The currently effective collective bargaining agreements establishing the
terms and conditions of employment of officers and employees of the City of
Millville shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 2-71. Professional services contracts.
The currently effective professional services contracts establishing the
terms and conditions of employment of officers employees, and appointees
of the City of Millville shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 2-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71
1:73

ARTICLE XX
Sale of Excess Materials
§ 2-72. Sale of excess materials.
Any excess, or used or worn out flagging, bricks, stone, lumber, piping,
machinery or other materials or supplies belonging to the City, and not, in
the opinion of the Board of Commissioners, necessary or required for any
useful purpose by this City, may be sold and disposed of at any time by order
of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-73. Advertisement in certain cases.
Sales of any part or portion of such material having in the opinion of the
Board a value less than $1,000 may be made at private sale, by the proper
director, on order of the Board of Commissioners; and if any such part or
portion of such material has a value in excess of $1,000 in the opinion of
the Board, then the same shall be sold at public vendue, or by means of
sealed bids, after advertisement in like manner as proposals for supplies are
published.
§ 2-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-73
1:75

ARTICLE XXI
Tax Collector
[Added 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 7-2010]
§ 2-74. Statutory authority.
The New Jersey Legislature recently revised various statutes concerning
the sale of tax liens and other municipal liens. The law took effect on
January 18, 2010. Various sections of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 et seq. were revised
to authorize Tax Collectors involved in lien collection and enforcement to
charge various fees if authorized by the governing body of the municipality.
Pursuant to these amendments the municipality is hereby authorizing the
Tax Collector to charge the following fees in connection with lien collection
and enforcement.
§ 2-75. Notice in lieu of publications.
In lieu of any two publications, notice to the property owner and to any
person or entity entitled to notice of the foreclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-104.48 may be given by regular or certified mail, the cost of which
shall be added to the cost of the sale in addition to those provided in N.J.S.A.
54:5-38. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a fee of $25 for
each notice mailed for a particular property.
§ 2-76. Redemption certificate requested by party entitled to
redeem.
The Tax Collector shall provide to any party entitled to redeem a certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54 two calculations of the amount required for
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. Any subsequent calculation
requested of the Tax Collector shall require a fee of $50 for each request.
A request for a redemption calculation shall be made in writing to the Tax
Collector.
§ 2-77. Redemption certificate requested by lienholder.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a lienholder a fee of $50
for the calculation of the amount due to redeem the tax lien required to
be provided pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1. Any request for a redemption
calculation shall specify the date to be used for the calculation, which shall
be the date of the notice. Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality
shall be liable for an incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the municipality
shall not become part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party
entitled to redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
§ 2-78. Electronic file request. [Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord. No.
27-2010]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge an annual fee of up to
$1,500 paid in advance for any electronic file requested. The Mayor and
§ 2-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-78
1:77
City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute any and all agreements for the
annual fee set forth herein. The Tax Collector shall collect such fees and
deposit same with the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality. This fee
shall not apply to mortgage companies in connection with the direct billing
and payment of real estate taxes. The fee charged herein is equivalent to
the approximate amount of the administration and related costs associated
with the request.
§ 2-78 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-78
1:78
ARTICLE XXII
Mandatory Direct Deposit
[Added 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
§ 2-79. Direct deposit required.
All full-time, seasonal and temporary employees and elected public officials
who receive compensation from the City of Millville are mandated to have
direct deposit of their compensation as of October 10, 2014, in accordance
with Chapter 28 P.L. 2013, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f-(b).
§ 2-80. Exemption.
Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the direct
deposit mandate to the City Clerk/Administrator. Such requests will be
presented to the Board of Commissioners within 20 days. The Board of
Commissioners may grant such an exemption by resolution and only for
good cause.
§ 2-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-80
1:79

ARTICLE XXIII
Procedure and Form for Notices of Tort Claim
[Added 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017; amended 3-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 13-2018]
§ 2-81. Notices of tort claim; required information.
A. A claim shall be presented by the claimant or by a person acting on his
or her behalf to the City Clerk and shall include:
(1) The name and post office address of the claimant;
(2) The post office address to which the person presenting the claim
desires notices to be sent;
(3) The date, place and other circumstances of the occurrence or
transaction which gave rise to the claim asserted;
(4) A general description of the injury, damage or loss incurred so far
as it may be known at the time of presentation of the claim;
(5) The name or names of the public entity, employee or employees
causing the injury, damage or loss, if known; and
(6) The amount claimed as of the date of presentation of the claim,
including the estimated amount of any prospective injury, damage,
or loss, insofar as it may be known at the time of the presentation of
the claim, together with the basis of computation of the amount
claimed.
B. Additional information; claim form.12 A representative from the City of
Millville shall be assigned to the claim and shall contact the claimant or
person acting on his or her behalf to obtain additional information
required by the insurer and authorized by N.J.S.A. 59:8-6 and any
direction of the Attorney General.
12.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-81
1:81
Chapter 5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale or service of alcoholic beverages during
games of chance — See Ch. 33, Art. II,
§ 33-19.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 43.
Disciplining of employees for violation of
alcohol use laws — See Ch. 46, Art. VI,
§ 46-24.
Alcohol consumption in theaters — See Ch.
52, Art. XII.
§ 2-81 MILLVILLE CODE § 2-81
1:82
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 5-1. Statutory authority
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Regulations.
§ 5-2. Purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that it is the public policy
of this City to regulate the sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic
beverages to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to license and regulate these
activities consistent with state law.
§ 5-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as set forth in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq. and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Regulations adopted by
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, except as set
forth below.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Includes spouse, son, son-in-law, stepson, daughter,
daughter-in-law, stepdaughter, father, father-in-law, stepfather, mother,
mother-in-law, stepmother, brother, brother-in-law, stepbrother, sister,
sister-in-law, stepsister, grandparent and grandchild.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:83

ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 5-4. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the governing body
of the City which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-5. Licenses and fees.
§ 5-6. Applications for licenses. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No.
16-2012; 7-5-2016 by Ord. No. 28-2016]
A. No person shall sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages within the City
without obtaining a license as required by state law and this chapter
and complying with all applicable state and local regulations.
(1) Club license. The holder of this license shall be entitled to sell any
alcoholic beverages but only for immediate consumption on the
licensed premises and only to bona fide club members and their
guests. The annual fee for this license is $180. [Amended
10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 36-2007]
(2) Plenary retail consumption license. The holder of this license shall
be entitled to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises, and also to sell any alcoholic beverages in the
original containers for consumption off the licensed premises. No
other mercantile business shall be operated on the premises. The
annual fee for this license is $840. [Amended 10-2-2007 by Ord.
No. 36-2007]
(3) Plenary retail distribution license. The holder of this license shall
be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption off
the licensed premises, but only in original containers. No other
mercantile business shall be operated on the premises. The annual
fee for this license is $690. [Amended 10-2-2007 by Ord. No.
36-2007]
(4) Hotel or motel license. This license is a plenary retail consumption
license issued to a hotel or motel with 100 or more guest sleeping
rooms.
B. Every license shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place in
the licensed premises so that it is open to public view. Any omission to
do this shall be presumptive evidence that the premises are not licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages.
A. Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk on a form approved by the state and the City.
Each application shall contain the information required by state law
and the information required below.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:85
(1) The name and address of the applicant, including social security
number;
(2) The location of the premises to be licensed;
(3) The type of license desired;
(4) The time period for the license;
(5) The names and addresses of all persons who have a financial
interest in the premises to be licensed and the license applied for,
including their social security number;
(6) Indicate the nature and extent of the financial interest that each
person has in the premises to be licensed and the license applied
for;
(7) Indicate whether any person having a financial interest has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude in this state or any
other state; and
(8) Such other information as is required on the application form
approved by the state and the City.
B. The application filed with the City Clerk shall be accompanied with the
required license fee and such additional information as may be required
by state and local law, including the financial records of the applicant
which discloses the source of all funds utilized in the acquisition of the
business and license.
C. Upon the receipt of an application for a license which necessitates an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of a license, the City
Clerk shall refer a copy of the application to the proper City officials
who are required to take further action within 48 hours from the date
when the application is filed. The municipal officials charged with the
duty of making an inspection or investigation shall make a written
report and file it with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving a copy
of the application.
D. Approval standards. The governing body of the City shall issue a license
to all applicants who have filed the required application with the City
Clerk, paid the required fees, complied with the applicable state
statutes and state regulations, complied with the regulations contained
herein, and who have complied with the approval standards set forth
below.
(1) Background investigation. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
conduct a character and criminal background investigation of each
applicant and each person having a financial interest in the
business and file a written report with the City Clerk. Each person
shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Millville Police
Department.
§ 5-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 5-6
1:86
§ 5-7. Denial, suspension or revocation of license and appeals.
(2) Financial investigation. The City Clerk or his designee shall
conduct a financial investigation of each applicant and each person
having a financial interest in the business and prepare a written
report for the governing body. This investigation shall include the
source of all funds utilized in the acquisition of the business and
license.
(3) BOCA Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 11, Article XI).13 The
Bureau of Permits and Inspections shall make an inspection of the
business premises to insure compliance with the code and file a
written report with the City Clerk.
(4) Land Use and Development Regulations (Chapter 30). The Zoning
Officer shall make an inspection of the business premises to insure
compliance with the Land Use and Development Regulations and
file a written report with the City Clerk.
(5) State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official and
the subcode officials shall make inspections of the business
premises to insure compliance with the State Uniform Construction
Code and file a written report with the City Clerk.
(6) State Uniform Fire Code. The Fire Official shall make an inspection
of the business premises to insure compliance with the State
Uniform Fire Code and the retrofit regulations and file a written
report with the City Clerk.
E. Subsequent convictions. The applicant, licensee, and each person
having a financial interest in the business shall report to the City Clerk
within 10 days any and all criminal convictions occurring subsequent to
the filing of the application or the issuance of the license.
A. An applicant for a license may be denied a license, or any license issued
may be suspended or revoked for any of the following causes:
(1) If the applicant has falsified any of the contents of the application
for a license or any of the documents or written information
supplied as part of the application process.
(2) If the applicant or licensee has violated any of the provisions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A 33:1-1 et seq.
(3) If the applicant or licensee has violated any of the provisions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Regulations, N.J.A.C 13:2-1 et seq. and
13:3-1 et seq.
(4) If the applicant or licensee has violated any of the regulations
contained in this chapter.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Art. VI, Property Maintenance Code.
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:87
§ 5-8. Violations and penalties.
(5) If the applicant or licensee has been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude in this state or any other state.
(6) If the applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq. in connection with the operation of the
licensed premises.
(7) If the applicant or licensee has violated any special conditions
imposed on the license by the governing body.
(8) For any other cause designated by this chapter.
B. No license shall be denied nor shall any license be suspended or
revoked without a hearing before the governing body. No suspension or
revocation of any license shall be made until a five-day written notice of
the charges preferred against the licensee has been served on the
licensee personally or by certified mail at the licensed premises, and a
reasonable opportunity for a hearing before the governing body has
been afforded the licensee.
C. In the event of a denial, suspension or revocation of any license by the
governing body, the licensee may file an appeal in writing to the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control within 30 days
after the date of service or of mailing of the written notice of the action
taken by the governing body.
A. Any licensee violating any of the provisions contained in this chapter, or
any applicable state statute or state regulation shall receive a penalty
which is consistent with the penalties set forth in the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Penalty Schedule published by the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Any person other than a licensee convicted of violating any of the
provisions contained in this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50 and not more than $500, be required to perform
community service not to exceed 30 days, or be incarcerated for a
period of time not to exceed 30 days, or any combination of the
foregoing, in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
§ 5-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 5-8
1:88
ARTICLE III
Hours of Operation
§ 5-9. Mondays through Saturdays.
§ 5-10. Sundays. [Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003]
§ 5-11. Closing time.
During the hours that the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall be closed, and no person shall
be admitted or permitted to remain thereon except the licensee or bona
fide employees of the licensee. This provision shall not apply to hotels and
restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. or clubs where the principal
business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 5-12. Last call.
Last call shall be announced a reasonable time before closing to allow for
the orderly exit of the general public from the licensed premises by closing
time.
A. No holder of a club license or a plenary retail consumption license shall
sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises on Mondays through Saturdays between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. No holder of a plenary retail consumption license or a plenary retail
distribution license shall sell, distribute or deliver spirited liquors in
original containers (packaged goods) on Mondays through Saturdays
before 9:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. However, the sale of wine and
beer in original containers (packaged goods) is permitted at any time
allowed in Subsection A above.
A. No holder of a club license or a plenary retail consumption license shall
sell, serve, or deliver any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon.
B. No holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall sell, distribute
or deliver spirited liquors in original containers (packaged goods) on
Sundays before 12:00 p.m. and after 10:00 p.m. No holder of a plenary
retail distribution license shall sell, distribute or deliver spirited liquors
in original containers (packaged goods) on Sundays before 9:00 a.m.
and after 10:00 p.m. However, the sale of wine and beer in original
containers (packaged goods) is permitted at any time allowed in
Subsection A above. [Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
§ 5-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12
1:89

ARTICLE IV
Regulation of Licensed Premises
§ 5-13. Athletic team sponsors.
Athletic teams can be sponsored by licensees of any class. When the
sponsored teams consist of players under the age of 18 years, the use
of the words bar, cocktail, liquor, package goods, tavern, or similar terms
which are associated with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited. When all of the players are at least 18 years of age, such terms
can be utilized in the team identification or on uniforms.
§ 5-14. Bingo.
Bingo is permitted in an establishment with a club license if the bingo game
has been licensed under the Bingo Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
However, no alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed in the part of the
licensed premises where the bingo game is being played during the period
of time when the game is being played.
§ 5-15. Bus trips.
A licensee cannot sponsor a bus trip where alcoholic beverages are served
or are made available on the bus if there is a charge for the bus trip.
However, on any bus trip passengers may bring their own alcoholic
beverage package goods which were purchased at retail.
§ 5-16. Contest prizes.
No licensee shall offer a free drink or alcoholic beverages as a prize or
reward. A licensee is also prohibited from offering a gift certificate which
includes alcoholic beverages as a prize or reward.
§ 5-17. Cover charges.
A licensee is permitted to charge a cover charge for admission to the
licensed premises. However, the cover charge may include only one
alcoholic drink, and not more than one alcoholic drink.
§ 5-18. Donations of alcoholic beverages.
No licensee shall donate any alcoholic beverages in any form to a charitable
organization or otherwise. Such donations are considered a sale below cost
which is prohibited by state law.
§ 5-19. Entertainers.
No licensee shall provide live entertainment of the type that includes erotic
dancing, wet tee-shirt contests or other sexually suggestive activities. A
licensee may hire a band or a singer to perform in the licensed premises.
§ 5-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:91
However, all entertainers must be at least 18 years of age to perform in the
licensed premises.
§ 5-20. Raffle tickets.
Raffle tickets for a raffle properly licensed under New Jersey law and run
by a bona fide nonprofit organization may be sold on a licensed premises by
a patron or by a licensee, provided that the licensee is not compensated for
selling or permitting the sale of the tickets.
§ 5-21. Video games.
Video games which are for entertainment purposes only and whose outcome
depends on skill as opposed to chance are permitted on the licensed
premises. Most video games which have a card, dice, horse racing, roulette,
slot machine, or similar format are prohibited.
§ 5-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 5-21
1:92
ARTICLE V
Rules of Conduct
§ 5-22. Conduct of employees.
No employee of the licensee shall engage in illegal activities on the licensed
premises. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on the licensed premises
employees to engage in illegal acts such as the sale or delivery of alcoholic
beverages after legal hours of sale for off-premises consumption.
§ 5-23. Criminals.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on the licensed premises any known
criminals, gangsters, prostitutes, racketeers, or other persons of ill-repute.
§ 5-24. Disorderly persons.
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct while on the licensed
premises. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on the licensed premises
any persons engaged in disorderly conduct as defined in Article IV of
Chapter 52 titled "Police Regulations" of the municipal Code of the City.
§ 5-25. Drugs and narcotics.
No person shall possess, sell, or use illegal drugs or narcotics on the
licensed premises. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on the licensed
premises any possession, sale or use of illegal drugs or narcotics.
§ 5-26. Gambling.
No person shall engage in gambling on the licensed premises, except as
expressly licensed under New Jersey law. No licensee shall allow, permit or
suffer any unlicensed gambling or gambling paraphernalia on the licensed
premises.
§ 5-27. Lewd activity.
No person shall engage in lewd activity on the licensed premises. No
licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any activity on the licensed premises
which depicts in any way sexual activity or which shows the genitals or
private parts of persons, including female breasts. This prohibition includes
live entertainment as well as audio, printed or video matter.
§ 5-28. Open container prohibited off licensed premises.
No patron who purchases an alcoholic beverage in an open container shall
remove it from the licensed premises. No licensee or employee of a licensee
shall allow, permit, or suffer a patron to exit the licensed premises with an
open container containing an alcoholic beverage.
§ 5-29. Person under the legal age.
§ 5-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-29
1:93
§ 5-30. Prostitution.
No person shall solicit for sexual activity on the licensed premises. No
licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on the licensed premises the
solicitation for any sexual activity.
§ 5-31. Visibly intoxicated person.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver any
alcoholic beverage to a person who is actually or visibly intoxicated. No
licensee or employee of a licensee shall allow, permit or suffer a person to
consume an alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises when that person
is actually or visibly intoxicated.
A. No person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages shall
enter a licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or procuring
any alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of inducing a licensee or an
employee of a licensee to sell, serve or deliver an alcoholic beverage to
them.
B. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve, or deliver an
alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages.
§ 5-29 MILLVILLE CODE § 5-31
1:94
Chapter 8
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-31
1:95

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control
[Adopted 3-20-1990 as Ch. V of the Revised General Ordinances of
the City of Millville 1989, as amended through Ord. No. 7-1998]
§ 8-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate the activities of dogs
and other animals within the City to ensure the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
§ 8-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in these regulations shall be as follows:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal animal control
officer, or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement
officer of the City or his designee.14
ATTACK DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid trained or baited to attack persons
or animals.
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — A dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
GUARD DOG — Any dog trained to attack a person at the command or
instruction of a trainer.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding or selling
dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
LEASH — A chain, strap, cord or harness of sufficient substance to hold the
animal under control and shall be no longer than 15 feet.
NUISANCE — Defecation or urination, destruction of property, disturbing
the peace, emitting noxious odors, or otherwise endangering or offending
the well being of the inhabitants of the City.
OWNER — Any adult having an ownership interest in an animal or an adult
who keeps or harbors an animal on or about his or her premises.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, where dogs or other animals are kept or displayed for sale.
POLICE DOG — A dog actively engaged by a law enforcement agency to aid
in its law enforcement duties.
14.Editor's Note: The former definition of "aggressive breed dog," which immediately
preceded this definition, was repealed 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 18-2011.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:97
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog declared potentially
dangerous by a Municipal Court pursuant to state law.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land and any structures located thereon.
RUNNING AT LARGE — To be free of physical restraint or control beyond
the boundaries of the premises of the owner.
SHELTER — Any establishment where animals are received, housed and
distributed.
STRAY — Any animal found running at large.
TRAINER — Any person who trains or owns an attack dog or guard dog or
from whom an attack dog or guard dog takes commands or instructions.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog declared vicious by a Municipal Court pursuant
to state law.
§ 8-3. License requirements.
A. License. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing
age shall apply for and procure from the Tax Collector a license and
official metal registration tag for each dog, and shall place upon each
dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
B. Contents of application. The application for a license shall contain the
name and address of the owner of the dog and the person who shall
keep or harbor the dog, a short description of the dog including breed,
sex, age, color and markings, and proof of current rabies vaccination
for the period of the license sought. This information and the
registration number shall be preserved for three years and shall be
forwarded to the State Department of Health as required by law.
C. Official metal registration tag. The official metal registration tag for
each dog shall be securely fastened on the dog's collar or harness and
shall be maintained there at all times unless removed with the consent
of the owner or by the Animal Control Officer. In no event shall a dog be
off the premises of the owner without the official metal registration tag
securely fastened to the dog's collar or harness. No person shall attach
a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
D. Evidence of inoculation. No license and official metal registration tag
shall be issued for any dog unless the owner provides evidence that the
dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine as required by federal law and state law.
E. Attack dogs and guard dogs. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor
an attack dog or guard dog as defined herein shall apply for a license
and official metal registration tag within 72 hours from the time when
the dog is brought on the premises within the City.
§ 8-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-3
1:98
§ 8-4. Time for applications.
§ 8-5. License fees.
F. Potentially dangerous dogs. When a dog has been declared by a
Municipal Court to be potentially dangerous dog pursuant to state law,
a special license and special registration tag shall be issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-30. Said license and registration tag shall be applied for
within 72 hours from the time when the Court declaration is made.
G. License for kennel, pet shop, shelter and pound. Any person who
operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter, or pound
shall apply to the City Clerk for a license to operate such an
establishment. Said applicant shall comply with the applicable
development regulations of the City15 [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 40-2012]
H. No property within the City shall have or maintain five or more dogs of
licensing age unless the property is licensed as a kennel, pet shop,
shelter, or pound. [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-201216]
I. Notification. The Tax Collector or his or her designee shall notify the
Fire Department, Police Department and Rescue Squad servicing the
municipality of the fact that an animal has been registered as an attack
dog, guard dog or a dog which has been declared potentially dangerous
pursuant to state law. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure a license and official metal registration
tag for the dog during the period from January 1 through March 31. The
license and registration tag shall expire on December 31.
B. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains licensing age during the calendar year shall make
application for a license and registration tag for such dog within 10
days of such acquisition or age attainment.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City an
unlicensed dog of licensing age and shall permit the dog to be kept
within the City for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for such dog.
D. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this City a dog
licensed within another state and shall keep the dog or permit the dog
to remain within the City for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for such dog.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Land Use and Development, and N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection H
as Subsection I.
§ 8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:99
§ 8-6. Disposition of fees.
A. A person registering a dog shall pay to the Tax Collector the sum of $7
per year as a license fee and state regulation fee. [Amended
10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
B. (Reserved)17
C. A person registering an attack dog or guard dog shall pay to the Tax
Collector the sum of $50 per year as a license fee. [Amended
10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
D. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as Seeing
Eye dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as service dogs, or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as hearing ear dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee. Police dogs on active duty and not retired are
likewise exempt from the payment of any fee.
E. A person registering a dog declared by a Municipal Court to be a
potentially dangerous dog in accordance with state law shall pay to the
Tax Collector the sum of $700 per year as a license fee pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-31. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
F. A person registering a dog late shall be charged an added assessment
of $10 over and above the annual licensing fee required by this section.
[Amended 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007; 10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 18-2011]
G. The annual license fee for a kennel, pet shop, shelter, and pound is set
forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.9.
H. The fee for a nonspayed female dog and a nonneutered male dog is $10.
[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007]
A. License fees and other moneys collected under the provisions of this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer and shall be
placed in a special account separate from other accounts maintained by
the City and used for the following purposes only:
(1) Collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs and other animals liable
to seizure.
(2) Local prevention and control of rabies.
(3) Providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the County
Health Department for a person exposed to rabies.
(4) All other purposes prescribed by state law governing the subject.
17.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which provided that a person registering an
aggressive breed dog would pay a license fee of $50 per year, was repealed 10-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 18-2011.
§ 8-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-6
1:100
§ 8-7. Exemptions and waivers.
§ 8-8. General regulations.
B. Any unexpected balance remaining in this special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the third
fiscal year and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from the special account to the general funds of the City
any amount then in the special account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the previous two fiscal
years.
C. The registration tag fee collected for each dog shall be forwarded by
the Tax Collector to the State Department of Health within 30 days.
[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-2012]
A. Except as to licensing and registration, police dogs on active duty and
not retired shall be exempt from the regulations imposed by this
chapter.
B. Except as to licensing and registration, Seeing Eye dogs, service dogs
and hearing ear dogs shall be exempt from the regulations imposed by
this chapter.
A. Disturbance of the peace. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog
or other animal which habitually barks, howls or cries and thereby
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood and creates a
nuisance at any time of the day or night.
B. Leashing. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or similar
animal shall permit it to be upon a public street, sidewalk,
thoroughfare, park, playground, school yard or in any of the public
places of the City unless it is controlled by an adequate leash or tether
not more than 15 feet long.
C. Nuisance prohibited. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
or other animal shall cause or allow said animal to soil, defile, deface or
defecate on, or commit any nuisance on any public property. The person
in charge of such animal shall immediately remove all feces deposited
by such animal by any sanitary method. This same provision applies to
any private property when the activities of the animal occur without
permission of the property owner.
D. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or
other animal shall permit it to do any injury or to do any damage to any
lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds, garden or property of another
person unless consented to by the other person.
E. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or
other animal shall permit the animal to run at large, outside of the
§ 8-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8
1:101
§ 8-9. Attack, guard and dangerous dogs.
§ 8-10. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs.
§ 8-11. Cruelty to animals prohibited.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-1 et seq. governing the prevention of cruelty
to animals are incorporated by reference.
§ 8-12. Stray cats.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to seize any stray cats, and
if the cat lacks a collar with any means of identifying the owner, he shall
place the cat for adoption or disposal in a humane fashion.
§ 8-13. Types of animals not permitted.
control of the owner, on public property or private property off the
premises of the owner.
A. Muzzled. An attack dog, guard dog, or a dog declared by a Municipal
Court to be potentially dangerous pursuant to state law shall be
muzzled at all times when the animal is off the premises of the owner or
when the animal is off the premises of a person harboring or keeping
said animal.
B. Posting of signs. The owner or other person in control of an attack dog,
guard dog or dog declared by a Municipal Court to be potentially
dangerous pursuant to state law shall post signs on the premises where
the dog is maintained stating one of the following: "Warning: Attack
Dog on Premises," "Warning: Guard Dog on Premises" or "Warning:
Dangerous Dog on Premises."
C. Public places. No aggressive breed dog, attack dog, guard dog, or a dog
declared by a Municipal Court to be potentially dangerous pursuant to
state law shall be permitted inside public buildings, public parks, public
ball fields, public beaches and public recreational areas owned,
controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the City.
A. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37 governing vicious
and potentially dangerous dogs are incorporated by reference.
B. When a Municipal Court has declared a dog to be a potentially
dangerous dog, it may require the owner to maintain liability insurance
in an amount not to exceed $25,000 in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 4:19-24b. The liability insurance shall contain a provision
requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be named as
an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
liability insurance policy. [Amended 8-20-2002 by Ord. No.
26-2002]
§ 8-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-13
1:102
§ 8-14. Seizure and impounding.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor a wolf or wolf hybrid or wildlife
hybrid within the City.
B. No person shall own, keep or harbor any exotic animal which is covered
by the Endangered Species Act within the City.
C. No person shall own, keep or harbor a pot-belly pig or other livestock
within the City on property of less than two acres in size.
D. No person shall own, keep or harbor on their premises any wild or
vicious animal for display, training or exhibition purposes whether
gratuitously or for a fee.
E. No person shall own, keep or harbor any wild animal as a pet.
F. No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or other animal on
unoccupied premises.
G. The Animal Control Officer of the City shall take into custody and
impound any of the aforesaid animals subject to the notice
requirements contained in § 8-14.
A. The Animal Control Officer of the City shall take into custody and
impound any of the following:
(1) Any dog or other domestic animal off the premises of the owner
which the Animal Control Officer has reason to believe is a stray.
(2) Any dog or other domestic animal off the premises of the owner
without a current registration tag or other means of identification.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner.
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
(5) Any dog or other domestic animal off the premises of the owner
observed by the Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured or creating
a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise interfering
with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness with a registration tag
or has information inscribed on the collar or harness which identifies
the owner, the Animal Control Officer shall provide written notice to the
owner stating that the animal has been seized and shall be liable to be
offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by hand delivering it to
the person who is the owner, or by leaving it at the owner's premises, or
by forwarding it by regular and certified mail to the last known address
of the owner or the address given on the collar.
§ 8-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-14
1:103
§ 8-15. Animal control shelter.
The governing body of the City shall have the authority to establish by
resolution an animal control shelter to provide services for the City, and
to contract for services with that shelter consistent with the requirements
established by state law.
§ 8-16. Certified Animal Control Officer; Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 34-2018]
§ 8-17. Authority to enter premises.
The Animal Control Officer and the Assistant Animal Control Officer of the
City engaged in the performance of his or her duty is hereby authorized to
enter upon any premises to seize or impound any dog or other animal which
he may lawfully seize or impound when such officer is in the immediate
pursuit of said animal except upon the premises of the owner of the animal
if said owner is present and forbids same. In that event, the Animal Control
D. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for all expenses incurred
by the City in connection with the seizure and impounding of the
animal.
A. Certified Animal Control Officer appointment. The governing body of
the City is the appropriate authority to appoint a certified Animal
Control Officer who shall be responsible for animal control within the
City and who shall enforce the provisions of this article. In the absence
of such an appointment, the chief law enforcement officer of the City, or
his designee, shall act in that capacity.
B. Certified Animal Control Officer certification. The governing body of the
City shall ensure that any person appointed to the position of Animal
Control Officer shall be certified in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a, together with the state rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
C. Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer(s) appointment.
(1) The governing body shall appoint at least one Municipal Humane
Law Enforcement Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22-14.1, with
qualifications and duties as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:22-14.2.
(2) The governing body may designate as a Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officer any qualified individual who satisfactorily
completes the training course developed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:22-11.11, as soon as practicable, but no later than one year after
the date on which the officer's designation is approved by the Chief
of Police. An Animal Control Officer or a police officer may serve
concurrently as a Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer, so
long as the Officer is able to effectively carry out the duties and
responsibilities required of each position held.
§ 8-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-17
1:104
Officer must apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a search
warrant and authority to seize the animal.
§ 8-18. Interference with officer.
No person shall give false information, hinder, or interfere with anyone
authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 8-19. Canvass of dogs in municipality.
The Chief of Police of the City shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15, cause a
canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the City and
shall report to the City Clerk, Director of Public Safety and state agencies
required by state law the result of the canvass setting forth in separate
columns the name and address of persons owning, keeping or harboring
unlicensed dogs, the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by
each person together with a complete description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 8-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined for the first offense not more than $200.
B. Any person found to have committed a second violation of the same or
any other provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by
community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
C. Each day that a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Notwithstanding the penalties described herein for
violations of this chapter, the municipality shall be entitled to pursue
any other remedies available in law or in equity to enforce the
provisions hereof and to protect the citizens of the City.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall not in any way be deemed to hinder
or prohibit prosecution of violators pursuant to state law and the
penalties and provisions of state law are deemed to be in addition to the
penalties and provisions of this chapter.
§ 8-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-20
1:105

ARTICLE II
Feral Cat Program
[Adopted 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-2012]
§ 8-21. Purpose and scope.
§ 8-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal animal control
officer, or in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement officer
of the municipality or his designee.
ANIMAL COORDINATOR — The person appointed annually by the
governing body of the municipality to maintain records of feral cats, to
recommend caregivers and to perform such duties authorized by these
regulations.
CAREGIVER — A volunteer and uncompensated person who agrees to
serve to facilitate the TNR Program within the municipality in accordance
with the regulations set forth herein. A caregiver shall not be deemed
an employee of the municipality and shall hold such volunteer position at
the pleasure of the governing body. A caregiver may be removed from or
precluded from holding such volunteer position in the sole discretion of the
governing body of the municipality.
EAR TIPPING — The marking of a cat's ear through a surgical procedure
performed by qualified personnel.
FERAL CAT — Any stray cat roaming at large without a collar identifying
the owner.
§ 8-23. Trap, neuter and return program; roaming by cats;
abandonment of cats.
A. Pursuant to its police powers, the municipality has an obligation to
effective and humanely control feral cat populations within the
boundaries of the municipality.
B. The governing body of the municipality believes that it is in the interest
of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the community
to institute a trap, neuter and return program (TNR) in an effort to
reduce the feral cat population within the community over time without
the necessity of wholesale capture and euthanasia.
A. A trap, neuter and return program is hereby established within the
municipality in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth
herein.
§ 8-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-23
1:107
§ 8-24. Registration of colonies required; information and
education.
Each feral cat colony shall be registered by the caregivers with the
municipal animal coordinator. The animal coordinator shall serve as a
clearing house for information on current caregivers, education for new
caregivers, and assistance for persons found in violation of these
regulations.
§ 8-25. Ear tipping required.
Ear tipping shall be used on feral cats in order to identify the cats as spayed
or neutered and vaccinated as a member of a managed colony.
§ 8-26. Duties of caregivers.
Caregivers of feral cat colonies shall implement proper management and
sterilization practices, and shall seek the assistance of the Animal Control
Officer or the animal coordinator as follows:
B. No person shall allow any cat to roam free within the municipality
without a collar identifying the owner, unless the cat is part of the trap,
neuter and return program.
C. No person shall allow any cat to roam free in a manner to enter upon
any public lands restricted for such use by federal, state or local
agencies or authorities.
D. No person shall abandon any cat within the municipality.
A. Sterilize (spay/neuter) all adult cats that can be captured.
B. Vaccinate, as required by law, all cats that can be captured against
rabies, preferably with a three-year vaccine together with any other
infectious disease as mandated by law.
C. Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony before eight
weeks of age for domestication and placement.
D. Make every attempt to remove sick or injured cats from the colony for
immediate veterinarian care or humane euthanasia.
E. Assume responsibility and arrangements for feeding the cat colony
regularly throughout the year, including weekends, holidays and
vacations of the feral cat caregiver. Feeding on the caregiver's property
of feral cats managed by such caregiver shall not constitute a violation
of these regulations.
F. All reasonable efforts shall be made to "ear tip" all cats within a colony
with a single cut preferably on the left ear and arrange for the
implantation of an identification microchip. If this is not practicable
under the circumstances, photographic documentation adequate to
identify the cat shall be obtained.
§ 8-23 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-26
1:108
§ 8-27. Restrictions.
No feral cat colony shall be permitted to be established within any area
designated by federal or state agencies as areas reserved for protected or
endangered species of birds or other wildlife, or in any federal, state or local
designated park or preserve utilized for recreation.
§ 8-28. Administrative rules and regulations.
The Commissioner in charge of the department of government under which
the feral cat program will be administered shall have the authority to adopt
administrative rules and regulations to further implement the TNR Program
so long as they are not inconsistent with the rules and regulations set forth
herein.
§ 8-29. Violations and penalties.
§ 8-30. (Reserved)18
G. Maintain proof of sterilization, vaccination, ear tipping and
implantation of microchip and medical records for all cats. These
records must be provided to the animal coordinator upon request.
H. Register the feral cat colony with the animal coordinator for the
municipality.
I. Execute all documents required by the municipality pursuant to the
regulations set forth herein or administrative rules and regulations
adopted by the Commissioner in charge.
A. Any person or caregiver determined to be in violation of these
regulations shall be issued a written warning and be allowed a period of
time in the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, but not longer than
90 days, to come into compliance or provide satisfactory evidence of
working to achieve compliance.
B. Except as set forth above, any person violating the rules and
regulations set forth herein shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
§ 8-20 of this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 8-30, Sunset provision, was repealed 11-4-2013 by Ord. No.
30-2013.
§ 8-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-30
1:109
Chapter 11
BUREAU OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Fire Safety Act — See Ch. 17, Art. III.
Handbills and circulars — See Ch. 33, Art. IX.
Littering — See Ch. 43.
Collection of bulky waste — See Ch. 61, Art.
IV.
§ 8-30 MILLVILLE CODE § 8-30
1:110
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 11-1. Creation of Bureau.
The Bureau of Permits and Inspections is hereby created. The Construction
Official shall be the supervisor in charge of the subcode officials and
inspectors.
§ 11-2. Officials assigned to Bureau.
The following officials are assigned to the Bureau, and they shall perform
the functions authorized by their title and job description: Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Subcode
Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Director of Inspections, Building
Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Elevator Inspector or designated entity,
Housing Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Sanitary Inspector and Zoning
Officer.
§ 11-3. Enforcing agency, powers and duties.
The Bureau of Permits and Inspections is responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. The Bureau shall have those powers and duties
which are necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the provisions of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers
and duties:
A. The Construction Official is hereby designated as the public officer with
those powers and responsibilities set forth in these ordinances, under
the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 and 2.9 and N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.
B. The public officer shall maintain official records for all activities and the
business of the Bureau regulated by this chapter.
C. The code officials and inspectors shall investigate the various lands and
structures within the municipality to determine which lands and
structures have conditions or uses which are regulated by this chapter.
D. The code officials and inspectors shall inspect those lands and
structures which are regulated by this chapter to ensure compliance
with the regulations contained herein.
E. Whenever the enforcement of the regulations contained herein requires
inspections by more than one code official or inspector, the code
officials and inspectors shall coordinate their inspections, to the extent
practicable, so that the owners or occupants are not subjected to
multiple inspections or conflicting orders.
F. The code officials and inspectors may seek consent from property
owners or tenants, as appropriate in each case, to enter the premises
and structures of any properties regulated by this chapter at reasonable
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:111
§ 11-4. Notice of violation and order.
times in the course of carrying out their responsibilities to inspect
those premises or structures. If entry is refused, or not obtained, the
code official or inspector is authorized to pursue and secure an order
to authorize entry from the municipal court, or any other court of
competent jurisdiction.
G. The code officials and inspectors shall carry a City employee
identification card during the performance of their duties.
H. The code officials and inspectors shall issue notices of violations and
orders for compliance to ensure the regulations contained herein are
enforced.
A. The term "person" or "person responsible" shall mean the owner of the
property and the tenant in possession, whether it is a natural person,
corporation, limited liability company (LLC), partnership, or other legal
entity. If the property is abandoned, the first mortgage holder, if any,
shall also be a "person responsible" in addition to the owner.
B. Whenever a code official or inspector has reasonable grounds to believe
that there is a violation of the regulations contained herein, a notice of
violation and an order for compliance shall be issued to the persons
responsible.
C. The notice of violation and order for compliance shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the lands or premises sufficient for
identification of the property;
(3) Include a statement of the violations;
(4) Include an order for compliance setting forth a reasonable time to
correct the violations; and
(5) Include a statement, if applicable, that the municipality has the
right to correct the violation at its expense and assess the cost
against the property or, to the extent permitted by law, against any
other asset of the owner as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-100 if the
person responsible fails to act within the time specified in the
order.
D. The notice of violation and order for compliance shall be served in the
manner specified in this chapter depending on the nature of the
violation alleged, but if not otherwise specified, the notice shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
(1) Delivered personally to the person responsible, or his/her spouse,
agent, power of attorney or person aged 14 years or older residing
in the residence of the person responsible;
§ 11-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-4
1:112
§ 11-5. Right to appeal.
§ 11-6. Failure to comply with order.
(2) Mailed by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of the person responsible; or
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place on the lands or structure affected by
the notice and order.
A. Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation and order for compliance
issued by a code official or inspector under this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the municipal court.
B. Written application for appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the
municipal court within 10 days after the receipt of the notice of
violation and order for compliance. If the notice of violation and order
for compliance requires compliance within a lesser time period, then
the notice of violation and order for compliance shall specify such lesser
time period and the application for appeal shall be filed within the
lesser time period.
C. A written application for appeal must be based on a claim that the
violation was issued in error, the true intent of the regulation allegedly
violated has been incorrectly interpreted, or that the regulation does
not apply.
A. The failure to comply with an order within the time specified therein,
after service of the notice of violation and order for compliance, is a
strict liability offense under these regulations.
B. Any person failing to comply with an order for compliance within the
time specified therein shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court.
C. When the property that is subject to a notice of violation and order for
compliance under this chapter poses a significant risk to public health
or public safety and the person responsible has failed to comply with
the order for compliance within the time period specified, the public
officer is authorized, but not required, to correct the condition. Any
costs incurred by the municipality to correct the condition shall be
assessed as a lien against the subject property or, to the extent
permitted by law, against any other asset of the owner as provided in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-100D. The total cost incurred, including an
administrative fee of $250 for a first offense, and $500 for each
subsequent offense, shall be certified by the public officer to the City
Clerk and to the Municipal Tax Collector, who shall record the
certification forthwith. Thereafter, the governing body of the
municipality may adopt a resolution affirming the assessment of the lien
against the subject property and, if adopted, the City Clerk shall file a
copy of the resolution with the Municipal Tax Collector who shall record
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:113
§ 11-7. Violations and penalties.
it and collect the moneys owed in the same manner as property taxes
are assessed and collected.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Each day that a violation continues, after the notice of violation and
order for compliance has been served and the time specified in the
order has expired, shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person who shall violate the regulations contained herein shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 for each offense. The maximum
penalties are set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
§ 11-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-7
1:114
ARTICLE II
Vacant and Abandoned Properties
§ 11-8. Statutory authority.
The provisions of § 11-10 through § 11-19 of this article are adopted
pursuant to authority granted under the New Jersey Urban Redevelopment
Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq., as amended, and the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., as amended.
§ 11-9. Findings and purpose.
§ 11-10. Responsibility of public officer.
The Construction Official, as the designated public officer, is authorized and
instructed to exercise on behalf of the City of Millville the powers set forth
in this article and state statutes, including but not limited to identifying
abandoned properties throughout the City to establish an abandoned
property list.
§ 11-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any residential or nonresidential property that
is determined to be abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.).
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage or other interest secured by the property or any portion
thereof.
A. The governing body of the City finds and declares that there are
properties within the City which are abandoned properties as defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-81. The continued presence of abandoned buildings
within the community acts as a significant barrier to urban
revitalization and to the regeneration of the neighborhoods where they
are located.
B. Abandoned properties have been found to foster criminal activity,
create public health problems, and otherwise diminish the quality of life
for residents and business operators in the neighborhoods where they
are located, while diminishing the value of neighboring properties,
increasing the risk of property damage through arson and vandalism,
and discouraging neighborhood stability and revitalization.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to implement and utilize the powers
afforded to local government by the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, to further the revitalization of the City, and improve
economic and social conditions.
§ 11-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-11
1:115
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Millville and any qualified rehabilitation
entity that may be designated by the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-90 to
act as its agent to exercise any of the City's powers pursuant thereto.
NUISANCE — A property may be determined to be a nuisance if:
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title to an abandoned property.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — Any entity organized or
authorized to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have
as one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential
or nonresidential buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the
restoration of abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of
urban neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified
by virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior
activities set forth in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), to carry
out the rehabilitation of vacant buildings in urban areas.
REPRESENTATIVE — The individual registered with the City as the
representative of the property owner. If the property owner is an LLC or a
corporation, the registered agent, president or managing partner of same
are also "representatives" of the owner upon whom service may be made.
§ 11-12. Abandoned property list.
The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1942, c.112 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3);
A.
The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk
of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
B.
The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality has
secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner
has failed to do so;
C.
The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created
potential health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards; or
D.
The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of the
residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner
has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the
conditions.
E.
A. The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." The public
officer may add properties to the list at any time when he or she finds
§ 11-11 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-12
1:116
§ 11-13. Notice.
that a property meets the definition of an abandoned property, and the
public officer may delete properties from the list at any time when
he or she finds that a property no longer meets the definition of an
abandoned property.
B. The published list and notices shall identify the abandoned property,
setting forth the name of the owner of record, if known, the tax block
and lot numbers and the street address for the lot.
C. The abandoned property list shall be posted on the City of Millville web
site.
D. An interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned property list, provided they follow the procedure set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-105.
E. A property shall not be included on the abandoned property list if
rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as evidenced by
building permits issued and the diligent pursuit of rehabilitation work
authorized by those permits.
F. A property on which an entity, other than the municipality, has
purchased or taken assignment from the municipality of a tax sale
certificate which has been placed on the abandoned property list may
be removed in accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-103.
A. The public officer shall cause the list to be published in the official
newspaper of the City and on the City's website within 10 days of the
establishment of the abandoned property list or any additions thereto.
This publication shall constitute public notice.
B. The public officer shall mail a notice to the owner of record of each
property included on the list by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, within 10 days of the placement of any property on
the list.
C. When the owner of record is not known for a particular property and
cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax
Collector, the notice shall not be mailed, but instead shall be posted on
the property by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on
the building to be added to the list.
D. The public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also mail
a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization,
lienholder or property tax processing organization that receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill.
§ 11-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-13
1:117
§ 11-14. Right to appeal.
§ 11-15. Designation of qualified rehabilitation entity.
The City may exercise its powers under the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act directly, or the City may designate a qualified
rehabilitation entity to act as its designee for the purpose of exercising
its powers under state law where that designation will further the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with municipal plans and
objectives. This designation shall be made by resolution of the governing
body.
§ 11-16. Reporting.
The public officer shall provide a written report to the governing body of
the City every six months setting forth the status of abandoned properties
within the City and which includes, but is not limited to, the following
information:
E. A copy of the mailed or posted notice also shall be filed by the public
officer in the Cumberland County Clerk's Office, which shall have the
same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6.
A. An owner or lienholder of a property may challenge the inclusion of that
property on the abandoned property list by appealing that
determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt
of the certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice
was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the public officer
shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was published or
posted, whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on
the abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer
shall accept a late filing of an appeal.
B. The public officer shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the
matter within 30 days of the receipt of a request for an appeal of the
findings contained in the notice.
C. The public officer shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of
the hearing on the appeal, and shall promptly notify the appealing party
of the decision and the reasons therefor by regular mail and certified
mail, return receipt requested.
D. The appealing party may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer by instituting a summary proceeding in
the Superior Court, Law Division, Cumberland County, in accordance
with the New Jersey Court Rules. Such action shall be filed within 20
days of the date of the notice of decision.
A. A copy of the current abandoned property list;
B. A status report on any properties removed from the list since the last
report, and the reasons for their removal;
§ 11-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-16
1:118
§ 11-17. Other laws not affected.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to impair or limit in any way the
power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in
this article intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or
Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code Act, or any
rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 11-18. Vacant property registration.
C. A status report on any legal proceedings pending in connection with
any properties on the list;
D. A status report of any actions taken by any entity in connection with any
properties on the list; and
E. A status report of any tax sale certificates purchased by or assigned to
any entity with respect to any property appearing on the list or any
other property known to the public officer to be vacant.
A. The owner of any vacant property as defined herein shall, within 30
calendar days after the building becomes a vacant property or within 30
calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice of the
registration requirements of this ordinance by the City, file a
registration application for such vacant property with the public officer
on forms provided by the City for such purposes. Failure to receive
notice by the City shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the
property.
(1) For purposes of this section, "vacant property" shall include any
residential or nonresidential building or structure other than
sheds, barns and other structures accessory to a principal
structure which is not currently legally occupied or at which
substantially all lawful construction operations or occupancy has
ceased, including but not limited to any property meeting the
definition of "abandoned property" in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81; provided,
however, that any property where all building systems are in
working order, where the building and grounds are maintained in
good order or where the building is in habitable condition, and
where the building is being actively marketed by its owner for sale
or rental, or reserved for the owner's seasonal or temporary use,
shall not be deemed a vacant property for purposes of this article.
B. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the City shall be registered separately.
C. The registration application shall be on the form provided by the City
and shall include the name, street address, telephone number, and
email address (if applicable) of a person 21 years or older, designated
§ 11-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-18
1:119
by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for receiving notices
of code violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding
or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner or
owners in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code;
and the name, street address, telephone number, and email address (if
applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual
principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property. The individual
or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property
shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour-perday,
seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be the same or
different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
D. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains a vacant property and shall pay
a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 11-21 for
each vacant property registered, except as provided in Subsections E
and F below.
E. Any owner of vacant property who plans to restore the property to
productive use and occupancy during the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial registration of the property shall apply
for all necessary building permits with the registration application
which shall be reviewed by the public officer, and if building permits are
granted, shall be exempt from payment of the registration fee, but shall
comply with all other provisions of this article. If the property has not
received a certificate of occupancy at the end of the twelve-month
period, the owner shall be liable for any fee waived. The public officer
may extend the waiver of the registration fee for not more than one
additional year in response to a written request by the property owner
where the owner has received all necessary building permits and
commenced restoration of the property and the public officer finds that
compelling conditions outside of the owner's control made it impossible
for the owner to complete restoration of the property within the initial
twelve-month period. If the property receives a certificate of occupancy
and is restored to productive use and occupancy within the term of the
waiver granted by the public officer, the fee shall be forgiven in its
entirety.
F. Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property subject to
this article is being held for a project of rehabilitation or redevelopment
consistent with municipal plans and ordinance, and where by virtue of
financing, market or other conditions that project may require more
than one year for realization, the public officer may extend the waiver
of the registration fee on an annual basis without limitation upon
written request by the owner as long as the municipal officer finds that
the owner is making reasonable progress toward completion of the
§ 11-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-18
1:120
§ 11-19. Access to vacant properties.
The owner of any vacant property registered under this article shall provide
access to the City to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, upon reasonable
notice to the property owner, agent or representative during normal
business hours, or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between
the owner and the City. If entry is refused, or not obtained, the public officer
is authorized to pursue and secure an order to authorize entry from the
municipal court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 11-20. Responsible owner or agent.
project. The owner shall provide the public officer with such
documentation, which may include plans, financing applications,
applications for land use approval or other evidence of progress.
G. The owner shall notify the Bureau within 30 calendar days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
application on a form provided by the Bureau for such purpose.
H. The registration application shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this article,
the owner consents to receive by service of the notice or process on the
authorized agent any and all notices of code violations concerning the
registered vacant property and all process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the registered building. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this article shall
be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for
the purposes of this article until the owner notifies the City of Millville
in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner files a new
annual registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the provisions
of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
on the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known
address of the owner of the property on record with the City of Millville
by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations and
all process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the building.
§ 11-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-21
1:121
§ 11-21. Vacant Property Registration Fee Schedule.
§ 11-22. Responsibilities of owners of vacant property.
The owner of any building that has become a vacant property, and any
person maintaining or operating any building that has become vacant shall,
within 30 days thereof:
A. Fees.
(1) Initial registration: $500.
(2) First annual renewal: $1,000.
(3) Second annual renewal: $1,500.
(4) Each and any subsequent annual renewal: $2,000.
B. At least 80% of all fee revenues collected under this article shall be
used to carry out municipal activities with respect to vacant and
distressed properties, including but not limited to code enforcement,
abatement of nuisance conditions, stabilization, rehabilitation, and
other activities designed to minimize blight and further productive
reuse of vacant properties.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in Appendix A to the International Property Maintenance Code, or as
set forth in the rules and regulations supplementing those codes;
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant § 11-20) and the
person responsible for the day-to-day supervision and management of
the building, if such person is different from the owner holding title or
authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk,
whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than eight inches by 10
inches. The sign shall be of such material or in such an enclosure as to
ensure that it will remain legible under adverse weather conditions;
C. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are wellmaintained
and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass and weed
growth;
D. Continue to maintain the structure in a closed condition and secure
from unauthorized entry, keep the grounds in a clean and wellmaintained
condition, and ensure that the sign is visible and intact until
the building is again occupied, demolished, or until repair and/or
rehabilitation of the building is complete;
§ 11-21 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-22
1:122
§ 11-23. Violations and penalties.
§ 11-23.1. Exemption of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. [Added
7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 39-2019]
Notwithstanding the aforesaid sections to the contrary, Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and any loan servicer acting on their behalf shall be exempt from
the payment of registration fees for any property registered under Chapter
11, Article II, as well as the payment of any fines or penalties otherwise
permitted to be assessed by Chapter 11, Article II, or other ordinance that
addresses vacant property. Any form used to register a property subject to
Chapter 11, Article II, shall provide a place for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac
or any loan servicer acting on their behalf to indicate their exempt status.
Failure to indicate exempt status will not waive the right to grant an exempt
status but may require the registering party to reregister the property to
indicate the exempt status.
E. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed for one- to four-unit residential use and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other building, including, but not limited to,
buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage, or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any insurance
policy acquired or renewed after the building has become vacant shall
provide for written notice to the municipal officer within 30 days of any
lapse, cancellation, or change in coverage. The owner shall attach
evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration statement. Any
registration application submitted that does not include such evidence
shall not be deemed to be a valid application.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this section shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on
the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration application
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
City, failure to provide correct information on the registration
application, or failure to comply with the provisions contained herein
shall be deemed to be violations of this section.
§ 11-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-23.1
1:123

ARTICLE III
Dangerous, Damaged and Unfit Structures
§ 11-24. Findings and purpose.
§ 11-25. Authorization.
§ 11-26. Definitions.
A. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that there
are dangerous, damaged and unfit structures within the community
that constitute a nuisance which may require abatement or removal by
summary proceedings.
B. These nuisance properties may adversely affect the public health,
safety and welfare in a variety of ways, including representing an
attractive nuisance to children who can be injured or killed when
playing in them; being a haven for criminal activities which increase
crime in the neighborhood where these structures exist; adversely
affecting the quality of life of the residents living in the neighborhood
where they exist and undermining property values of other structures
in the neighborhood; and representing a fire hazard.
C. It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide a means by which
these structures can be identified and to provide for the timely
demolition or rehabilitation of these structures where necessary
through summary proceedings.
A. The public officer is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by
this article and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville is authorized to designate
any elected or appointed official of the City of Millville by resolution as
the hearing officer to conduct hearings under this article.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning
is intended:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, including any outbuildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DAMAGED STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part thereof,
which has been damaged to such an extent that nothing remains but
the walls, or parts of the walls, and other supports, regardless of the
safety and sturdiness of the remaining walls, or parts thereof.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part
thereof, which is dangerous to human life or the public welfare or which
constitutes a fire hazard.
NUISANCE — As defined in § 11-11 of this chapter.
§ 11-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-26
1:125
§ 11-27. Standards for unfit structures.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in the
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of the building, the occupants of neighboring buildings, or other
residents of the City. Such conditions may include any of the following
without limiting the generality of the foregoing.
§ 11-28. Complaint and notice of hearing.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
OWNER'S REPRESENTATIVE — The individual registered with the City
as the representative of the property owner. If the property owner is
an LLC or a corporation, the registered agent, president or managing
partner of same are also "representatives" of the owner upon whom
service may be made.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building or are in actual possession
thereof.
UNFIT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, or part thereof, which
is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use due to the conditions
set forth herein.
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of accident, fire or other
calamities;
B. Dilapidation;
C. Disrepair or structural defects;
D. Lack of adequate light, sanitary facilities or ventilation;
E. Failure to comply with the Property Maintenance Code; or
F. Other defects or conditions dangerous to the health or safety of the
occupants of the building, the occupants of neighboring buildings, or
other residents of the City, including emergency conditions requiring
immediate action.
A. Whenever the public officer shall determine that any building is a
dangerous, damaged or unfit structure and is in need of summary
action to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community, he or
she shall file a report with the City Attorney which identifies the
structure, its condition, the reasons for action, and the nature of the
action proposed to be taken. Upon receipt of the report, the City
Attorney shall prepare a complaint setting forth the location and
condition of the building and the remedy sought and a notice of hearing
setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing.
§ 11-26 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-28
1:126
§ 11-29. Hearing and order.
B. The complaint and notice of hearing shall be served upon the property
owner or the owner's representative and all parties in interest. Service
shall be made personally or by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested, by mailing the complaint and notice of hearing to their last
known addresses. Service on either the property owner or the property
owner's representative shall be sufficient service; service on both shall
not be required.
C. If the whereabouts of both the property owner and the owner's
representative are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, or if the whereabouts of a party in interest
cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence, then
service of the pleadings shall be made on such person as follows: 1) by
publishing the complaint and notice of hearing once in the official
newspaper of the City; 2) by posting the complaint and notice of
hearing in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
complaint; and 3) by recording the complaint and notice of hearing in
the Cumberland County Clerk's office.
A. The public officer shall testify at the hearing in connection with the
complaint that was issued. The property owner and any party in interest
shall have the right to appear at the hearing and testify, produce
witnesses, and be represented by an attorney.
B. If after the hearing the hearing officer determines that the building in
question is a dangerous, damaged or unfit structure, he or she shall
enter an order, including any of the following:
(1) Requiring the immediate closing of an unfit structure;
(2) Requiring the repair of the structure within a reasonable time,
which time shall be set forth in the order; or
(3) Requiring the demolition of the structure if it is not economically or
otherwise feasible to repair the structure.
C. A copy of the order shall be served on the property owner and all
parties in interest personally or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, by mailing it to their last known addresses.
D. If the whereabouts of both the property owner and the property owner's
representative are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, or if any party in interest is unknown and
cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then
service of the order shall be made on such person as follows: 1) by
publishing the order once in the official newspaper of the City; 2) by
posting the order in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
order; and 3) by recording the order in the Cumberland County Clerk's
office.
§ 11-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-29
1:127
§ 11-30. Emergency measures.
§ 11-31. Failure to comply with order.
E. A copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or order shall be filed with
and duly recorded in the Cumberland County Clerk's Office, which shall
have the same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens.
A. Imminent danger. Whenever the public officer determines that there is
imminent danger to life or property due to the potential for collapse or
failure of a structure or other health or safety conditions representing
an immediate hazard to the life or health of the occupants or to the
health and safety of the public, the public officer is authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises
immediately. The public officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such structure a notice which reads as follows: "This
structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the City of
Millville." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the structure
except for the purpose of inspecting the structure, securing the
structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or demolishing the structure.
B. Emergency repairs. Whenever the public officer makes emergency
repairs, the public officer shall employ the necessary labor and
materials to perform the required work and stabilize the property as
expeditiously as possible. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the municipality, and shall be
recoverable from the property owner in accordance with the provisions
set forth in § 11-6.
A. In the event that the property owner and all parties in interest fail to
comply with the order of the hearing officer, the public officer may
proceed without further notice to enforce the provisions of the order by
such means as is necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the
order, including but not limited to the closing of the structure, the
repair of the structure, or the demolition of the structure at the expense
of the City.
B. The cost of closing, repairing or demolishing and removing the
structure as well as the cost of legal services, expert witness fees,
search fees and advertising expenses incurred in the course of any
proceeding shall constitute a municipal lien against the real property or
against any other asset of the owner as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
Any revenues realized by the City in the course of action, such as sale of
building materials obtained in the course of demolition, shall constitute
a credit against any such lien or judgment.
C. The public officer shall prepare a detailed statement of the costs
incurred, less any credits due, and file it with the City Clerk. Thereafter,
the governing body of the City shall adopt a resolution certifying the
total amount of the municipal lien. This resolution shall be filed with the
§ 11-29 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-31
1:128
§ 11-32. Effect of transfer of property.
In the event a property subject to the provisions of this article is transferred
by the property owner to another owner subsequent to the filing of a
complaint and notice of hearing, the transferee shall be deemed to have
assumed full responsibility for compliance with the pending matter, shall be
bound to the terms of the original order for compliance and shall assume
full liability for any failure to comply with any order issued under the
provisions of this article. The transferor's failure to notify the transferee
of the existence of any notice of violation and order for compliance issued
pursuant to this chapter prior to the transfer shall not excuse transferee
from complying with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter,
including, without limitation, the obligation to comply with an order and to
assume liability for any failure to comply with an order issued prior to such
transfer.
§ 11-33. Other laws not affected.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to impair or limit in any way the
power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in
this article intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or
Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code Act or any
rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
Tax Assessor and the Tax Collector, and a copy of the resolution shall
be mailed forthwith to the property owner by regular mail and certified
mail, return receipt requested.
D. The owner or any party in interest may, within 30 days of the filing date
of the municipal lien certificate, institute a summary proceeding in the
Superior Court, Law Division, to contest the accuracy or
reasonableness of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 11-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-33
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Properties in Foreclosure
§ 11-34. Statutory authority.
A. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides in relevant part that a municipality may make
and enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations not contrary to the
laws of this state or of the United States as it may deem necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(a) provides in relevant part that a creditor serving a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage on
residential property in this state shall within 10 days of serving the
summons and complaint notify the municipal clerk of the municipality
in which the property is located that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been filed against the subject
property. The notice shall contain the name and contact information for
the representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations. The notice
may contain information about more than one property, and shall be
provided by mail or electronic communication, at the discretion of the
municipal clerk. The notice shall also include the street address, lot and
block number of the property and the full name and contact information
of an individual located within the state who is authorized to accept
service on behalf of the creditor.
C. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(b) provides in relevant part that if the owner of a
residential property vacates or abandons any property on which a
foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a residential property
becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the creditor's filing the
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against
the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor or any
other third party, and the exterior of the property is found to be a
nuisance or in violation of any applicable state or local code, the
appropriate local municipal official shall notify the creditor of the
nuisance or violation. The creditor shall have the responsibility to abate
the nuisance or correct the violation in the same manner and to the
same extent as the title owner of the property, to such standard or
specification as may be required by state law or municipal ordinance.
D. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51(c) provides in relevant part that if the municipality
expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct a violation
on a residential property in situations where the creditor was given
notice pursuant to the aforesaid statute but failed to abate the nuisance
or correct the violation as directed, the municipality shall have the
same recourse against the creditor as it would have against the title
owner of the property including, but not limited to, the recourse
provided under N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
§ 11-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-34
1:131
§ 11-35. Findings and purpose.
E. N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.1 provides in relevant part that the owner of any
non-owner-occupied residential property who takes title to the property
as the result of a sheriff's sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, other than
an owner who has previously provided notice to the municipality
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, shall provide notice, within 10 business
days, to the municipal clerk of the municipality wherein the property is
located providing the name and address of the owner. If the owner is
not located within New Jersey, then the owner shall designate an agent
within New Jersey, including the agent's address, who is authorized to
accept service of process on behalf of the property owner.
F. N.J.S.A. 55:19-100 provides in relevant part that with respect to any lien
placed against any real property pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3a or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 or any receiver's
lien pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:42-114 et seq., the municipality shall have
recourse with respect to the lien against any asset of the owner of the
property if an individual, against any asset of any partner if a
partnership, and against any asset of any owner of a 10% interest or
greater if the owner is any other business organization or entity
recognized pursuant to law.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that
residential properties with pending foreclosure proceedings often
become vacant. These vacant properties if not maintained rapidly
become eyesores with unkempt lawns and overgrown vegetation,
broken doors and windows, and deteriorating structures. These
properties create a wide range of negative secondary effects in the
neighborhoods where they are located in that they foster criminal
activity, create public health problems, and otherwise diminish the
quality of life for residents and business operators located in those
areas.
B. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that
residential properties with pending foreclosure proceedings which have
become vacant are often not maintained by the creditor who has filed
the foreclosure proceedings. These vacant properties deteriorate by
neglect and diminish property values of neighboring properties,
increase the risk of property damage through arson and vandalism, and
discourage neighborhood stability and revitalization.
C. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are vacant residential properties located within the community that
constitute a nuisance which require the abatement or removal of the
nuisance by summary proceedings. Where a creditor has filed a
summons and complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage on a
residential property that is vacant, the creditor is responsible for the
abatement or removal of the nuisance.
§ 11-34 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-35
1:132
§ 11-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the meaning given in
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
CREDITOR — A state or federal chartered bank, savings bank, savings and
loan association or credit union, any person required to be licensed under
the provisions of the New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lenders Act, P.L.
2009, c.53, and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the debt
obligations, including, but not limited to, servicers.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Grandfather, grandmother, father,
mother, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, uncle or
aunt, niece or nephew.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any structure used for residential occupancy.
§ 11-37. Property Maintenance Code.
The provisions of the Property Maintenance Code of the municipality shall
apply to all residential properties where a creditor has filed a summons and
complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage.
§ 11-38. Registration.
D. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there
are vacant residential properties located within the community that
have exterior violations of the Property Maintenance Code which
require affirmative action to correct the violation to protect the public
health, safety or welfare. Where a creditor has filed a summons and
complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage on a residential property
that is vacant, the creditor is responsible for the correction of those
violations of the Property Maintenance Code.
E. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to require the
registration of residential properties where a creditor has filed a
summons and complaint for the foreclosure of a mortgage on the
property so that the municipality can identify these properties, inspect
the structures, monitor the condition of the properties, insure that the
properties are maintained, and have a data base of information to
contact and provide legal notice to the creditor.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint to foreclose a mortgage on
residential property within the municipality must also register the
dwelling with the municipality through the Bureau of Permits and
Inspections within 30 days from the date when the complaint was filed
with the court. Creditor shall comply with all the requirements of
Article II of the ordinances of the City of Millville when a property
meets the conditions of vacant property per § 11-18A. A complete
§ 11-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-38
1:133
§ 11-39. Responsible party.
registration form and fee are required for each separate property that
is the subject of a foreclosure action.
B. The registration application shall be on the form provided by the City
and shall include the name, street address, telephone number, and
email address (if applicable) of a person 21 years or older, designated
by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for receiving notices of
code violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner or
owners in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code; and
the name, street address, telephone number, and email address (if
applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual
principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property. The individual or
representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property
shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour-perday,
seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be the same or
different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
C. The registration form shall be accompanied with an annual registration
fee of $500 for the initial registration, $1,000 for the first renewal,
$1,500 for the second renewal and $2,000 for each subsequent annual
renewal. Registration forms shall be available at the Bureau of Permits
and Inspections. Registrants shall mail the completed and executed
form to the Bureau along with a check made payable to the
municipality. A registration form is required for each house, commercial
property, townhouse, condominium or duplex that is the subject of a
foreclosure action.
D. The cost of inspections is included in the fee charged above.
E. Property registration shall be renewed every 12 months. The renewal
form shall be due on the anniversary date following the original
registration date. Failure to register a property on a timely basis shall
result in the assessment of civil penalties. It shall be the responsibility
of the registrant to notify the Bureau in writing whenever there is a
change in the contact information of the registrant.
A. If a residential or commercial property becomes vacant at any point
subsequent to the filing of a summons and complaint but prior to
vesting of title in the creditor/lender, the creditor/lender is the
responsible party for the upkeep of the property. This includes the
responsibility to abate any nuisance and correct violations of the
municipal property maintenance code; and
B. If a residential or commercial property becomes vacant, the creditor/
lender shall be the responsible party immediately upon receiving notice
from the municipality that the property has become vacant. Said notice
§ 11-38 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-39
1:134
§ 11-40. Inspection.
Once a home is registered, the Public Officer shall send an inspector to
the property to determine whether there are any exterior violations of the
Property Maintenance Code. After the inspection, a notice of violation and
order for compliance shall be sent to the responsible party indicating what
problems must be remedied and the time period for the completion of the
work. A reinspection of the property shall take place at the end of that time
period to determine whether compliance has occurred.
§ 11-41. Applicability.
Article I of this chapter, titled "Administration," shall be applicable to this
article. It sets forth the procedural requirements that apply once a notice of
violation has been sent to the responsible party.
§ 11-42. Violations and penalties.
must be sent to the creditor/lender by certified mail. If the certified mail
has not been able to be delivered, notice shall be deemed to be given
at the time notice is posted on the property in a conspicuous place and
notice is sent by regular mail to the last known address of the creditor
as noted in the records of the Tax Collector.
A. If the public officer determines that any person or entity subject to the
provisions of this article has violated the article by failing to provide for
the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the
property, the public officer shall issue a notice requiring the person or
entity to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or
within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety. The issuance of a notice
pursuant to this subsection shall constitute proof that a property is
vacant and abandoned for the purposes of P.L. 2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A.
2A:50-23).
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article found to be in violation of
the requirement to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall be
subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the ten-day
period set forth in Paragraph (1) of Subsection a. of section 17 of P.L.
2009, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51) for providing notice to the municipal
clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage has been served.
C. A creditor subject to this article found to be in violation of the
requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep
violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to the article shall be subject
to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed
pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following the
receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to
§ 11-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-42
1:135
§ 11-43. Assessment of lien.
If the municipality expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation of the Property Maintenance Code on a residential
property in situations in which the creditor was given notice pursuant to
this article, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violations as
directed, the municipality shall have the same recourse against the creditor
as it would have against the title owner of the property. The municipality
may assess a lien against the subject property for the moneys expended
by the municipality. This lien may be enforced and collected in the same
manner as real estate taxes are enforced and collected or may be enforced
against any other asset of the owner as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-100.
public health and safety, in which case any files shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
§ 11-42 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-43
1:136
ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance Code
§ 11-44. Statutory authority.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides in relevant part that a municipality may make and
enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations not contrary to the laws of
this state or of the United States as it may deem necessary and proper for
the good government, order and protection of persons and property, and for
the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the municipality
and its inhabitants.
§ 11-45. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish the standards and to regulate the
manner by which existing structures and premises within the City shall be
maintained to preserve the environmental quality of the City and to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 11-46. Adoption of standards by reference.
Chapters 2 through 8, inclusive, of the International Property Maintenance
Code of 2012 as it may be updated, amended or revised from time to
time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same were set
forth with particularity. These regulations shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Millville."
§ 11-47. Amendments and additions.
A. (Subsection 201.3). Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not
defined in this code or an applicable state code but are defined in the
International Building Code, New Jersey edition; the International Fire
Code; state and local zoning codes; the National Standard Plumbing
Code; the International Mechanical Code; the International Residential
Code, New Jersey edition; and the National Electrical Code, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
B. (Subsection 302.4). Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches.
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees, shrubs,
cultivated flowers and gardens.
C. (Subsection 302.10). Laundry: At no time shall laundry be located on
front porches, deck railings or any other appurtenances that can be
viewed from the roadway.
D. (Subsection 304.14). Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to
October 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
§ 11-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-47
1:137
§ 11-48. Liberal construction of article.
This article shall be construed liberally and justly to ensure public health,
safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued use and
maintenance of structures and premises.
§ 11-49. Applicability of uniform construction codes.
Any repairs, or alterations to a structure, or changes of use therein, which
may result directly or indirectly from the enforcement of this article shall be
done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 11-50. Workmanship.
All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are
required for compliance with this article shall be executed and installed in
a workmanlike manner so as to secure the results intended by this article.
§ 11-51. Modification of provisions.
When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out structural or
mechanical provisions of this article, the public officer and the construction
official shall be permitted jointly to vary or modify such provision upon
application of the owner or the owner's representative, provided that the
spirit and intent of this article is observed and public health, welfare and
safety protected.
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored,
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than
16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every swinging door shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition.
E. Carbon monoxide alarms and smoke detectors shall be installed within
all residential homes located within the City of Millville in accordance
with the requirements imposed by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
F. Chapter 8 referenced standards. Where there is an applicable state
code and the standards in the applicable state code are in conflict with
the referenced standards in this chapter, the standards contained in the
state code shall apply.
G. Maintenance of signs. All signs authorized or permitted by Chapter 30
of the Municipal Code (Land Use and Development Regulations) or by
Chapter 33 of the Municipal Code (Licensing and Permits) or by
§ 11-22B of this chapter shall be maintained in good repair and be
properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required,
all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weathercoating
materials such as paint or similar surface treatment.
§ 11-47 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-52
1:138
§ 11-52. Grant of access to owner or operator.
Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator
thereof, or the owner's agent or employee, access to any part of such
structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making
such inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary for
the owner to comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 11-53. Emergency orders.
Whenever the public officer finds that an emergency exists in any structure
or part thereof which requires immediate action to protect the public health
and safety, or that of the occupants of said structure or part thereof, the
public officer shall, with proper notice, issue an order reciting the existence
of such an emergency and requiring that repairs be made to the structure
or premises forthwith.
§ 11-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-53
1:139

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Disposal of Harmful Matter, Vegetation and Bulk
Waste
§ 11-54. Statutory authority.
§ 11-55. Findings and purpose.
The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that the existence
of matter and vegetation which is detrimental to the public health, safety,
or general welfare, or which constitutes a fire or public safety hazard is a
nuisance which must be abated. The purpose and intent of these regulations
is to identify these conditions and provide for their timely abatement.
§ 11-56. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
A. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 authorizes a municipality to adopt regulations
requiring the owner or tenant of a dwelling or lands located within the
municipality to remove and destroy brush, weeds, ragweed, dead and
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and
debris where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety, general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13a authorizes a municipality to adopt regulations
requiring the owner or tenant of a dwelling or land located within the
municipality to remove and destroy solid waste stored in such a way as
to be accessible to and likely to be strewn about by animals where it is
necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health,
safety or general welfare.
C. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14 authorizes a municipality to assess a lien against the
subject property where the municipality has incurred expenses to
remove and destroy the harmful matter and vegetation after the owner
or tenant has failed to comply with a notice of violation and order.
D. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 authorizes a municipality to adopt regulations
requiring the owner or tenant of lands located within the municipality
to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of
any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut
to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it is necessary and
expedient for the preservation of the public safety.
E. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27 authorizes a municipality to assess a lien against the
subject property where the municipality has incurred expenses to cut
and remove the plant life after the owner or tenant has failed to comply
with a notice of violation and order.
§ 11-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-56
1:141
BRUSH — A dense growth of underwood or vegetation or broken and cut
branches.
BULK WASTE — Large, unused or unproductive matter not constituting
garbage, trash or recyclable materials, including but not limited to
demolition materials, furniture, household appliances, household
furnishings, motor vehicle bodies and parts, tires and debris.
DEBRIS — Any accumulation of broken and detached materials, including
fragments or ruins from construction, demolition, or rehabilitation projects.
FILTH — Any foul or odorous matter except for that authorized and
designated for use in agriculture.
GARBAGE — Any animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HARMFUL MATTER — Debris, filth, garbage, refuse, rubbish, or trash
which poses a significant risk to the public health, safety or general welfare,
or which constitutes a fire hazard.
HARMFUL VEGETATION — Brush, dead and dying trees, noxious growth,
ragweed, roots, stumps, or weeds which poses a significant risk to the
public health, safety or general welfare, or which constitute a fire hazard.
NOXIOUS GROWTH — Plant growth which is harmful or injurious to health
or physical well-being.
REFUSE — Any matter, excluding garbage, that is discarded as useless or
worthless.
RUBBISH — Any combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
including boxes, cartons, cans, crockery, excelsior, glass, leather, metals,
mineral matter, paper, rags, rubber, wood, and other similar materials.
TRASH — Waste or worthless matter, including refuse and rubbish.
WEEDS — Any plant that is troublesome, useless or injurious to any
cultivated crop or plant, or to the public health.
§ 11-57. Regulations.
A. The public officer shall require the removal and proper disposal of any
harmful matter in any dwelling or on lands within the municipality
where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
health, safety or general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard.
B. The public officer shall require the removal and proper disposal of any
harmful vegetation in any dwelling or on lands within the municipality
including alleyways and areas adjacent thereto in private ownership,
where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
health, safety or general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard.
C. The public officer shall require the removal and proper disposal of solid
waste being stored in any dwelling or on lands within the municipality,
including alleyways and areas adjacent thereto in private ownership, in
§ 11-56 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-57
1:142
§ 11-58. Notice of violation and order.
§ 11-59. Failure to comply with order.
Where the responsible person fails to comply with the notice of violation and
order within the time specified in the order, the public officer may provide
for the removal and destruction of the harmful matter and vegetation at the
expense of the municipality.
such a manner as to be accessible to and likely to be strewn about by
animals where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety or general welfare.
D. The public officer shall require the removal and proper disposal of bulk
waste on property where it is found to damage the environmental
quality of the community and impair the public health, safety and
general welfare.
E. The public officer shall require that brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways be cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2
feet where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public safety.
F. The owner and tenant in possession of any dwelling or lands shall be the
person or persons jointly responsible for compliance with these
regulations, or if the property is in the process of being foreclosed and
has been abandoned, the mortgagee shall also be a person responsible
for compliance with these regulations.
G. The owner or landlord of any building, structure or lands shall be solely
responsible for compliance with these regulations where the condition
exists in common areas under the exclusive control of the owner or
landlord.
H. No person shall dump or deposit waste material on any property within
the City unless the dump site is a site specifically approved by state or
local government and is authorized by state or local law.
I. No person shall transport waste material through the streets of the City
except in vehicles or receptacles that are covered and watertight so
that no liquid or odor shall escape.
A. The public officer shall issue a notice of violation and order requiring
the responsible person to remove and destroy the harmful matter or
vegetation within 10 days from the date of service of the notice of
violation.
B. If the notice of violation involves solid waste stored in such a manner
that it is accessible to and likely to be strewn about by animals, then the
order may provide for its removal and destruction within 72 hours from
the date of service of the notice of violation.
§ 11-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-60
1:143
§ 11-60. Assessment of lien.
§ 11-61. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the regulations contained in
this article. The court shall fine all responsible parties found guilty of failure
to comply with the notice of violation and order or found guilty of other
regulations contained in this article a minimum of $200 and a maximum of
$1,000 for the initial offense.
§ 11-62. Continuation of violation.
Each day that a violation continues, after a notice of violation and an order
for correction has been issued and the time for correction has expired, shall
constitute a separate violation. The court shall impose a minimum fine of
$25 for each additional day that the violation continues and maximum of
$1,000 for each additional day that the violation continues after notice of
violation and an order for correction have been issued, and the time for
correction has expired.
A. In all cases where the harmful matter and vegetation has been removed
and destroyed under the direction of the public officer, at the expense of
the municipality, after issuing a notice of violation and order under
§ 11-58 above, the public officer shall certify the cost thereof to the
governing body of the municipality plus an administrative fee of $250
for a first offense and $500 for each subsequent offense.
B. The City Administrator shall review the certification and upon approval
the governing body of the municipality shall adopt a resolution
authorizing and instructing the Tax Collector to assess the cost incurred
by the municipality against the subject property. The assessment shall
become a lien against the subject property and collected in the same
manner as property taxes are assessed and collected.
§ 11-60 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-62
1:144
ARTICLE VII
Residential Rental Properties
§ 11-63. Statutory authority.
A. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 provides in relevant part that a municipality may make,
amend, repeal and enforce ordinances not contrary to the laws of this
state or of the United States, as it may deem necessary and proper for
the good government, order and protection of persons and property,
and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the
municipality and its inhabitants.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12a provides in relevant part that the governing body
of any municipality may make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to
regulate buildings and structures and their use and occupation to
prevent and abate conditions therein harmful to the health and safety of
the occupants of said building and structures and the general public in
the municipality.
C. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12c provides in relevant part that any ordinance
adopted pursuant to this act may provide for registration of the owners
and management of every building and structure in the municipality
which is occupied by two or more families as tenants of the owner or
lessor.
D. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f provides in relevant part that any ordinance
adopted pursuant to this act may also provide that the municipality may
abate a nuisance, correct a defect, or put the premises in proper
condition so as to comply with the requirements of any municipal
ordinance or state law applicable thereto, at the cost of the owner or
lessor, and expend municipal funds for such purpose and charge the
same against the premises, and the amount thereof as determined by
the governing body of the municipality shall be a lien against the
premises.
E. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12m authorizes a municipality to adopt an ordinance
requiring a landlord to obtain a certificate of occupancy or inspection
before re-renting an apartment to a new occupant. After an apartment
is inspected by a municipal inspector, the municipality would issue a
certificate of inspection or occupancy if the apartment meets the
standards required by law. The municipality may charge a fee to fund
the costs of the inspections and the issuance of the certificates.
F. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n sets forth the findings of the Legislature that
municipal residents have experienced disturbances, damage and public
expense resulting from carelessly granted and inadequately supervised
rentals to irresponsible tenants by inept or indifferent landlords; that to
preserve their peace and tranquility it is necessary and desirable that
those communities have adequate means to curb and discourage those
occasional excesses arising from irresponsible rentals; and that
municipal governing bodies may take effective action to assure that
§ 11-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-63
1:145
§ 11-64. Findings and purpose.
§ 11-65. Exceptions.
§ 11-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the meaning given in
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
AGENT — The individual designated by the owner who is authorized to
perform any duty imposed by these regulations.
CRIME RATE — The number of verified criminal incidents divided into the
number of households in the City of Millville, as shown in the most recent
American Community Survey, or into the number of residential rental units
in a large multiunit complex, as defined further herein.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Grandfather, grandmother, father,
mother, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, uncle or
aunt, niece or nephew.
LARGE MULTIUNIT COMPLEX — Any property containing 75 or more
residential rental units in the aggregate. This may include a property that
contains more than one separate building or structure, or multiple
properties that are generally contiguous to one another, under common or
related management or held out to the public as being a single facility or
project.
excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated, and that landlords be
held to sufficient standards of responsibility.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that the
Property Maintenance Code sets minimum standards for safety and
habitability and the continued occupancy of residential rental units in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Minor violations
of the Property Maintenance Code shall not prevent the continued
occupancy of a residential rental unit.
B. The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that a
registration and inspection scheme for residential rental units is a
rational exercise of the municipal police power to establish that each
residential rental unit substantially complies with the standards set
forth in the property maintenance code in order to insure the safety and
habitability of each residential rental unit.
A. These regulations shall not apply to hotels, motels, boardinghouses,
rooming houses and other residential units which are consistently
occupied by guests or tenants for less than 30 successive days.
B. These regulations shall not apply to a residential rental unit occupied
by an immediate family member of the owner.
§ 11-63 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-66
1:146
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any structure or property containing two or more
residential rental units.
OWNER — For purposes of this article, "owner" shall include not only any
person who is the fee simple owner of a residential rental unit but any other
person who has a legal interest in such unit, or operates or exercises control
over a residential rental unit.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — An apartment, dwelling, structure or any
portion of a structure, including single-family dwellings, used for human
habitation for which the owner receives monetary consideration or in-kind
services.
SECURITY MEASURES — Any measures taken to protect the safety of
residents living within a large multiunit complex. Security may include, but
is not limited to, visitor sign-in requirements, video or human surveillance,
unarmed guard patrols, armed guard patrols and/or any other measures
taken to improve safety and reduce crime.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any structure or property containing one
residential rental unit.
§ 11-67. Registration permit and fee.
A. Each residential rental unit shall be registered annually. The
registration term shall commence on January 1 of each year and end on
December 31 of that year. The annual registration fee for each unit shall
be $100 if applied for and paid for before March 1 and $125 for any
renewal of a registration permit if applied for thereafter. No fee shall be
required for units owned by the City, Millville Housing Authority, or
another governmental agency.
B. No residential rental unit shall be occupied unless it is registered with
the City and is occupied in compliance with these regulations and
Article V, Property Maintenance Code, of this chapter.
C. Upon submission of a complete registration form and payment of the
registration fee, the City shall issue a registration permit for each
property containing a residential rental unit. No registration shall be
accepted unless an agent has been designated as provided in § 11-68
below. Upon receipt of the completed form and fee, the City will
schedule a timely inspection of the unit or units that are the subject of
the registration. If the inspection results in a satisfactory rating, a
certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued. However, the
Housing Inspector may reinspect any residential rental unit at any time
when he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the unit is no
longer in compliance with the property maintenance code or these
regulations.
§ 11-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-67
1:147
§ 11-68. Application information.
Every application for registration of a residential rental unit shall be on
the form provided by the municipality, and shall include the following
information:
D. As a condition of receiving a registration permit, the owner or manager
of a multiple dwelling shall provide proof that said multiple dwelling is
under contract with a private waste hauler for the collection of its solid
waste.
E. The registration fee shall include the administrative cost of the
registration permit and two inspections during the calendar year for
which the permit applies. Any additional inspection or reinspection
required by the Housing Inspector or any cancellation of an
appointment for inspection on less than 48 hours' notice during the
same year shall result in an additional charge of $50 per inspection.
F. The owner shall notify the Bureau of Permits and Inspections forthwith
whenever a unit has been vacated, and prior to any reoccupancy of the
residential rental unit.
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the record owner or
owners of the premises. In the case of a partnership, this information
shall be provided for all general partners. In the case of a corporation or
LLC, this information shall be provided for the registered agent and all
corporate officers.
B. The address of the residential rental unit, the exact number of all
separate residential rental units at that address, the number or letter
designating each unit, and for each unit:
(1) The number of rooms used exclusively or primarily for sleeping
contained within each residential rental unit.
(2) The estimated square footage of each room used exclusively or
primarily for sleeping.
(3) The number of occupants of each residential rental unit and the
name of the tenant or tenants signing the lease. If the residential
rental unit is unoccupied at the time that the application is
completed, the owner or agent shall provide this information as
soon as the unit is occupied.
C. Individual owners and partnerships shall provide a photo identification
for at least one of the named owners or partners.
D. LLCs and corporations shall supply a copy of the corporate charter or
registration certificate and a photo identification of either the president
or managing partner.
E. Associations shall supply a photo identification of one of the officers.
Trusts shall supply a photo identification of at least one of the trustees.
§ 11-67 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-68
1:148
§ 11-69. Designation of person to receive notice and correct
violations.
Each person who owns a property containing one or more residential rental
units except as provided in § 11-65 within the City of Millville shall
designate a natural person or agent who resides within the county to
receive the notice of violation and to correct any violations of these
regulations or of Article V, Property Maintenance Code, of this chapter. This
natural person or agent shall be named in the application when it is filed. If
the owner does not reside in Cumberland County, the owner shall designate
an agent with a residence or office in the county to act on his or her behalf.
§ 11-70. Inspections.
F. The public officer, in consultation with the Commissioner/Director of
Public Affairs and the City Administrator, may amend the registration
application to require additional information.
A. Each property containing one or more residential rental unit except as
provided in § 11-65 within the City of Millville shall be inspected
annually and with each change in occupancy, except as provided herein,
to insure that it is in compliance with these regulations and the
property maintenance code. The housing inspector shall make a report
promptly after each inspection.
B. The City shall waive the annual inspection requirement for any property
that (1) received a change of occupancy inspection within six months or
less of the scheduled annual inspection date; and (2) was found at that
time to be in satisfactory condition on the initial inspection.
C. If the residential rental unit does not comply with applicable
regulations and codes of the City of Millville, a notice of violation shall
be served on the owner or resident agent in the form and manner
prescribed by Article I of this chapter, and a time specified for
correction of the violations.
D. The housing inspector shall reinspect the residential rental unit after
the notice of violation has been served and the time has expired for
correction of the violations.
E. If a violation still exists after reinspection, if the housing inspector
deems that the owner is making a good-faith effort to correct the
violation, he or she may allow for further time and subsequent
reinspection of the residential rental unit; alternatively, the housing
inspector shall file a complaint with the Municipal Court for
enforcement of the applicable regulations and codes.
F. No certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued until all violations
have been corrected. Any certificate of continued occupancy, once
issued, may be revoked or suspended in the event the residential rental
§ 11-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-70
1:149
§ 11-71. Standards for occupancy.
unit is subsequently found to be in violation of these regulations and
the code.
G. Any residential rental unit that is damaged by fire or other cause shall
be reinspected to ensure compliance with these regulations and the
Property Maintenance Code prior to reoccupancy.
H. All residential rental units in a multiple dwelling shall be inspected.
A. No person shall occupy a residential rental unit and no owner shall
permit the occupancy of a residential rental unit which has not been
registered with the City of Millville, or where the certificate of
continued occupancy has been revoked or suspended, except as
provided immediately below.
B. Where the certificate of continued occupancy has been revoked or
suspended, the housing inspector shall make a determination whether
continued occupancy of the residential rental unit is dangerous to the
health and safety of the tenant or tenants, and shall permit continued
occupancy by the tenants in those cases where continued occupancy is
determined not to be dangerous to their health and safety; provided,
however, that if said unit is subsequently vacated, it may not be rerented
as long as the certificate of continued occupancy has not been
reinstated.
C. The maximum number of occupants shall comply with the International
Property Maintenance Code of 2012 as it may be updated. The
maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each residential
rental unit. It shall be unlawful for an owner to knowingly rent and a
tenant to knowingly occupy a residential rental unit with occupants that
exceed the number allowed on the premises based on the available
sleeping rooms or any modification made by the housing inspector on
the basis of the size and layout of the unit.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to reside in the premises whose
name does not appear on the lease unless authorized by the tenant or
tenants whose names appear on the lease.
E. The lease for each residential rental unit shall specify that the lease is
subject to all provisions of City ordinances.
F. At the time of any change of occupancy inspection, the housing
inspector shall provide the owner with the Department of Community
Affairs Truth in Renting guide or equivalent listing the responsibilities
of owners and tenants. The owner or agent of a residential rental unit
shall provide a copy of the guide to all tenants, new and existing, and
shall require that each adult tenant who signed the lease acknowledge
receipt of the guide by signing the receipt form, a copy of which shall be
attached to the lease.
§ 11-70 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-72
1:150
§ 11-72. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or to occupy a residential rental
unit in violation of these regulations. Each day that a violation continues
after a notice of violation and order for compliance has been served on
the person responsible, and the time for compliance has expired, shall
constitute a separate offense. The penalties imposed are those set forth in
Article I of this chapter.
§ 11-73. Provision of security measures in large multiunit
complexes.
A. On or before January 1 of each year, the public officer shall provide the
Millville Police Department with a list and maps showing the location
and boundaries of each large multiunit complex in the City of Millville.
No later than January 31, the Millville Police Department will provide
the public officer with the number of verified criminal incidents for the
preceding year for the City as a whole, and the number for each large
multiunit complex. Verified criminal incidents shall include the
following:
(1) Murder/attempted murder or manslaughter.
(2) Aggravated assault or assault.
(3) Rape or other sexual assault.
(4) Armed robbery.
(5) Burglary or theft.
(6) Criminal mischief and destruction of property.
(7) Discharge of firearms or shooting incidents.
B. On the basis of this information, the public officer or his or her designee
shall calculate the crime rate for the City as a whole and for each large
multiunit complex, and shall notify the owner and operator of each such
complex of their crime rate, and the extent to which it does or does not
exceed the Citywide rate.
C. _____
(1) The owners or operators of any large multiunit complex for which
the complex crime rate exceeds the Citywide crime rate by 25% or
more shall take such security measures as may be necessary or
advisable at the discretion of the owners or operators of the
complex to reduce the crime rate over the next twelve-month
period.
(2) Within 30 days of notification by the public officer, the owner or
operator of each complex subject to the requirements of Subsection
C(1) above shall put those security measures into effect and
§ 11-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-73
1:151
provide a report on the security measures taken to the public
officer and the chief of police and filed with the municipal clerk.
(3) The owner or operator of any complex subject to this requirement
may seek a waiver of the requirement from the public officer and
Chief of Police by showing that the information used to determine
the crime rate is unreliable, that there are extenuating
circumstances, that adequate measures to address security are
already in place, and that there is no demonstrated need for
increased security measures. Any request for a waiver shall be
submitted in writing to the public officer no more than 15 days
after receipt of notification as set forth above.
D. Security plan.
(1) If the crime rate for any multiunit complex subject to the provisions
of section C above for the year following imposition of those
provisions remains 25% or more above the Citywide crime rate, the
owner and operator, as appropriate, shall be required to meet with
the public officer and the Chief of Police, or their designees, and
develop a plan for additional security measures, which may include
but not be limited to video surveillance, gunshot detection
applications, and hiring of armed or unarmed security guards. Said
plan shall be put in writing, and executed by the owner or operator,
the public officer and the Chief of Police and filed with the
municipal clerk.
(2) Within 30 days of execution of the security plan as set forth above,
the owner or operator of each complex subject to the plan shall put
those security measures into effect and provide a report on the
security measures taken to the public officer and the Chief of Police
and filed with the municipal clerk.
E. Reduction of security measures.
(1) If the crime rate for any multiunit complex subject to the provisions
of Subsection C or D above for the year following imposition has
been reduced to less than 10% above the Citywide crime rate, the
owner or operator of that complex shall be permitted to reduce
security measures established under that section.
(2) The owner or operator of any complex reducing security measures
as provided above shall provide a report on the reduction in
security measures to the public office and the Chief of Police.
(3) If, during the course of any year following such reduction in
security measures, the Millville Police Department determines that
criminal incidents have increased materially from the preceding
year in that complex, the Chief of Police shall notify the public
officer, who shall be authorized to order the owner or operator to
reinstate any measures previously reduced or eliminated for the
§ 11-73 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-73
1:152
§ 11-74. Suspension or revocation of certificate of continued
occupancy.
complex. The order shall be in writing and shall include the data
that is the basis for the order.
F. In the event that the owner or operator of a multiunit complex subject
to the above requirements shall fail to implement security measures or
a security plan as required by this section, then, for each day following
the period of time during which such a security plan should have been
established and implemented, the multiunit complex shall be liable to
pay a fine of up to $1,000 for each day it fails to provide security as set
forth in this section. The owners of the multiunit complex shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of this penalty.
A. The following are grounds for the revocation or suspension of the
certificate of continued occupancy or the occupancy of the unit:
(1) Allowing the residential rental unit to be occupied or used in a
manner which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to
N.J.S.A.2C:33-12 or as defined in § 11-11 of this Ordinance, or
which is the location of activities which endanger the health and
safety of surrounding residents, property owners and the general
public.
(2) Refusal to comply with a notice of violation and an emergency
order of a public officer to correct a violation of the property
maintenance code involving public health or safety violations.
(3) Violation of the property maintenance or other applicable code on
three or more separate occasions within a twelve-month period, if
not corrected in timely fashion.
(4) Failure to comply with an order to correct a violation of the
property maintenance or other applicable code entered by the
municipal court or any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(5) Failure to pay inspection fees and registration fee.
(6) Failure to notify the public officer that a residential rental unit has
been vacated and reoccupied.
B. Opportunity to cure. Whenever the public officer shall determine that
any property is being occupied in violation of this section, the public
officer shall notify the owner and provide the owner with a period not to
exceed 30 days to cure the violation. The owner shall further be given
the opportunity to show that the proposed suspension or revocation is
inappropriate because it is based on incorrect or obsolete information.
C. Administrative action. In the event that the owner fails to cure the
violation or fails to show that the proposed suspension or revocation is
inappropriate, within the time period granted, the public officer shall
§ 11-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-74
1:153
issue an order revoking the certificate of continued occupancy for the
property or suspending it for a period not to exceed one year. The order
may include demand for payment of any registration or inspection fees
due and unpaid.
D. Hearing.
(1) The owner shall have the opportunity to be granted a hearing on
the proposed suspension or revocation of the certificate of
continued occupancy and demand for payment of fees unpaid and
due, by submitting a written request for a hearing to the public
officer within 30 days of issuance of the order in Subsection C
above. In the request for a hearing, the owner shall provide the
names and mailing addresses of any tenants affected by the order.
In such event, the effect of such order shall be stayed until the
conclusion of the hearing.
(2) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall
notify the City Attorney, identifying the property, the property
owner, and the grounds for the order.
(3) Upon receipt of said notification, the City Attorney shall identify a
hearing officer, which may be the City commissioner/director of
public affairs or another qualified individual, who may or may not
be a municipal employee, and shall issue a notice of hearing setting
forth the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
order which is the subject of the hearing and the grounds for
issuance of the order. The hearing shall take place not less than 20
days from the date of service of the notice of hearing.
(4) The notice of hearing shall be served upon the property owner or
resident agent and upon any tenant affected by the order. Service
shall be made personally or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, by mailing the notice of hearing to the last
known address of such person.
(5) The public officer shall testify at the hearing and may produce
witnesses in support of the grounds for issuance of the order. The
property owner, resident agent, and any tenant affected by the
order shall have the right to appear at the hearing and testify,
produce witnesses, and be represented by an attorney.
E. Action by hearing officer; appeal.
(1) After the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written order
setting forth his or her findings and affirming, modifying or
rescinding the order of the public officer, including any registration
or inspection fees due and payable.
(2) A copy of the order shall be served on the property owner or
resident agent and any tenant affected by the order personally or
§ 11-74 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-74
1:154
by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, by mailing
the document to their last known address.
(3) If the whereabouts of any tenant is unknown and cannot be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then service of
the resolution or order on such person shall be made by posting the
document in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
complaint.
(4) The owner or any party in interest may, within 30 days of receipt of
the order, institute a summary proceeding in the Superior Court,
Law Division, to contest the reasonableness of any provisions of the
order.
§ 11-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-74
1:155

ARTICLE VIII
State Uniform Construction Code
§ 11-75. Enforcing agency established.
§ 11-76. Construction permit fees.
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the basic construction
fee plus all applicable special fees and shall be paid before the permit is
issued. Each fee shall be rounded up to the nearest dollar.
A. State Uniform Construction Code is hereby reestablished, and the
Bureau of Permits and Inspections will operate as the enforcing agency
for the City of Millville, 12 South High Street in the County of
Cumberland. "Enforcing agency" means the Municipal Construction
Official as chief administrator of the enforcing agency, all subcode
officials and assistants thereto. This enforcing agency will perform the
following services: plan review, construction permits, certificates of
occupancy, certificates of continued occupancy, demolition permits and
sign permits.
(1) The Board of Appeals for this municipality will be left to the
jurisdiction of the county at 164 West Broad Street, Bridgeton, New
Jersey 08302.
B. Each official position designated in Subsection A above shall be filled by
a person qualified for such position, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-5.1 et
seq., provided that in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.5A.
(1) The elevator plan review and inspectors will be directed to the
State Department of Community Affairs for all reviews and
inspections.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the
construction permit fee.
B. Training and certification fees. The Department of Community Affairs
training and certification fees shall be $0.00371 per cubic foot of
volume and $1.90 per $1,000 for alterations.
C. Building subcode fees. The building subcode fees shall be computed as
follows:
(1) Residential. The fee for new construction shall be $0.038 per cubic
foot of volume for buildings and structures.
§ 11-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-76
1:157
(2) Nonresidential. The fee for new construction other than residential
per cubic foot of volume shall be $0.034 for the first 50,000 and
$0.030 from 50,001 to 1,000,000 and $0.020 from 1,000,001 to
5,000,000.
(3) Manufactured home or modular structure. In accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4-18(c), there are no fees for the factory-built portion
of the home or structure. The fee shall be $150 per $1,000 of
estimated costs and $25 per $1,000 fraction thereafter.
(4) Farm structures. The fee for qualified structures shall be $0.010
per cubic foot of volume with a maximum fee of $1,443 per
structure. The structure must be used exclusively for farm use and
must be located on a qualified farm pursuant to the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964.
(5) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $150 for the first $1,000
of estimated costs and $25 per $1,000 fraction thereafter.
(6) For installation of swimming pools: $100 for aboveground pools
and $200 for in-ground pools.
(7) Removal of underground tanks: $75 for the first tank and $50 for
additional tanks.
(8) Installation of tanks: $200.
(9) Storable pools with twenty-four-inch depth of water or more: $30
annually.
(10) Structural towers such as cell towers, etc., flat fee: $500.
(11) Construction trailers or construction offices, flat fee: $100.
(12) Roofing/siding, flat fee: $100 each.
(13) Open decks and storage structures, flat fee: $75.
(14) Fencing, flat fee: $50.
D. Fees for certificates and other permits. The fees for certificates and
other permits are computed as follows:
(1) Demolition of residential structures: $200. Accessory structures:
$50. All fees for other use groups are $300 for the first 20,000
square feet and $50 for each additional 20,000 square feet or part
thereof.
(2) Sign permits: $5 per square foot with a minimum fee of $75 for
signs over 25 square feet in area or over six feet high.
(3) Occupancy certificate for new construction: $150 for residential
and $200 for all others.
§ 11-76 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-76
1:158
(4) Relocate building or structure to new location: Please refer to
Subsection C(5), Renovations, alterations and repairs, or
Subsection D(1), regarding demolition of residential structures,
depending on the type of project.
(5) Reinstatement of permit: $150 applicable after one year of
issuance date plus volume increase if applicable at time of
reinstatement.
(6) Lead abatement fees: $150 for permit and $50 for clearance
certificate.
(7) Asbestos abatement fees: $150 for permit and $50 for clearance
certificate.
(8) Application for variation for all use group: $500.
(9) Continued certificate of occupancy for an industrial or commercial
property or day cares with prior use letter attached: $400.
(10) Continued certificate of occupancy for residential properties: $150.
(11) The minimum building subcode fee shall be $50.
E. Plumbing subcode fees. The plumbing subcode fees shall be computed
as follows:
(1) Appliances and fixtures connected to the plumbing system:
(a) Water closet or urinal or bidet: $15.
(b) Bathtub: $15.
(c) Lavatory: $15.
(d) Shower: $15.
(e) Floor drain: $15.
(f) Sink: $15.
(g) Dishwasher: $15.
(h) Drinking fountain: $15.
(i) Washing machine: $15.
(j) Hose bib: $15.
(k) Water heater (up to 50 gallons): $75.
(l) Vent stack or back vent: $15.
(m) Adding gas appliance to existing system: $15.
(2) Special devices:
§ 11-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-76
1:159
(a) Fuel oil piping and tank: $90.
(b) New gas piping system: $90.
(c) Steam boiler: $90.
(d) Interceptor or separator: $90.
(e) Backflow preventer: $90.
(f) Grease trap: $90.
(g) Water-cooled air conditioners: $90.
(h) Central air or refrigeration unit: $90.
(i) Sewer connection: $90.
(j) Water service connection: $90.
(k) Swimming pool vacuum release system: $90.
(l) Sewer pump: $90.
(m) Water heater (over 50 gallons): $75.
(n) Hot water boilers (up to 300,000 BTUs): $90.
(o) Hot water boilers (over 300,000 BTUs): $90.
(3) The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be $50.
F. Mechanical subcode fees. The mechanical subcode fees shall be
computed as follows:
(1) Water heater: $75.
(2) Fuel oil piping connections: $90.
(3) Gas piping connections: $90.
(4) Steam boiler: $90.
(5) Hot water boiler: $90.
(6) Hot air furnace: $90.
(7) Oil tank: $90.
(8) LPG tank: $100.
(9) Fireplace: $100.
(10) Generator: $100.
(11) Other: $50.
§ 11-76 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-76
1:160
G. Electrical subcode fees. The electrical subcode fees shall be computed
as follows:
(1) Fixtures or receptacles or switches (one to 50): $75.
(a) Each additional outlet: $25. (This includes detectors, light
poles, motors of less than one horsepower, emergency and exit
lights, communication points, alarm devices, fire alarm control
panels and thermostats.)
(2) Other devices:
(a) Pool permits with underwater lights (in-ground pool): $100.
[1] The electrical subcode fee for swimming pools:
[a] Aboveground pool with or without lights: $60.
[b] In-ground pool with or without lights: $150.
[c] Yearly public pool inspections: $150.
(b) Storable pool all rubber or spa or hot tub: $100.
(c) KW electric range or receptacle: $15.
(d) KW oven or surface unit: $15.
(e) KW electric water heater: $15.
(f) KW dishwasher: $15.
(g) HP garbage disposal: $15.
(h) Air-KW central conditioning unit: $50.
(i) HP/KW space heater: $15.
(j) KW baseboard heater: $15.
(k) AMP subpanels, nonmain: $75.
(l) Temporary service pole: $50.
(m) Aboveground pool with bonding: $60.
(n) Reintroduction of electric services: $100.
(o) Photo voltaic systems:
[1] 1 to 50 KW: $150.
[2] 50 to 100 KW: $200.
[3] 100 KW: $457.
[4] Over 100 to 1,000 KW: $600.
§ 11-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-76
1:161
(3) Electrical devices or generators or transformers:
(a) 1 kw to 10kw: $15.
(b) Over 10kw to 45kw: $60.
(c) Over 45kw to 112.5kw: $115.
(d) Over 112.5kw: $175.
(4) Motors:
(a) 1 hp to 10hp: $25.
(b) Over 10hp to 50hp: $75.
(c) Over 50hp to 100hp: $125.
(d) Over 100 hp: $200.
(5) Motor control center or service panels or service entrance or
subpanels:
(a) 2 to 200 amps: $150.
(b) 201 to 1,000 amps: $200.
(c) Over 1,000 amps: $300.
(6) Electrical annual inspection for public swimming pools, spas, and
hot tubs located on any property other than one- or two-family
residential properties: $100.
(7) The minimum electric subcode fee shall be $50.
H. Elevator subcode fees. The elevator subcode fees shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 and 5:25-12.6. Third-party
inspection agency is 50% of state fee plus 45% for administrative costs.
I. Fire subcode fees. The fire subcode fees shall be computed as follows:
(1) Sprinkler system fees:
(a) First 20 heads: $150.
(b) 21 to 100: $200.
(c) 101 to 200: $300.
(d) 201 to 400: $650.
(e) 401 to 1,000: $900.
(f) Over 1,000: $1,200.
(2) Standpipe system: $100 each.
§ 11-76 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-76
1:162
§ 11-77. City fire limits.
The fire limits of the City, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 shall be as follows:
Beginning at a point on the east bank of Maurice River, 100 feet south of the
south line of Smith Street (if extended in a westerly direction); and running
from thence in an easterly direction and parallel with the south line of Smith
Street to a point 100 feet east of the east line of Second Street; thence in a
northerly direction and parallel with Second Street to a point 100 feet north
of the north line of Broad Street, thence in a westerly direction and parallel
with Broad Street, to a point 100 feet west of the west line of Buck Street;
thence in a southerly direction and parallel with Buck Street to a point 100
feet north of the north line of Pine Street; thence in a westerly direction and
parallel with Pine Street to the east bank of Maurice River; thence thereby
in a southerly direction to the place of beginning.
(3) Fire pump: $100.
(4) Special suppression systems:
(a) Range hoods, commercial: $150.
(b) Smoke control system: $150.
(c) Large systems; carbon dioxide, chemical or halogen: $350.
(5) Fire alarms:
(a) First six devices: $90.
(b) Each additional 10 devices: $25.
(6) Exit signs and emergency lighting per floor: $50.
(7) Heat producing devices: wood stoves, fireplaces and furnaces: $90.
(8) The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $50.
J. Waiver of fees. The fees for certificates and other are hereby waived as
follows:
(1) For the erection or alteration of public buildings or structures
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126c.
(2) For the construction or alteration of improvements designed to
promote accessibility by disabled persons in residential homes
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e.
K. Annual fee recommendation report. The Construction Official shall,
with the advice of the subcode officials, prepare and submit to the City
Commission biannually a report recommending a fee schedule based on
the operating expenses of the agency, and any other expenses of the
municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
§ 11-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-77
1:163

ARTICLE IX
Business Occupancy Permit
§ 11-78. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish the standards and manner by
which businesses or commercial activities are conducted within the City of
Millville to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Specifically, this article is designed to ensure that those premises are
occupied and maintained in accordance with established standards to
preserve the aesthetics of the community and the property values.
§ 11-79. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUSINESS — The pursuit of any commercial activity designed to earn a
profit for the person or persons engaged in the activity.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES — Those activities engaged in by a person or
persons for the purpose of earning a profit other than industrial uses or
professions and trades.
LICENSED PROFESSION — An occupation that properly involves a liberal,
scientific or artistic education and which is licensed by the State of New
Jersey, including but not limited to accountants, doctors, engineers, lawyers
and teachers.
LICENSED TRADE — An occupation that properly involves a skilled craft
and which is licensed by the State of New Jersey, including but not limited
to electricians and plumbers.
NUISANCE IN FACT — Acts, occupations or structures which are not
nuisances per se, but may become nuisances by reason of their
circumstances, the manner in which they are conducted, or their location
and surroundings.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, firm,
partnership, trust or other legal entity.
A. General licensing. This article shall not apply to any business or
commercial activity which is required to be licensed pursuant to
Chapter 33 of the Code of the City of Millville or to the rental of
property for those businesses or commercial activities.
B. Farming. This article shall not apply to farming operations, including
but not limited to the growing of agricultural crops and the raising of
livestock, or to the rental of property for that purpose.
C. Professions and trades. This article shall not apply to professions and
trades which are licensed or regulated by the State of New Jersey which
do not occupy business establishments.
§ 11-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-80
1:165
§ 11-80. Business occupancy permit required.
§ 11-81. Application for business occupancy permit.
The application for a business occupancy permit shall be made in writing
and filed with the Zoning Officer on the appropriate form of the City of
Millville. The application for the permit shall be filed before any business
A. No person other than those exempt from this article as set forth above
shall open or conduct business on property within the City without
obtaining a business occupancy permit from the Construction Official.
B. Change of ownership. No person other than those exempt from this
article who acquires or purchases a business or property within the City
shall operate a business therein without obtaining a business
occupancy permit.
C. Change of use. No person other than those exempt from this article
shall change the use of a business, change the use of a nonbusiness
property to a business, or add a different business use on property
within the City to operate a business without obtaining a business
occupancy permit.
D. Residential property. No person other than those exempt from this
article shall operate a business on residential property within the City
without obtaining a business occupancy permit.
E. Issuance of permit. No business occupancy permit shall be issued by
the Construction Official until the applicant has paid the required fee,
complied with these regulations, and complied with the following
approval standards:
(1) The property has been inspected by the City and found to be in full
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code and any other
applicable codes.
(2) The Zoning Officer has inspected the property and found it to be in
compliance with the City Development Regulations.
(3) To the extent applicable, the Construction Official and subcode
officials have made all appropriate inspections of the premises and
determined that all work is in compliance with applicable codes.
(4) The Fire Subcode Official and/or Fire Inspector have made all
appropriate inspections of the premises and determined that it is in
compliance with the code or the retrofit regulations.
F. The permit issued shall be prominently displayed on the property at all
times and is not transferable.
G. The fee for the business occupancy permit shall be $100, payable when
the application is filed.
§ 11-80 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-81
1:166
activity subject to the provisions of this article has commenced. The
application shall contain the following information:
§ 11-82. Regulations.
§ 11-83. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
A. The name and address of the person who owns the business.
B. The location of the business.
C. The name and address of the person who owns the property where the
business is located, and whether the applicant is the owner or a tenant
of the property. In the case of a partnership, this information shall be
provided for all general partners. In the case of a corporation or LLC,
this information shall be provided for the registered agent and all
corporate officers. LLCs and corporations shall supply a copy of the
corporate charter or registration certificate and a photo identification
of either the president or managing partner.
D. The use or uses, if any, which currently exist on the property, and
whether the applicant will continue that use.
E. Where a change of use or additional use or uses are proposed for the
property, the use or uses which the applicant proposes.
F. Any existing commercial signs advertising the business or business
activities.
G. Such other information as the Construction Official deems relevant to
the issuance of the business occupancy permit.
A. Condition of property. The property shall be properly maintained at all
times in conformance with the Property Maintenance Code, the State
Uniform Construction Code, and the State Uniform Fire Code.
B. Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
business except between the hours of day authorized in Chapter 30,
Land Use and Development Regulations, for the type of business and
for the zoning district where the property is located.
C. Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business in
such a manner as to create a nuisance in fact.
D. Signs. No new commercial sign shall be erected or maintained on the
property without obtaining the permit required by Chapter 30, Land
Use and Development Regulations. All commercial signs erected shall
conform to the standards for quality, number, set back, size and other
standards contained in the development regulations.
A. Any applicant for a permit may be denied a permit by the Construction
Official, or any permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the
§ 11-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-83
1:167
Commissioner in charge of the department for any of the following
causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with the approval
standards.
(4) The applicant or permittee has been convicted of an offense under
this article.
B. Opportunity to cure. Whenever the public officer shall determine that
any property is being used in violation of this section, the public officer
shall notify the owner and provide the owner with a period not to
exceed 30 days to cure the violation. The owner shall further be given
the opportunity to show that the proposed suspension or revocation is
inappropriate because it is based on incorrect or obsolete information.
C. Administrative action. In the event that the owner fails to cure the
violation or fails to show that the proposed suspension or revocation is
inappropriate, within the time period granted, the public officer shall
issue an order revoking the business occupancy certificate for the
property or suspending it for a period not to exceed one year. The order
may include demand for payment of any registration or inspection fees
due and unpaid.
D. Hearing.
(1) The owner shall have the opportunity to be granted a hearing on
the proposed suspension or revocation of the business occupancy
certificate and demand for payment of fees unpaid and due, by
submitting a written request for a hearing to the public officer
within 30 days of issuance of the order in Subsection C above. In
the request for a hearing, the owner shall provide the names and
mailing addresses of any tenants affected by the order. In such
event, the effect of such order shall be stayed until the conclusion
of the hearing.
(2) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall
notify the City Attorney, identifying the property, the property
owner, and the grounds for the order.
(3) Upon receipt of said notification, the City Attorney shall identify a
hearing officer, which may be the City commissioner/director of
public affairs or another qualified individual, who may or may not
be a municipal employee, and shall issue a notice of hearing setting
forth the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
order which is the subject of the hearing and the grounds for
§ 11-83 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-83
1:168
§ 11-84. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, General Penalty.
issuance of the order. The hearing shall take place not less than 20
days from the date of service of the notice of hearing.
(4) The notice of hearing shall be served upon the property owner or
resident agent and upon any tenant affected by the order. Service
shall be made personally or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, by mailing the notice of hearing to the last
known address of such person.
(5) The public officer shall testify at the hearing and may produce
witnesses in support of the grounds for issuance of the order. The
property owner, resident agent, and any tenant affected by the
order shall have the right to appear at the hearing and testify,
produce witnesses, and be represented by an attorney.
E. Action by hearing officer; appeal.
(1) After the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written order
setting forth his or her findings and affirming, modifying or
rescinding the order of the public officer, including any registration
or inspection fees due and payable.
(2) A copy of the order shall be served on the property owner or
resident agent and any tenant affected by the order personally or
by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, by mailing
the document to their last known address.
(3) If the whereabouts of any tenant is unknown and cannot be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then service of
the resolution or order on such person shall be made by posting the
document in a conspicuous place on the building affected by the
complaint.
(4) The owner or any party in interest may, within 30 days of receipt of
the order, institute a summary proceeding in the Superior Court,
Law Division, to contest the reasonableness of any provisions of the
order.
§ 11-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-84
1:169

ARTICLE X
Driveways and Parking Spaces
§ 11-85. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish the standards and manner by
which driveways and parking spaces shall be constructed and maintained to
protect the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community.
This article shall apply to all properties covered by Article V, Property
Maintenance Code, of this chapter.
§ 11-86. Responsibility of property owner.
All driveways and parking spaces shall be maintained in a proper state
of repair free from hazardous conditions. These areas must be clearly
designated by the property owner and shall be constructed with concrete,
crushed stone, macadam, or similar material installed and graded to
prevent pooling of water.
§ 11-87. Placement of driveways and parking spaces.
Driveways and parking spaces shall not be situated between the sidewalk
and any part of the structure except as follows:
§ 11-88. Ground cover.
All areas not designated as driveways or parking spaces shall be covered
with grass, appropriate vegetation, or landscaping material to prevent dust,
stagnant water or any other blighting conditions to exist.
§ 11-89. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
A. Properties where the owner has been granted authority to maintain a
driveway or parking space between the sidewalk and any part of the
structure by action of the municipal planning board, zoning board of
adjustment or governing body of the City, provided that the driveway
and parking spaces are constructed and maintained in accordance with
these regulations and any conditions of approval.
B. Properties containing driveways or parking spaces located between the
sidewalk and any part of the structure constructed in accordance with
regulations in effect prior to the adoption of this article.
§ 11-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-89
1:171

ARTICLE XI
Clean Fill
§ 11-90. Purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that the unregulated
dumping of clean fill can damage the aesthetic beauty and the
environmental quality of the community. It also can endanger the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens if the fill contains
substances that contaminate the soil or groundwater. It is the purpose and
intent of these regulations to regulate the dumping of clean fill.
§ 11-91. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CLEAN FILL — Clean gravel, sand, soil or rock deposited for the purpose of
landscaping or regrading the land.
§ 11-92. Permit required.
No person shall dump or deposit more than 300 cubic yards of clean fill on
any lot within a twelve-month period without obtaining a zoning permit from
the Zoning Officer. The fee for the permit is $100.
§ 11-93. Application.
The application for a zoning permit shall be made in writing and filed with
the Zoning Officer on a form provided by the City and shall contained the
following information:
§ 11-94. Regulations.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person transporting the clean fill.
C. The location where the clean fill is to be dumped or deposited.
D. The intended use for the clean fill.
E. The composition and source of the clean fill.
F. Such other information as is required on the application form provided
by the Zoning Officer.
A. The dumping or depositing of clean fill at a location selected by the
applicant and approved by the Zoning Officer shall be consistent with
any regulations adopted by the County Board of Health or the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 11-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-94
1:173
§ 11-95. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
B. The dumping or depositing of clean fill on a property must be
undertaken during normal working hours and not require the
construction of a driveway or road to the dump site.
C. Clean fill shall be transported through the streets of the City only in
vehicles that are covered to prevent any spillage of the contents.
A. Any applicant for a zoning permit may be denied a permit by the Zoning
Officer, or any permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the
Zoning Officer for any of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing
materially false information.
(2) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or permittee has been convicted of violating these
regulations.
B. Opportunity to cure. Whenever the public officer shall determine that
any action is being taken in violation of this section, the public officer
shall notify the applicant and provide the applicant with a period not to
exceed 30 days to cure the violation. The applicant shall further be
given the opportunity to show that the proposed suspension or
revocation is inappropriate because it is based on incorrect or obsolete
information.
C. Administrative action. In the event that the applicant fails to cure the
violation or fails to show that the proposed suspension or revocation is
inappropriate, within the time period granted, the public officer shall
issue an order revoking the permit or suspending it for a period not to
exceed one year. The order may include demand for payment of any
registration or inspection fees due and unpaid.
D. Hearing.
(1) The applicant shall have the opportunity to be granted a hearing on
the proposed suspension or revocation of the permit and demand
for payment of fees unpaid and due, by submitting a written
request for a hearing to the public officer within 30 days of
issuance of the order in Subsection C above. In such event, the
effect of such order shall be stayed until the conclusion of the
hearing.
(2) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall
notify the City Attorney, identifying the applicant and the grounds
for the order.
(3) Upon receipt of said notification, the City Attorney shall identify a
hearing officer, which may be the City commissioner/director of
§ 11-94 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-95
1:174
§ 11-96. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating these regulations shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, General
Penalty.
public affairs or another qualified individual, who may or may not
be a municipal employee, and shall issue a notice of hearing setting
forth the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
order which is the subject of the hearing and the grounds for
issuance of the order. The hearing shall take place not less than 20
days from the date of service of the notice of hearing.
(4) The notice of hearing shall be served upon the applicant. Service
shall be made personally or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, by mailing the notice of hearing to the last
known address of such person.
(5) The public officer shall testify at the hearing and may produce
witnesses in support of the grounds for issuance of the order. The
applicant shall have the right to appear at the hearing and testify,
produce witnesses, and be represented by an attorney.
E. Action by hearing officer; appeal.
(1) After the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written order
setting forth his or her findings and affirming, modifying or
rescinding the order of the public officer, including any registration
or inspection fees due and payable.
(2) A copy of the order shall be served on the applicant personally or
by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested, by mailing
the document to their last known address.
(3) The applicant or any party in interest may, within 30 days of receipt
of the order, institute a summary proceeding in the Superior Court,
Law Division, to contest the reasonableness of any provisions of the
order.
§ 11-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-96
1:175

ARTICLE XII
Graffiti
§ 11-97. Purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that the proliferation of
graffiti adversely affects the aesthetic beauty and environmental quality of
the community and undermines property values. It is the purpose and intent
of these regulations to eliminate graffiti within the City.
§ 11-98. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized drawing or inscription visible from any
public right-of-way placed on the surface of any building, structure or
location.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 11-99. Regulations.
§ 11-100. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon any private or
public building, structure or location.
B. Where graffiti exists on any property visible to any extent from the
public right of way, the property owner shall be responsible for having
the graffiti removed or painted over within 48 hours of the graffiti being
placed on the property. If the graffiti is not visible from the public rightof-
way, the owner shall be responsible for having the graffiti removed or
painted over with 20 days of the graffiti being placed on the property.
C. If a property is vacant and is the subject of foreclosure proceedings, the
mortgagee shall be responsible for having the graffiti removed or
painted over within the time periods set forth in § 11-99B above.
A. Penalties.
(1) Any person who shall violate Subsection A of § 11-99 of this chapter
by placing graffiti upon any private or public building, structure or
location shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for
each offense. Additionally or alternatively, the Municipal Court
Judge may impose a period of community service not exceeding 90
days. Any person convicted of placing graffiti upon any property
shall, in addition to the penalties referred to herein, be responsible
for providing restitution to the property owner for the cost of
removing or painting over the graffiti.
§ 11-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-100
1:177
(2) For second and subsequent offenses the court shall impose a fine of
not less than $500 nor exceeding $1,000 and impose a fine of up to
$250 for each day of continuing violation. Additionally, the court
may impose imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or
any combination thereof.
B. Where graffiti exists on any private or commercially owned property,
and the property owner or responsible person shall fail to remove it or
paint over it within the time periods set forth in § 11-99B above, said
owner or responsible person shall be subject to a fine of no less than
$200 nor more than $1,000. For second and subsequent offenses, the
court shall impose a fine of not less than $500 nor exceeding $1,000
and impose a fine of up to $250 for each day of continuing violation.
Additionally, the court may impose a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
C. If the owner of any privately or commercially owned property, after
notice, shall fail to have graffiti removed from that property or painted
over within the time period set forth in § 11-99B above, the City may but
shall not be required to remove same. The Construction Official may file
a notice of lien against the property for all costs incurred together with
an administrative fee of $250 by certifying same to the City Clerk and to
the Municipal Tax Collector, who shall record the certification. The
governing body of the municipality may adopt a resolution affirming the
assessment of the lien against the subject property and, if adopted, the
City shall file a copy of the resolution with the Municipal Tax Collector
who shall record it and collect the moneys owed in the same manner as
property taxes are assessed and collected.
§ 11-100 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-100
1:178
ARTICLE XIII
Movement of Buildings
§ 11-101. Purpose.
The governing body finds and declares that the movement of large
structures through the streets of the City causes a traffic hazard which
must be properly regulated. The governing body further finds and declares
that structures being relocated within the City often times contain materials
which are hazardous or unfit for relocation within the City. It is the purpose
and intent of these regulations to provide standards for the movement and
relocation of structures. The movement of modular homes built in the City
that have obtained a motor carrier services permit from the State of New
Jersey are excluded from Article XIII, except § 11-105A.
§ 11-102. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUILDING — Any building, home or similar structure with a width in excess
of 14 feet.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 11-103. Permit required.
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building through the
streets of the City without obtaining a building moving permit from the
Construction Official. The cost of the permit shall be $300. A permit is
required in the following situations:
§ 11-104. Application.
The application for a building moving permit shall be made in writing
and filed with the Construction Official. The application shall contain the
following information:
A. When a building is being moved to a location inside the City from a
location either inside or outside the City;
B. When a building is being moved to a location outside the City from a
location inside the City;
C. When a building is traveling through the City on streets under local
jurisdiction to a location outside the City from a location outside the
City.
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. The destination;
§ 11-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-104
1:179
§ 11-105. Regulations.
C. The route to be taken;
D. The time of day and day of the week that the building is to be moved;
E. The character and size of the building to be moved;
F. If the building is to be relocated within the City, the use, purpose and
occupancy for which the building is to be used;
G. If the building is to be relocated within the City, a plot plan showing the
proposed location of the building on the property where it is to be
located;
H. If the building is to be relocated within the City, a brief statement as to
whether the building conforms to the land use and development
regulations for the proposed location; and
I. The applicant shall furnish copies of any other permits obtained in
connection with the movement and relocation of the building.
A. Traffic safety. No permit shall be issued to move a structure until the
application and route of travel has been reviewed and approved by the
Traffic Safety Division of the Millville Police Department. Traffic Safety
shall be satisfied that the structure can be moved safely on the route of
travel selected and shall not cause unreasonable risk of damage to the
trees, plants, and shrubs along the sidewalks, streets or alleys within
the City. Furthermore, the permittee shall be responsible to provide a
lead vehicle with a warning to motorists of a wide load equipped with
yellow flashing lights.
B. Structural soundness of structure; engineer's certification required. No
permit shall issue to move any structure which is not structurally
sound. Where the structure is already located within the City, the
Construction Official shall physically inspect the structure to ensure
that it is structurally sound, and may require the permittee to supply an
engineer's report certifying that the building is structurally sound. In all
other instances, the permittee shall supply an engineer's report
certifying that the building is structurally sound before a permit can be
issued.
C. Certain types of structures prohibited from being moved. No permit
shall issue to move any structure which in the opinion of the
Construction Official is not structurally sound, or is infested with pests,
or is unfit for occupancy, if it is to be located within the City, or is a type
of structure prohibited by the development regulations at the proposed
location within the City.
D. Notice to neighbors where building is to be placed. When a structure is
to be located within the City, the property owners located within 200
feet of the proposed location for the structure shall be notified at least
§ 11-104 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-105
1:180
§ 11-106. Asbestos hazard abatement certificate.
No permit shall issue to move any structure to be located within the City
of Millville until a certificate has been provided to the Construction Official
indicating that the structure is completely free of all asbestos in any form.
§ 11-107. Lead-based paint hazard abatement certificate.
No permit shall issue to move any structure to be located within the City
of Millville until a lead-based paint hazard abatement certificate has been
provided to the Construction Official indicating that N.J.A.C. 5:17-1.1 has
been complied with concerning those structures governed by that of the
New Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 11-108. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
five days in advance of the intention to locate the structure within their
neighborhood. Said notice shall include the destination, the route of
travel, the time of day and day of the week that the structure is to
be moved, and the character and size of the structure to be moved.
Additionally, the structure shall be located on an approved foundation
and conform to all applicable development regulations within 30 days
of its arrival on the site. The applicant shall be required to provide the
notification to the property owners at its own expense. In connection
therewith, the applicant shall obtain a list, from the Tax Assessor, of
the names and addresses of all persons who are located within 200
feet of the site. The applicant shall provide written notice by certified
mail to said property owners and shall provide a proof of mailing to the
Construction Official. If the date set for moving the structure contained
in the notice has to be changed, the applicant is responsible to provide
renotification to the property owners at its own expense.
A. Any applicant for a building moving permit may be denied a permit by
the Construction Official, or any permit issued may be suspended or
revoked by the Construction Official for any of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing
materially false information.
(2) The applicant or permitee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or permitee has been convicted of violating these
regulations.
B. Hearing.
(1) The applicant or permittee shall have the opportunity to be granted
a hearing on the proposed suspension or revocation of the permit
and demand for payment of fees unpaid and due, by submitting a
written request for a hearing to the Construction Official within 10
§ 11-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-108
1:181
§ 11-109. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating these regulations shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, General
Penalty.
days of issuance of the order. In such event, the effect of such order
shall be stayed until the conclusion of the hearing.
(2) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall
notify the City Attorney, identifying the applicant or permittee, and
the grounds for the order.
(3) Upon receipt of said notification, the City Attorney shall identify a
hearing officer, which may be the City commissioner/director of
public affairs or another qualified individual, who may or may not
be a municipal employee, and shall issue a notice of hearing setting
forth the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
order which is the subject of the hearing and the grounds for
issuance of the order. The hearing shall take place not less than 20
days from the date of service of the notice of hearing.
(4) The notice of hearing shall be served upon the applicant or
permittee. Service shall be made personally or by regular and
certified mail, return receipt requested, by mailing the notice of
hearing to the last known address of such person.
(5) The Construction Official shall testify at the hearing and may
produce witnesses in support of the grounds for issuance of the
order. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to appear at
the hearing and testify, produce witnesses, and be represented by
an attorney.
C. Action by hearing officer; appeal.
(1) After the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written order
setting forth his or her findings and affirming, modifying or
rescinding the order of the Construction Official, including any due
and payable.
(2) A copy of the order shall be served on the applicant or permittee
personally or by regular and certified mail, return receipt
requested, by mailing the document to their last known address.
(3) The applicant or permittee may, within 30 days of receipt of the
order, institute a summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law
Division, to contest the reasonableness of any provisions of the
order.
§ 11-108 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-109
1:182
ARTICLE XIV
Official Map; Numbering of Buildings and Lots
§ 11-110. Purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that the adoption of an
Official Map and the orderly numbering of buildings and lots is necessary
for the public health, safety and general welfare. The governing body
further finds and declares that the conspicuous display of assigned numbers
on buildings fronting on a road or street is important in assisting fire,
police, rescue and other emergency personnel in locating a person in need
of emergency response. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to
provide these standards.
§ 11-111. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUILDING — Includes all commercial, industrial and institutional
structures, and all residential dwellings such as apartments, condominiums,
half doubles, and single-family dwellings.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by an ordinance of the governing body
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 11-112. Official Map.
The "Official Map for the City of Millville, County of Cumberland and State
of New Jersey" is hereby established as the Official Map of the City pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 11-113. Building and lot numbers.
A. The City shall designate and assign a number to each lot and to each
building which now or hereafter shall front upon any street or roadway.
B. The City shall, after the numbers have been so designated and assigned
in accordance with this article, cause each subdivided lot to receive a
designated number within 10 days after approval by the Planning Board
of the City of any subdivision.
C. The owner and occupant of each building shall conspicuously display
the number assigned to it by the City at or near the front entrance to
the building in numbers at least three inches in height and in such a
manner as to be visible to persons passing by the building on the
abutting roadway or street.
§ 11-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-114
1:183
§ 11-114. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate the
regulations contained herein. Each day that a violation continues after
a notice of violation and order for compliance has been served, and the
time specified therein has expired, shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalties imposed are those set forth in Article I of this chapter.
§ 11-114 MILLVILLE CODE § 11-114
1:184
Chapter 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assignment of Fire Subcode Official to Bureau
of Permits and Inspections — See Ch. 11, Art.
I.
Fire hazards in dangerous structures — See
Ch. 11, Art. IV.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 11, Art. XIII.
Fire subcode fees — See Ch. 11, Art. XIV.
City fire limits — See Ch. 11, Art. XIV.
Fire on public lands — See Ch. 43, Art. V.
Firearms and fireworks — See Ch. 52, Art. VI.
§ 11-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-114
1:185

ARTICLE I
Millville Fire Department Established
§ 17-1. Creation.
There is hereby created and established a part-paid Fire Department for
the City which shall consist of such members, officers and personnel as the
governing body shall deem necessary for the effective government of the
Department. The governing body is the appropriate authority to exercise
legislative authority to:
§ 17-2. Powers and duties of Director of Public Safety as
appropriate authority.
The Director of Public Safety is the appropriate authority to exercise
administrative authority to establish policies providing guidelines to the
Fire Chief for the operation of the Fire Department. Furthermore, he is the
appropriate authority to:
A. Provide for the maintenance, regulation and control of the Fire
Department;
B. Provide for a line of authority relating to the fire fighting function;
C. Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
Fire Department and for the discipline of its members; and
D. Determine the terms of office of its members, fix their compensation,
and prescribe their powers, functions and duties, all as the governing
body shall deem necessary for the effective government of the
Department.
A. Appoint the paid firemen and other civil service employees from a list of
candidates supplied by the Civil Service Commission;
B. Control the preparation of the budget for the Fire Department and be
responsible for submitting it to the governing body for approval;
C. Establish policies to control the budget once adopted to ensure that
moneys are spent in accordance with the adopted budget;
D. Establish policies formulating fundamental principles to serve as
guidelines to the Fire Chief in making his decision with respect to
discharging his responsibility for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operation of the Fire Department;
E. Issue special emergency directives to provide for the health, safety or
welfare of the municipality in an emergency situation; and
F. Preside as hearing officer in disciplinary matters that originate within
the Fire Department, including matters involving civilian employees
under his jurisdiction.
§ 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:187
§ 17-3. Powers and duties of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the Fire Department,
and he shall be directly responsible to the Director of Public Safety for
the efficiency and routine day-to-day operation of the Fire Department.
Furthermore, pursuant to policies established by the Director of Public
Safety, he shall:
§ 17-4. Rules and regulations.19
The rules and regulations adopted by the governing body shall be contained
in a manual known as the "Fire Fighters Manual."
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the
Department and its officers and personnel;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers, and duties of the
Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and
E. Report at least monthly, in writing, to the Director of Public Safety on
the operation of the Department during the preceding month and make
such other reports as may be requested by the Director of Public Safety.
A. Adoption. The City of Millville Fire Fighters Manual of 1995 containing
the revised rules and regulations is hereby adopted.
B. Amendments. The City of Millville Fire Fighters Manual may be
amended by resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time to time
as hereinafter provided.
C. Amendatory procedure. Any Commissioner seeking to amend the Fire
Fighters Manual shall do so by circulating a draft copy of the proposed
change to the City Clerk, City Solicitor and the other Commissioners at
least five days in advance of the Commission meeting when the change
resolution is to be considered.
D. Copies. A copy of the Fire Fighters Manual shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk, and copies shall be made available to each
employee of the Fire Department.
19.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 44-1996, the rules and regulations, written
policies and standard operating procedures which are applicable to the Millville Fire
Department are hereby amended to the extent that they are inconsistent with Art. V,
Discipline, of Ch. 46, Personnel Policies of the Code of the City of Millville.
§ 17-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-5
1:188
§ 17-5. Discipline.
Employees of the Fire Department shall be subject to discipline including
suspension or dismissal for violations of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.3(a), the rules and
regulations, special emergency directives, directives issued by the Fire
Chief, or lawful orders of the Fire Chief or superior officers. Volunteer
members of the Fire Department shall be subject to discipline in accordance
with the Constitution and bylaws of their organization.
§ 17-6. Composition of the Fire Department.
The Fire Department of the City is composed of paid firefighters, regular
volunteer firemen and trainee members.
§ 17-7. Fire Chief. [Amended 7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 21-2007]
A. Paid fire fighters. Paid fire fighters shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety from a list of candidates supplied by the Civil Service
Commission. No person shall be appointed as a paid member or officer
who is under 21 or over 35 years of age pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-12.
B. Regular volunteer fire fighters. Volunteer fire fighters shall be
appointed by the Director of Public Safety. New applicants for this
position must submit an application to the City Clerk which satisfies the
general qualifications required by New Jersey State statutes. No person
shall be selected as a regular volunteer fire fighter who is under 18 or
over 55 years of age. [Amended 7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 21-2007]
C. Trainee members. The number of trainee members shall not exceed 15
members. New applicants for this position must be reviewed and
approved by the Investigative Committee of the Millville Fire
Department. Final approval must be made by the governing body of the
City. The trainee member shall serve a probationary period of not less
than one year and shall successfully fulfill all of the requirements set
forth in the Constitution of the Millville Fire Department before being
eligible for regular volunteer fireman. No person shall be selected as a
trainee member who is under 18 years or over 55 years of age.
A. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with the New Jersey State statutes and the rules and
regulations of the Department of Personnel.
B. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to appoint three Deputy Chiefs,
three Battalion Chiefs, three Captains, three Lieutenants and all
apparatus drivers to hold office during his term.
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-7
1:189

ARTICLE II
Arson Investigation Unit
§ 17-8. Creation.
There is hereby created an Arson Investigation Unit within the Fire
Department of the City. Members of the unit shall be assigned by the
Director of Public Safety from the full-time paid fire fighters within the
Department.
§ 17-9. Duties.
The Arson Investigation Unit shall be responsible for conducting
investigations of arson, suspicious fires or explosions within the
municipality.
§ 17-10. Regulation and control.
The regulation and control of the Arson Investigation Unit shall be pursuant
to rules and regulations adopted by the governing body.
§ 17-11. Training and supervision.
Before any member shall be assigned to the Arson Investigation Unit, he
shall successfully complete an appropriate course of training approved by
the Police Training Commission and an arson investigation training course
approved by the Department of Law and Public Safety. Members assigned
shall be under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief.
§ 17-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-11
1:191

ARTICLE III
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Act
§ 17-12. Statutory authority.
The Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., was enacted for
the purpose of establishing a Uniform Fire Safety Code throughout the
State of New Jersey designed to protect the lives and property of the state's
citizens. The Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to adopt
an ordinance providing for local enforcement of this Act and the State
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 17-13. Local enforcing agency established. [Amended 4-2-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-2019]
The Bureau of Fire Safety is hereby established with the Millville Fire
Department as the local enforcing agency for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the state regulations. The
Bureau of Fire Safety shall consist of a Fire Marshal who also shall be the
chief administrator and such fire inspectors as shall be appointed. The Fire
Marshal may appoint two additional Fire Officials to serve as Deputy Fire
Marshals.
§ 17-14. Appointment. [Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
The Fire Marshal and fire inspectors shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety in accordance with applicable state law. The local Bureau of
Fire Safety shall have at least one paid fire inspector as required by New
Jersey Regulations for Fire Code Enforcement. The Fire Marshal, Deputy
Fire Marshal(s), and fire inspectors may be removed by the Director of
Public Safety in accordance with applicable state law. All appointments shall
consider civil service status where applicable.
§ 17-15. Duties and applicability.
A. The local Bureau of Fire Safety shall administer and enforce the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the state regulations for all buildings,
structures and premises within the City, other than owner-occupied
buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and containing fewer
than three dwelling units.
B. The state law and this article shall not be construed as authorizing the
adoption of a requirement for a building, conforming in all respects to
the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code Act, to be made
to conform to more restrictive standards, except as to the requirements
contained in the Retrofit Regulations.
C. Buildings, structures and premises owned or operated by the state, its
agencies, departments, instrumentalities, or an interstate agency shall
be inspected exclusively by the Department of Community Affairs. For
purposes of this section, unit of a local government, whether county,
§ 17-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-15
1:193
§ 17-16. Enforcement of regulations. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 16-2012; 7-5-2016 by Ord. No. 28-2016]
The regulations of the local Bureau of Fire Safety shall be administered
in accordance with the State of New Jersey Regulations for Fire Code
Enforcement, N.J.A.C. 5:18A-1 et seq.,20 under the authority of the Director
of Public Safety.
§ 17-17. Training and supervision. [Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No.
19-2019]
Persons appointed to the local Bureau of Fire Safety shall be trained and
certified in accordance with the New Jersey Regulations for Fire Code
Enforcement. The local Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Marshal who shall report to the Director
of Public Safety through the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may also serve as the
Fire Marshal.
§ 17-18. Life-hazard uses.
§ 17-19. Non-life-hazard uses. [Added 7-5-2016 by Ord. No.
28-2016]
interlocal or municipal, or a local, county, regional or consolidated
school district shall not be deemed to be an instrumentality of the state.
A. Registration fees. The fees for registration are set by the state in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
B. Permit fees. In addition to the registration of life-hazard uses, certain
activities and uses are required to be regulated only with permits. The
permits are currently classified into five types with application fees for
each. The local enforcing agency shall review these applications,
activities and uses as required by state law. The permit fees shall be set
in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
A. Inspections. In addition to the life-hazard use inspections pursuant to
this article, the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs
also require all non-life-hazard buildings and structures to be
inspected.
B. Annual registration fees. [Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
(1) Businesses/uses that qualify as a life-hazard use will be assessed an
annual registration fee in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9 by the
New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(2) Businesses/uses that are non-life-hazard uses shall be assessed an
annual firesafety registration fee per business and/or use according
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:71.
§ 17-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-19
1:194
to the schedule below (use group as defined in the Uniform
Construction Code):
(a) New initial registration: $50.
(b) Use Group A.
[1] Occupancy of less than 50 persons: $50.
(c) Use Group B.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(d) Use Group F.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(e) Use Group M.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(f) Use Group S.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(g) Use Group U.
[1] Zero to 999 square feet: $25.
[2] One thousand to 2,499 square feet: $50.
[3] Two thousand five hundred square feet or more: $75.
(h) Use Group R-1 and R-2 hotels and motels that do not qualify as
a life-hazard use: $100.
(i) Vacant, closed or shuttered commercial buildings.
[1] Under 1,000 square feet: $100.
[2] One thousand square feet or more: $150.
§ 17-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-19
1:195
§ 17-20. Carbon monoxide alarms and smoke detectors. [Added
6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the State of New Jersey adopted
regulations which are set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq. Pursuant to these regulations, carbon monoxide
alarms and smoke detectors are required to be installed in all residential
homes within Use Group R-3 or R-4 within the City of Millville.
§ 17-21. Certification required verifying carbon monoxide alarm
and smoke detector installation. [Amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No.
9-2010; 12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 41-2017]
(j) Private communities, such as but not limited to mobile home
parks, gated communities or developments where site
inspections are required for signage, fire hydrants, access, etc.
$100.
(k) Self-storage facilities: $150. This fee shall include all storage
buildings and office regardless of amount of rental units.
(l) Any business that already pays a fee for a permit required
under the Uniform Fire Code shall only be charged a
registration fee of $25.
C. Inspection fees. Any business/use that neither qualifies as a life-hazard
use nor fits in a category as outlined under registration fees will be
assessed an inspection fee of $25 at the time the building is inspected.
D. Responsibility. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.2, the landlord and
tenant shall share equal responsibility for any violations, penalties or
fees associated with the enforcement of the fire code.
E. The fee for a certificate of fire code status shall be $25.
F. Applications and fees for non-life-hazard use registrations shall be
processed by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
G. Non-life-hazard use registered buildings shall be inspected at least
once every three years. [Added 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
A. Upon the sale of a residential home, the owner shall obtain a
certification from the Bureau of Fire Safety verifying compliance with
the applicable regulations regarding the installation of carbon
monoxide alarms and smoke detectors. Fees for the inspection and
certification shall be those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9 [Fees:
registration; certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance (CSBCMAC); permit; carnival registration certificate];
B. Where a residential home fails its initial inspection, a reinspection fee
in the sum of $25 shall be paid.
§ 17-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-22
1:196
§ 17-22. Variances from regulation.
An application for a variance from the requirements of state law shall be
filed in writing pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-200 and state regulations.
§ 17-23. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any ruling, action, order or notice of the local
Bureau of Fire Safety entered pursuant to this article shall be entitled
to an administrative hearing before the Construction Board of Appeals of
Cumberland County, which appeal shall be filed in accordance with state
law after receipt of the ruling, action, order or notice.
§ 17-24. Enforcement.
A person who violates a provision of the Uniform Fire Safety Act or the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be liable for the penalties set
forth in the state statute and state regulations in accordance with the
enforcement provisions contained therein.
§ 17-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-24
1:197

ARTICLE IV
Fire Insurance Claims
§ 17-25. Statutory authority.
The terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. are hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if they were set forth with
particularity, including all amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 17-26. Insurance company prohibited from paying fire insurance
claim.
No insurance company issuing fire insurance policies in this state shall pay
any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within the City of Millville until the insurance company and insured person
comply with these regulations.
§ 17-27. Unpaid moneys due city.
Unless the owner of the real property has paid all of the unpaid moneys
due the City or the City has adopted a resolution authorizing installment
payments pursuant to these regulations, the insurance company is
authorized and required to pay to the City the amount of all anticipated
demolition costs, taxes, assessments, and other municipal liens or charges
due and payable which appear on the official certificate of search prior to
the payment of the fire insurance claim.
§ 17-28. Installment payments.
The governing body of the City may adopt a resolution authorizing
installment payments by the owner of any fire damaged property for all
moneys due under these regulations if it is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire damaged property. An
insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement
from the governing body of the City is authorized to make full payment on
the claim to the insured person.
§ 17-29. Applicability.
These regulations shall be applicable to any fire insurance policy issued or
renewed after the effective date of this article and after the filing of the
regulations with the State Commissioner of Insurance. Nothing herein shall
be interpreted to alter or effect any other remedy available to the City under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 17-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-29
1:199

ARTICLE V
Mutual Fire Aid in Emergencies
§ 17-30. Establishment of agreement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a reciprocal
mutual aid agreement with all other municipalities located in Cumberland
County, New Jersey, who adopt a reciprocal ordinance with the City to
provide mutual fire aid in case of emergency. This reciprocal mutual aid
agreement will apply whenever the City has an emergency within its
boundaries requiring additional fire assistance to protect life and property,
and whenever another municipality within Cumberland County, who has
enacted a reciprocal ordinance, may experience a similar emergency
requiring additional fire assistance.
§ 17-31. Assistance.
The Fire Chief of the City shall provide assistance to another municipality
or municipalities within Cumberland County making a valid request to
supply personnel and equipment as required to the extent possible without
endangering persons or property within the City. The members of the Fire
Department supplying aid shall have the same power, authority, rights and
immunities as the members of the Fire Department of the municipality to
which assistance is rendered.
§ 17-32. Cost and expense of personnel and equipment.
The City shall upon providing assistance to another municipality assume
the cost and expenses of providing its personnel and equipment to the
requesting municipality, except in the instance when the requesting
municipality receives state or federal aid by way of reimbursement. In
such circumstances, the cost incurred by the City shall be submitted for
reimbursement to the municipality requesting assistance.
§ 17-33. Injury or death while rendering assistance.
Members of the Fire Department of the City suffering injury or death while
rendering assistance to another municipality shall be entitled to all benefits
they would have realized if injury or death occurred in the performance of
their normal duties within the City.
§ 17-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-33
1:201

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)21
§ 17-34. through § 17-40. (Reserved)
21.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Regulations Governing the Public, was repealed 5-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-2017. See now Art. XII, Regulations Governing the Public.
§ 17-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-34
1:203

ARTICLE VII
Fire Emergency Alarm Equipment
§ 17-41. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Fire Department to
enforce these regulations.
§ 17-42. Powers and duties of Fire Department.
The Millville Fire Department shall have those powers and duties which are
necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations including,
but not limited to, the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 17-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
automatic protection and detection devices are installed, maintained and
operated within the City of Millville to ensure the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 17-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person who sells, leases or installs
automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and who
have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency
message over a direct or primary trunkline to the county communications
center.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, horn or siren, which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
A. To record and print out all alarms received each month during the
calendar year.
B. To identify which alarms are false alarms, where they originated, and
the date and time each false alarm occurred.
C. To serve a written notice of violation on the user of an automatic
protection device after the Millville Fire Department has received four
false alarms for that user during the calendar year.
D. To investigate violations of these regulations and file a complaint with
the Municipal Court against any person violating these regulations.
§ 17-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-44
1:205
the building, and is designed to attract attention when activated by a fire or
other emergency requiring the Fire Department to respond.
AUTOMATIC DETECTION DEVICE — An electrically or battery operated
instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically transmits an alarm or prerecorded voice message upon
receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected smoke or
heat from an incipient fire.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system operated
privately for customers by a person who maintains supervisors, trained
operators and guards in attendance at a central station at all times to accept
recorded messages or signals from automatic protection devices and who
has the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a recorded message
or signal including the relaying of messages by a direct or primary trunkline
to the county communications center.
COUNTY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The Cumberland County 911
Communication and Training Center.
DESIGNATED TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the county
communications center that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency signals which originate from automatic protection devices which
are transmitted directly from the device.
DIRECT TRUNKLINE — An unlisted telephone line leading into the county
communications center that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency messages.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection or
detection device, and audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect
signal given the county communications center to which the Fire
Department responds, which is not the result of a fire or similar emergency.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment to transmit an alarm,
message or signal from an automatic protection device to a particular
location.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, limited liability
company, partnership, trust or other legal entity.
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the county
communications center that is for the purpose of handling administrative
and other calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is identified by a
specific listing among the white pages in the telephone directory issued by
Bell Atlantic.
RESPONDER — The person authorized to respond other than the listed
owner of the premises who can assist the Fire Department with securing
the premises if necessary.
§ 17-44 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-45
1:206
§ 17-45. Permits required; fees; exemptions.
No person shall install or use an automatic protection device within the
city, which is directly or indirectly keyed to a designated, direct or primary
trunkline, without obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.
§ 17-46. Application.
The application for the connection permit and the user permit shall be made
in writing and filed with the City Clerk as hereinafter provided.
A. No person who installs an automatic protection device shall directly key
said device to a designated trunkline without obtaining a connection
permit from the City Clerk. The fee for the connection permit shall be
$50 and shall be paid once at the time of connection.
B. No person shall use an automatic protection or detection device within
the City without obtaining an annual user permit from the City Clerk.
The fee for the annual user permit is $20 which shall be paid to the City
Clerk when the application is filed. The annual permit expires on
December 31 of each year.
C. Any person who installs a combination police and fire emergency alarm
system shall not be required to pay the connection fee or the annual
user fee for the fire emergency alarm system.
D. Senior citizens and persons totally and permanently disabled are
exempt from the payment of the user fee, but shall otherwise comply
with these regulations.
A. The application for the connection permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk prior to the date when the automatic protection or detection
device is directly keyed to a designated trunkline. The application shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the device;
(2) The address where the device is installed;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
installed the equipment; and
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment.
B. The application for the initial user permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk when the automatic protection device is installed. The application
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the device;
(2) The address where the device is installed;
§ 17-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-46
1:207
§ 17-47. Regulations.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
installed the equipment;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment; and
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the responder.
C. The application for the annual user permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk each year not later than January 31. The application shall contain
the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the automatic protection or detection device;
(2) The address where the device is installed;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment; and
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the responder.
A. Current list of installations required.
(1) Every alarm equipment supplier who has installed an automatic
protection device within the City shall furnish a monthly report to
the Fire Chief and to the City Clerk by the fifth working day of each
month containing a list of all installations made during the
preceding month. The report shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or
lessee.
(b) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protection system or any other person who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where
the device is installed.
(d) The name, address and telephone number of any person, if any,
other than the alarm equipment supplier, who is responsible
for the maintenance and repair of the automatic protection or
detection device.
(e) The monthly report shall also contain any corrections or
deletions, which should be made to a prior month's report
including any disconnection.
§ 17-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-47
1:208
§ 17-48. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
Any applicant for a permit may be denied a permit by the City Clerk or any
permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Director of Public Safety
for any of the following causes:
(2) All information supplied to the City pursuant to this subsection
shall remain confidential, except as otherwise required by state
law.
B. Operational requirements. Automatic protection or detection devices
installed within the City that are connected to the county
communication center shall meet the center's guidelines. The type and
content of recorded messages sent to the county communications
center must be intelligible and in a format approved by the director of
the county communications center as appropriate for the type of
emergency prior to installation.
C. Technical information. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells, leases
or installs an automatic protection or detection device within the City
shall furnish operating instructions, a circuit diagram and maintenance
manual to the buyer or lessee.
D. Repair service. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells, leases or
installs an automatic protection or detection device within the City shall
provide repair service as follows:
(1) If the supplier provides repair service itself, it shall make that
service available to a user on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis for
seven days per week.
(2) If the supplier does not provide repair service itself, it shall furnish
to the user at the time that the equipment is installed written
information as to how service may be obtained at any time
including the telephone number for a person responsible for
servicing the equipment.
(3) The buyer or lessee and the service provider shall be responsible
for having a malfunctioning device repaired as quickly as possible
after notice is received that the equipment is not functioning
properly.
E. Testing. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an
automatic protection or detection device without first notifying the
communication center and the Millville Fire Department.
A. If the applicant or permit holder has had more than four false alarms in
a calendar year, the permit shall not be denied, suspended or revoked,
but the applicant shall be subject to the violations and penalties
contained in this article.
§ 17-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-48
1:209
§ 17-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
52-2018]
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the following penalties. Each day that a violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate offense.
B. If the applicant or permit holder has included materially false
information in the application filed with the City Clerk.
C. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the City
Clerk or Director of Public Safety by filing a request for a public hearing
before the Board of Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days
of receiving the notice of denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
The hearing shall be held within 20 days of the date that the request is
filed with the City Clerk.
A. For the first offense: a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $50.
B. For a second offense: a minimum fine of $50 and a maximum fine of
$100.
C. For a third and subsequent offense: a minimum fine of $100 and a
maximum fine of $500, together with a one-year disconnection of the
alarm device.
D. The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm devices on
property owned by public entities or agencies, or state, local, county or
federal governments.
§ 17-48 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-49
1:210
ARTICLE VIII
Volunteer Incentive Program
[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 32-2007]
§ 17-50. Legal authority.
The United States Department of Labor (DOL) issued a letter on August
7, 2006, to the International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC) providing
guidance under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) clarifying that fire
departments and other entities can provide its volunteer firefighters up
to 20% of what the public agency would otherwise pay to hire a full-time
firefighter for performing comparable service.
§ 17-51. Purpose and scope.
The City of Millville desires to implement a volunteer incentive program
for regular volunteer firefighters to help retain existing volunteers and
to increase the volunteer rolls so that the Millville Fire Department can
continue to provide a high level of service to the community.
§ 17-52. Authorization to establish criteria.
The Fire Chief of the Millville Fire Department is hereby authorized to
develop criteria for the Volunteer Incentive Program and the payment of a
quarterly stipend to volunteer firefighters who provide fire-fighting services
for the Millville Fire Department.
§ 17-53. Approval by governing body.
The Fire Chief shall prepare a standard operating procedure (SOP) detailing
the purpose, scope and requirements of the Volunteer Incentive Program
which shall be approved by resolution of the governing body of the City. The
Fire Chief shall review this SOP on an annual basis to determine whether
any amendments or modifications should be made to the SOP. Any changes
to the SOP shall be approved by resolution of the governing body of the City.
§ 17-54. Payment of stipend.
The Fire Chief shall present to the Director of Public Safety, on a quarterly
basis, a list containing the names of the volunteer firefighters who are
entitled to receive a quarterly stipend and the amount of the stipend for
each volunteer firefighter. The Fire Chief shall endeavor to provide this
list not later than the 10th day of the month following each quarter. In no
event shall any stipend paid by the City of Millville in accordance with these
regulations be considered salary or wages. No person receiving a stipend
under these regulations shall be considered an employee of the City. Each
individual firefighter receiving a stipend shall be issued a Form 1099 for
tax purposes, and any tax payments associated with the stipend shall be the
sole responsibility of the individual receiving the stipend.
§ 17-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-55
1:211
§ 17-55. Reporting requirements.
The Fire Chief shall submit an annual report to the Director of Public
Safety reporting the effect of the Volunteer Incentive Program on the status
of the membership of the volunteer firefighters within the Millville Fire
Department. The Director of Public Safety may request a report on shorter
intervals if the Director so desires.
§ 17-55 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-55
1:212
ARTICLE IX
Rescue Fees
[Added 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 31-2009]
§ 17-56. Purpose.
There has been an increasing demand for emergency rescue services from
the Fire Department. The purpose of this article is to establish standards
and fees to recover some of the cost incurred by the municipality in
providing these services, including the cost of specialized training and
equipment.
§ 17-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meaning
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
EMERGENCY RESCUE INCIDENT — Includes a motor vehicle accident,
hazardous material spill or technical rescue incident.
EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICES — Includes the extrication of a person
from a dangerous situation by the use of any specialized equipment.
EMPLOYER — Includes a natural person, association, corporation, limitedliability
company, partnership, trust or other legal entity.
PERSON — A natural person.
RECIPIENT OF SERVICE — Includes a person extricated from a dangerous
situation. It also includes the employer of said person acting in the course
of his or her employment at the time of the emergency rescue incident.
TECHNICAL RESCUE INCIDENT — Includes any incident which requires
a confined space rescue, high angle rescue, machinery extrication rescue,
rope rescue, structural collapse rescue, trench rescue or water and ice
rescue.
§ 17-58. Reimbursable services.
Emergency rescue services shall be reimbursable whenever Fire
Department vehicles and equipment respond to an emergency rescue
incident and perform emergency rescue services.
§ 17-59. Required information.
Any recipient of the services specified herein shall provide the Fire
Department with the following information:
A. His or her name, address and telephone number.
B. The name, address and telephone number of his or her insurance
carrier, if applicable.
§ 17-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-59
1:213
§ 17-60. Fees established.
The following fees are hereby established for reimbursable services
rendered by the Fire Department. Fees for incidents involving multiple
vehicles are established herein on a per-vehicle basis.
§ 17-61. Enforcement.
The Fire Department and the Chief Financial Officer shall establish a thirdparty
billing system to collect the fees set forth herein. Fees for emergency
rescue services shall be billed to the recipient of the service, his or her
insurance carrier, or his or her employer, if applicable.
C. If the recipient of the service is an employee acting in the course of his
or her employment at the time of the emergency rescue incident, then
the recipient shall provide the name, address and telephone number of
his or her employer.
A. Light rescue.
(1) Fee: $200.
(2) Light rescue operations shall include, but not be limited to, removal
of possible fire hazards, fluid control, vehicle stabilization, use of
hand tools and other scene-related light rescue activities.
B. Medium rescue.
(1) Fee: $400.
(2) Medium rescue operations shall include, but not be limited to, the
use of power tools and hydraulic rescue tools to perform activities
such as opening or removing doors to provide access to patients,
stabilizing vehicles and performing hazardous assessments.
C. Heavy rescue.
(1) Fee: $800.
(2) Heavy rescue operations shall include, but not be limited to, any
technical rescue procedures such as confined space rescue, high
angle rescue, machinery extrication rescue, rope rescue, structural
collapse rescue, trench rescue or water and ice rescue.
(3) Heavy rescue operations shall include a motor vehicle rescue
where the rescue includes the use of power tools and hydraulic
equipment to perform operations such as partial or full roof
removal, front/dash displacement, third door access and separating
vehicles from one another.
§ 17-59 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-62
1:214
§ 17-62. Duty to respond.
The Fire Department has the duty to respond to all emergency rescue
incidents, notwithstanding the inability of the recipient of the service to pay
for the service or the lack of insurance. The Fire Department shall not delay
or refuse any emergency rescue service to any person based on the inability
to pay for the service or lack of insurance.
§ 17-63. through § 17-64. (Reserved)
§ 17-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-63
1:215

ARTICLE X
Contracted Off-Duty Employment
[Added 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 26-2012]
§ 17-65. Policy established.
For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the services
of off-duty firefighters of the Fire Department and to authorize the outside
employment of City firefighters while off duty, the City hereby establishes a
policy regarding the use of firefighters.
§ 17-66. Escrow accounts
A. Full-time career members of the Fire Department shall be permitted to
accept fire-related employment for private employers or school districts
only during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled duty or emergency duty
for the City.
B. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty firefighters shall first
obtain the approval of the Fire Chief, which approval shall be granted if,
in the opinion of the Fire Chief, such employment would not be
inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the
Fire Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the
safety of the firefighter or firefighters who are to perform the work.
C. Volunteer members of the Fire Department shall be permitted to accept
fire-related employment for private employers or school districts only
during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
efficient operation of the Fire Department, subject to the annual
compensation limits applicable to volunteer members of the Fire
Department.
A. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty firefighter in
the Fire Department shall estimate the number of hours such
firefighter's services are required, which estimate shall be approved in
writing by the Fire Chief.
B. Said person or entity shall establish an escrow account with the Chief
Financial Officer of the City by depositing an amount sufficient to cover
the rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth in § 17-68
for the total estimated hours or days of service. A day of service is equal
to approximately eight hours.
C. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty firefighters, the Fire
Chief or his designee shall verify that the balance in the escrow account
of the person or entity requesting services is sufficient to cover the
compensation and fees for the number of hours specified in the request
for services. The Fire Chief shall not post a request for services from
any person or entity unless all fees and compensation required in the
manner described above have been deposited with the Chief Financial
§ 17-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-66
1:217
§ 17-67. Requests for services.
§ 17-68. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for
services.
Officer. No firefighter shall provide any such services for more hours
than are specified in the request for services.
D. In the event that funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty firefighters shall cease and requests for
further or future services shall not be performed or posted until
additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
E. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
A. All requests to the City for services of off-duty firefighters in the Fire
Department for a period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the
Fire Chief for posting at least 10 days before such services are
required.
B. Any full-time career firefighter, when so employed by the City shall be
treated as an employee of the City; provided, however, that wages
earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension
benefits of the full-time career firefighters so employed, nor shall hours
worked for outside employment be considered in any way compensable
as overtime.
A. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty full-time
career firefighters are established as follows:
(1) Rate of compensation for private employers: $75 per hour.
[Amended 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 28-2018]
(2) Rate of compensation for school districts: $40 per hour.
B. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty volunteer
firefighters are established as follows:
(1) Rates of compensation for private employers: $320 per day.
(2) Rates of compensation for school districts: $320 per day.
C. An additional fee of $5 per hour for full-time career firefighters and a
set sum of $40 per day for volunteer firefighters is hereby established to
cover administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses of the
City.
§ 17-66 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-68
1:218
ARTICLE XI
Fire Lanes
[Added 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-2017]
§ 17-69. Prohibited parking.
No person shall park or stop a motor vehicle in, or in any other manner
obstruct, a properly designated fire lane, fire hydrant or Fire Department
connection. This shall apply to any public street, private street or access
lane.
§ 17-70. Enforcement.
§ 17-71. Fire lane locations.
All fire lane locations shall be recorded in a file maintained by the Fire
Prevention Bureau and shall be made available for public inspection. Copies
of said file shall also be located in the City Clerk's office, the Police
Department and the Fire Department.
§ 17-72. Curb marking.
All curbs in a fire lane shall be painted exclusively with yellow traffic
paint that meets the specifications of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation for Type 1 pure-drying yellow traffic paint for road and
bridge construction. An approved plan and a color sample must be
submitted to and approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Hash marks and
curb markings may be used in lieu of signs, as determined by the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
§ 17-73. Posting and signs.
A. Violations of this chapter or any provision of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) or the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.) which pertains to this chapter shall be enforced
by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
B. The Police Department shall assist the Fire Prevention Bureau in
obtaining information on any vehicle in violation of this chapter. The
Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to have any vehicle
found in violation of this chapter impounded at the expense of the
vehicle owner.
A. Whenever a fire lane is established on any property, the property owner
shall erect, replace, repair and maintain all fire lane signs and markings
on said property as specified in this section and by the Fire Prevention
Bureau. The property owner shall have 15 days to comply with this
section upon proper notice by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Said notice
shall contain a copy of this section.
§ 17-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-73
1:219
§ 17-74. Violations and penalties.
The Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to issue any fine,
penalty or enforcement action as provided for in the Uniform Fire Safety
Act or the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. Unless another fine, penalty or
enforcement action is expressly provided for by the aforementioned laws,
any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be issued the
following fines:
§ 17-75. Right to appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any ruling, action, order or notice of the local
Bureau of Safety entered pursuant to this article shall be entitled to an
administrative hearing before the Construction Board of Appeals of
Cumberland County, which appeal shall be filed in accordance with state
law after receipt of the ruling, action, order or notice.
B. The underside of any sign erected on a post shall be at least seven feet
from the ground or pavement. The underside of any sign mounted on a
building shall be six feet from the ground or pavement. The spacing
between signs shall be determined by the Fire Prevention Bureau. All
signs, posts and foundations shall be constructed to hold signs and
posts in a proper and permanent position. Signs shall be mounted to
resist swaying in the wind or displacement by vandalism. Sign
dimensions shall be 12 inches by 18 inches. Signs shall be white and
reflective, and all lettering shall be red and reflective. The words "NO
PARKING" shall be 7.5 inches in height, and the words "FIRE LANE"
shall be five inches in height.
A. First offense: $100.
B. Second offense: $250.
C. Third offense: $500, and vehicle shall be impounded at the expense of
the owner.
§ 17-73 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-75
1:220
ARTICLE XII
Regulations Governing the Public
[Added 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 17-2017]
§ 17-76. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give or cause to be given a
false fire alarm by word, act or other means.
§ 17-77. Permits for bonfires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made a bonfire
of any kind, or burn boxes, combustible material, paper, or shavings on any
privately owned or publicly owned property within the City, including alleys
or streets, without first having obtained a permit from the Fire Official.
§ 17-78. Interference with firemen or fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or recklessly interfere with a
fireman or fire apparatus in the course of fighting a fire or responding to a
fire alarm, or returning from responding to a fire alarm.
§ 17-79. Damage to fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or recklessly damage any fire
engine, fire truck or fire equipment.
§ 17-80. Driving to fire scene or over fire hose.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a fireman or police officer, to
drive an automobile or other vehicle to the scene of a fire, or to operate an
automobile or other vehicle over the fire hose of the City.
§ 17-81. Roping off streets.
In the event of fire, any fireman has the authority in the performance of his
duty to rope off any street for the protection of life and property. It shall
be unlawful for any person to willfully or recklessly interfere with a fireman
in the performance of this duty, or to trespass upon any street, highway, or
alley which has been closed to public travel by rope or otherwise.
§ 17-82. Passing fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pass or attempt to pass a fire engine or
fire truck responding to a fire alarm or returning from a fire alarm. It shall
be unlawful for any person to operate an automobile or other vehicle so near
to a fire engine or fire truck responding to or returning from a fire alarm as
to obstruct the vehicle or endanger the firemen in or on the vehicle.
§ 17-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-82
1:221

ARTICLE XIII
Bureau of Emergency Medical Services
[Added 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 49-2019]
§ 17-83. Establishment.
A Bureau of Emergency Medical Services shall be and the same is hereby
created and established in the City of Millville, County of Cumberland and
State of New Jersey.
§ 17-84. Title of Department.
The official name of said department shall be "City of Millville Fire
Department — Bureau of Emergency Medical Services."
§ 17-85. Word usage.
The words "he" and "his" shall be taken to also mean and include the words
"she" and "hers," and said words shall, for purposes of this chapter, be
interchangeable with each other.
§ 17-86. Organization; supervision.
§ 17-87. Purpose.
A. The Bureau of Emergency Medical Services shall consist of career and
part-time personnel, which shall consist of the positions of Chief
Emergency Medical Technician ("Chief EMT"), Medical Director, and
emergency medical technicians (both full-time and part-time/per diem),
in a quantity designated by the City Commission and appointed by the
appointing authority. The Bureau may also consist of a volunteer
section, if deemed necessary by the Fire Chief, which shall be governed
in accordance with state law, rules and regulations and standard
operating procedures adopted by the appropriate authority.
B. The Chief EMT shall report to the Fire Chief.
C. In the absence of the Fire Chief and Chief EMT, the on-duty Fire
Captain, or acting Captain, will oversee EMS operations.
A. The work and functions of said EMS shall be to protect lives and
property within the City and, subject to law, rules and regulations, and
standard operating procedures, within neighboring municipalities
against fire or other disasters. Said work and functions are hereby
declared to be and constitute a public purpose.
B. The Bureau shall be in compliance with N.J.A.C. 8:40-1.1 et seq. and all
other statutory and regulations within the state. In addition to the
emergency medical services herein authorized, the Bureau may provide
secondary nonemergency transport based on criteria established by the
Bureau.
§ 17-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-88
1:223
§ 17-88. Administration.
§ 17-89. Chief EMT.
The Chief EMT shall be the head of the Bureau of Emergency Medical
Services and shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department for its
efficiency and day-to-day operations pursuant to policies established by the
City Commission. The Chief EMT shall:
§ 17-90. Personnel.
The Bureau shall be staffed by certified emergency medical technicians
("EMT") who hold a valid New Jersey driver's license and shall be employees
of the City. The Bureau shall consist of sufficient full-time employees and
sufficient part-time employees to ensure appropriate staffing of the EMS
Bureau. Employees will be appointed per New Jersey Civil Service
requirements.
§ 17-91. Qualifications for employees.
No person shall be eligible to become an employee of the Bureau unless
such person possesses and provides proof of the following qualifications:
A. The Bureau shall at all times be and remain under the supervision and
control of the Chief EMT and/or designee in coordination with the Fire
Chief and shall render emergency services to the City as needed. Said
Bureau shall be governed in accordance with state law, rules and
regulations, and standard operating procedures.
B. The Bureau is governed by all of the policies and procedures of the City
of Millville. The Chief EMT and/or his/her designee shall develop
supplemental policies and procedures tailored to the specific protocols
governing the Bureau.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Bureau of
Emergency Medical Services and special emergency directives for
disposition and discipline of the Bureau and its members;
B. Exercise and discharge the functions and duties of the Bureau of
Emergency Medical Services;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members of the Bureau;
D. Delegate such authority as may be necessary for the efficient operation
of the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services, to be exercised under
the Chief EMT's direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the City Commission in such form as shall be
prescribed on the operation of the Bureau of Emergency Medical
Services during the preceding month, and make such other reports as
may be requested by the City Commission.
§ 17-88 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-91
1:224
§ 17-92. Removal; suspension; fines; reduction in office.
No member of the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services shall be
suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience, as provided in New Jersey statutes
and the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services rules and regulations.
§ 17-93. Compensation.
The staff of the City Bureau shall receive such compensation as is provided
for by salary ordinance covering their titles adopted by the City of Millville.
§ 17-94. No denial of service.
All persons needing emergency or rescue services within the City shall
be serviced, to the extent that such services are available, without
discrimination on any basis and without respect to residency, ability to pay,
or any other factor. No person located within the City at the time that either
emergency medical or rescue services are needed shall be denied available
service when such services are available.
A. All applicants for employment shall be between the age of 18 and the
state maximum permitted age.
B. Be physically fit to perform the duties of an emergency medical
technician. The applicant shall submit to a physical, medical and
psychological evaluation by a licensed physician, the costs of which will
be borne by the employer.
C. Prior to employment, provide the City with a criminal background
check and have no prior convictions for any offense or crime.
D. Be subject to a motor vehicle background check with no prior record of
reckless driving, driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol or any
other serious moving violation.
E. Be subject to preemployment and random drug testing. The position of
emergency medical technician is considered a safety sensitive position
and shall be subject to the City policies and procedures for safety
sensitive positions.
F. Be a certified emergency medical technician of the State of New Jersey
with at least two years' experience as an emergency medical
technician. Any lapse in certification will be cause for immediate
suspension of duties. Reinstatement will only occur upon certification
reinstatement.
G. Possess a valid New Jersey driver's license and maintain same during
course of employment.
§ 17-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-95
1:225
§ 17-95. No delay of service.
There shall be no delay in providing available service identified in this
ordinance due to any third-party billing, prior interaction between the
person needing emergency medical or rescue services and the billing
companies or the City.
§ 17-96. Maintenance of records.
Personnel of the Bureau shall maintain accurate records of all EMS requests
for service, service calls and services provided. Said records shall include
pertinent information about the general nature of the call and shall identify
the complete name, mailing address, location and telephone numbers of all
persons requesting and receiving EMS services as well as all pertinent and
available insurance information.
§ 17-97. Fees for emergency medical services.
The fee schedule for emergency medical services transport by the City is as
follows:
§ 17-98. Insurance only billing.
A. Base rate: The base rate is $800 per transport. This rate includes the
dispatch of two EMTs; services of basic life support; and emergency
ambulance transportation to the following health care facilities:
(1) Most appropriate acute care facility.
B. Mileage charge: A mileage charge of $14 per mile shall be added to the
base rate for any facility further than those listed in Subsection A
herein;
C. Additional charges:
(1) Oxygen: $75;
(2) Collars: $35;
(3) AED: $95;
(4) EpiPen/Narcan: $150;
(5) Nonemergency stretcher transport: $500.
A. The fees for emergency medical services set forth herein
notwithstanding, when a City ambulance responds to an emergency
call, the City shall engage in insurance only billing, whereby the City
will accept as payment only what is paid by the patient's health
insurance plan, applicable automobile insurance policy, or Medicare/
Medicaid, and shall not bill for any deductibles, co-pays or other
balance due.
§ 17-95 MILLVILLE CODE § 17-98
1:226
B. The Bureau may utilize other agencies or providers for services, such
as, but not limited to, advanced life support services. Those agencies/
providers charge in accordance with their policies and are not subject
to insurance only billing, whether billed through the division or
independently to the patient.
C. The failure of the patient to cooperate in providing necessary
information, processing insurance forms, or otherwise refusing to assist
the Bureau in collecting fees owed shall subject the patient to liability
to the City for such services.
D. The City may contract with a professional medical billing service for the
collection of payment for services rendered by the Bureau. Said bill
shall be issued to the insurance company for the person served or
directly to the person served if there is a failure to cooperate.
§ 17-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-98
1:227
Chapter 20
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 30.
§ 20-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., the Legislature of the State of New
Jersey has delegated the responsibility to local government to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry.
§ 20-2. Findings.
§ 20-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Millville are subject to periodic
inundation which results in health and safety hazards, loss of property,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as sewer and
water mains, electric, gas and telephone lines, bridges and streets
located in the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 17-98 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-3
1:228
§ 20-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 20-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A or AE.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year flood).
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
I. To maintain eligibility and good standing in the National Flood
Insurance Program enabling residents to purchase flood insurance,
which would otherwise be unavailable.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling dredging, filling, grading and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:229
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zone AE, the elevation represents the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-or-greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward Limit
of the Moderate Wave Action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward
Limit of the Moderate Wave Action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be
subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of
these forces. Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be
regulated the same as V Zones/coastal high hazard areas.
DEVELOPMENT — Any made-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building which is built, in the
case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of
the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal A Zone, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water, and which is adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In Areas of Coastal A Zones, "elevated buildings" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
§ 20-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-5
1:230
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
A.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:231
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than, those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 20-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-5
1:232
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)22 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
22.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:233
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 20-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Millville.
§ 20-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report titled the "Flood
Insurance Study, Volume 1 of 1, Cumberland County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)," dated June 16, 2016, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) Panel Nos. 34011C0170E, 34011C0178E, 34011C0179E,
34011C0183E, 34011C0187E, 34011C0189E, 34011C0190E,
34011C0191E, 34011C0192E, 34011C0193E, 34011C0194E,
34011C0213E, 34011C0214E, 34011C0330E, 34011C0331E,
34011C0332E, 34011C0333E, 34011C0334E, 34011C0351E and
34011C0352E, dated June 16, 2016, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and FIRM
panels are on file in the office of the City Clerk, 12 South High Street,
Millville, New Jersey.
§ 20-8. Violations and penalties.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. No land or structure shall hereafter be altered, constructed, converted,
extended, relocated to or located without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with condition) shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
§ 20-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-8
1:234
§ 20-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to abrogate, impair, or repeal any existing
covenants, deed restrictions, or easements. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, covenant, deed restriction, or easement conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 20-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 20-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 20-12. Establishment of development permit.
B. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each
violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Millville from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damage.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Millville,
any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 20-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Official and may include but not be
limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or
§ 20-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-12
1:235
§ 20-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 20-14. Duties and responsibilities of Construction Official.
The duties of the Construction Official shall include but not be limited to:
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures.
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 20-17B.
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 20-18A are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the Coastal A Zone area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters the terrain so as to increase potential flood
damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 20-19B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 20-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
§ 20-12 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-14
1:236
source in order to administer § 20-17A, Residential construction, and
§ 20-17B, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea
level; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 20-12B(3).
(3) In Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 20-19B(1) and B(2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 20-17A, Specific standards, residential construction, and
§ 20-17B, Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Official shall
make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
§ 20-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-14
1:237
§ 20-15. Variance procedure.
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 20-15.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Cumberland County Construction Appeals Board as
established by the County of Cumberland shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) The Cumberland County Construction Appeals Board shall hear
and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
decision, determination or requirement made by the Construction
Official in the administration or enforcement of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided by law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Appeals Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
§ 20-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-15
1:238
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeals Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) above have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variance shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense or create nuisances or cause
§ 20-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-15
1:239
§ 20-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
Subsection A(4) above or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinance.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind force.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
§ 20-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-16
1:240
§ 20-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 20-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 20-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall
be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other covering
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
§ 20-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-17
1:241
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction see § 20-19 Coastal A Zone.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated to or above base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
(for Coastal A Zone construction see § 20-19, Coastal A Zone) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities: either
(1) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is more
restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(3) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(4) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 20-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 20-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed as to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
§ 20-17 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-18
1:242
§ 20-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 20-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 20-19. Coastal A Zone.
Coastal A Zones are located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 20-7. These areas may be subject to wave effects, velocity
flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces; therefore, the
following provisions shall apply:
A. Encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, shall be prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If § 20-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the flood hazard reduction provisions of
§§ 20-16 through 20-19.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in § 20-19B(4).
§ 20-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-19
1:243
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year mean
recurrence interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Coastal A Zones on the community's FIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 20-19B(1) and
B(2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open-wood latticework or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open-wood latticework or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions:
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
§ 20-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 20-19
1:244
Chapter 25
HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking in theaters — See Ch. 52, Art. XII.
§ 25-1. Enforcment of public health laws.
The Cumberland County Health Department is the local enforcing agency
responsible for enforcement of the public health laws within the City of
Millville which are adopted by the State of New Jersey, Cumberland County
Board of Health, and the City of Millville. The local enforcing agency shall
cooperate with the local Bureau of Permits and Inspections in carrying out
this enforcement function, and it shall act as lead agency in those matters
where it has primary jurisdiction.
§ 25-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the manner in which public health
laws shall be enforced within the City of Millville to ensure the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Millville.
§ 25-3. Food and drugs.
The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Title 24 of the New Jersey
Statutes shall be enforced by the local enforcing agency in accordance with
the requirements established by state law.
§ 25-4. Health and vital statistics.
The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Title 26 of the New Jersey
Statutes shall be enforced by the local enforcing agency in accordance
with the requirements established by state law. These rules and regulations
identify the following core activities as basic public health services which
must be provided by local boards of health in all municipalities:
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
§ 20-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:245
§ 25-5. County Environmental Health Act.
The following state laws are authorized to be enforced by the local
enforcing agency pursuant to the provisions of the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) and the standards adopted by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Administration. Public health services required in this area shall
include administrative services, health promotion and public health
nursing services.
B. Adult health services. Public health services required in this area shall
include cancer services, cardiovascular disease services, diabetes
services and health services for older adults.
C. Communicable diseases. Public health services required in this area
shall include services for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, immunization, rabies and zoonoses control, reportable
diseases, sexually transmitted diseases, and tuberculosis control.
D. Environmental health. Public health services required in this area shall
include services for campgrounds, food surveillance, occupational
health, public health nuisances, recreational bathing and youth camps.
E. Maternal and child health. Public health services required in this area
shall include services for childhood lead poisoning, improved
pregnancy outcome and infant and preschool children.
A. Air Pollution Control Act (1954).23
B. Environmental Cleanup Responsibility Act (1983).24
C. Noise Control Act of 1971.25
D. Pesticide Control Act of 1971.26
E. Radiation Protection Act (1958).27
F. Solid Waste Management Act (1970).28
G. Toxic Catastrophe Prevention Act (1985).29
H. Water Pollution Control Act (1977).30
I. Worker and Community Right to Know Act (1983).31
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1K-6 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1G-1 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1K-19 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
§ 25-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 25-6
1:246
§ 25-6. New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
State law provides that the New Jersey State Sanitary Code shall be
enforced throughout the state. It shall be enforced by the local enforcing
agency, the local police authorities, and the local Bureau of Permits and
Inspections. However, the local enforcing agency shall be the lead agency
with primary jurisdiction to enforce the code.
§ 25-7. Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey.
The Cumberland County Board of Health has adopted the Public Health
Nuisance Code of 1953 which is enforceable within the City of Millville. The
local enforcing agency is responsible for enforcement of this code within the
City, and it shall cooperate with the local Bureau of Permits and Inspections
in carrying out this enforcement function. However, the local enforcing
agency is the lead agency with primary jurisdiction for enforcement of the
code.
§ 25-8. Weed Control Code of New Jersey.
The Cumberland County Board of Health has adopted the Weed Control
Code of New Jersey of 1953 which is enforceable within the City of Millville.
The local enforcing agency is responsible for enforcement of this code
within the City, and it shall cooperate with the local Bureau of Permits
and Inspections in carrying out this enforcement function. However, the
local enforcing agency is the lead agency with primary jurisdiction for
enforcement of the code.
§ 25-9. Smoking inside government buildings.
A. Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to adopt regulations
prohibiting smoking inside government buildings to ensure the
protection of the public health including the protection of public
employees who work inside those buildings.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
GOVERNMENT BUILDING — Any building owned or leased by the City
of Millville or any other governmental entity, and located within the
City.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm,
partnership, trust or other legal entity.
SMOKING — The act of smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering
cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind, or lighting a cigar, cigarette or pipe
of any kind.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:5A-1 et seq.
§ 25-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9
1:247
§ 25-10. Warning signs for microwave ovens. [Added by Ord. No.
31-1998]
All restaurants or other public accommodations operating an electronic
device known as a "microwave oven" or "radar oven" at any time shall
post conspicuously a notice at or near the entrance to the public
accommodations, public area or restaurant in the following language:
WARNING
Microwave radiation present on these premises may affect the
efficient operation of a heart pacemaker.
§ 25-11. Smoking or use of tobacco and tobacco-related products
on City property. [Added 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
C. Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke inside any
government building within the City of Millville. "No Smoking" signs
shall be displayed conspicuously near each outside entrance to the
building by the owner or person having control of the building.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person violating this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to a penalty not to exceed $500.
A. Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — The use of an electronic device
that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person
inhaling the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic
cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from,
or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, cigarillo or pipe or any
other matter or substance which contains tobacco.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco or nicotine,
including but not limited to cigars, cigarillos, pipe tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, snus, and electronic cigarette
cartridges.
B. Smoking or use of tobacco and tobacco related products upon Cityowned
properties is prohibited.
(1) No person shall engage in smoking or use of tobacco products
while on City-owned properties.
(2) Employees engaged in smoking or use of tobacco products in an
employee-designated smoking area are exempt from this
restriction.
C. Enforcement.
§ 25-9 MILLVILLE CODE § 25-11
1:248
Chapter 30
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 2, Art. XI.
Official Map — See Ch. 11, Art. IX.
Flood hazard protection — See Ch. 20.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 56
Standards for construction of certain
streets — See Ch. 61, Art. II.
Woodland management — See Ch. 70.
(1) This section shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or any
other person charged with the enforcement of ordinances in the
City of Millville.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose,
verbally abuse or otherwise obstruct any official executing his or
her official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
(3) Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this
section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the following penalties:
(1) A fine of not less than $50 but not exceeding $100 for the first
offense;
(2) A fine of not less than $100 but not exceeding $200 for the second
offense;
(3) A fine of not less than $200 but not exceeding $500 for the third
offense.
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-11
1:249

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 30-1. Statutory authority.
The Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. authorizes
municipalities to adopt standards and regulations related to the planning
and regulation of land uses and development within their jurisdiction which
are consistent with the purposes, intent and guidelines established by the
state statute.
§ 30-2. Short title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "City of Millville Land Use
and Development Regulations."
§ 30-3. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. To establish a Municipal Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment, setting forth the composition of these Boards, their powers
and duties and the procedures by which these Boards shall perform
their duties.
B. To encourage the most appropriate use or development of lands
throughout the City while conserving the value of property, with
reasonable consideration for the character of various zoning districts
and their peculiar suitability for particular uses that will be compatible
with development patterns in neighboring municipalities and the
surrounding region, all in accordance with a Comprehensive Master
Plan.
C. To encourage industrial development compatible with the environment
and consistent with the natural features of the City and its man-made
environment.
D. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural or man-made
disasters.
E. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of the land.
F. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
G. To encourage and regulate new techniques and designs with conserved
energy.
H. To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
I. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:251
§ 30-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the meaning given in the
Municipal Land Use Law, or if not defined therein, then they shall have the
meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of a use of property or the use of a
structure and property for which a zoning permit had been issued or which
had existed prior to the date of this chapter.32 The continued connection of
utilities, including a telephone or the outward appearance of the use of such
a sign, shall not be sufficient to overcome the presumption of abandonment.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure or use which:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Secretary of the Planning Board in the
case of matters involving the Planning Board; the Secretary of the Board
of Adjustment in the case of matters involving the Board of Adjustment;
neighborhoods and communities and to the preservation of the
environment.
J. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, conservational, residential, recreational, commercial and
industrial uses and open space, both public and private.
K. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangement.
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land to avoid undue concentration of
population and, to these ends, to regulate the height, design,
appearance, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures, as well as their placement on the land.
M. To encourage residential cluster and planned developments which
conserve land and provide a variety of housing types.
Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use,
including but not limited to the production, harvesting, and storage as
well as washing, grading and packaging of unprocessed produce grown
on site;
A.
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or
principal building or a principal land use;
B.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants,
business or industry of the principal structure or principal use served;
C.
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or principal use
served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of
this chapter.
D.
32.Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1-1985.
§ 30-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:252
the City Clerk in the case of matters involving the Board of Commissioners;
the Zoning Officer in the case of matters involving the issuance of zoning
permits and the enforcement of regulations; and the Tax Assessor in the
case of providing required property owner lists pursuant to § 30-49.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Development designs, situations or existing features,
natural or man-made, on a developer's property, or nearby property,
creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe,
unsatisfactory or noncomplying conditions, such as layout inconsistent with
the zoning regulations; insufficient street width; unsuitable street grade;
unsuitable street location; inconvenient street system; inadequate utilities,
such as water drainage, shade trees, sewerage and other utilities necessary
for essential services to residents and occupants; unsuitable size, shape
and location for any area reserved for public use or land for open space
in a planned development; infringement upon land designated as subject
to flooding; and the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion from
wind or water or from excavation or grading; all as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38 and measured against the design and performance standards of
this chapter.
AGE-RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT — A residential development, including
accessory buildings and permitted or necessary cultural, medical,
recreational and social facilities, limited to certain age groups conforming
to 24 CFR Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons of the federal Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or superseded.
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — A dwelling or housing unit deed restricted
to require at least one permanent resident 55 years of age or older in
each such dwelling or housing unit and prohibiting any resident from being
less than 19 years of age, as permitted by law, and conforming to 24
CFR Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons, implementing the
federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or
superseded.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Residential dwellings, for the
seasonal use of employees of an agricultural or horticultural use, which
because of their character or location are not practical for and cannot
be transformed into permanent housekeeping units for nonagricultural
employees.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PURPOSE OR USE — Any
production of plants or animals useful to man, including but not limited to:
forages or sod crops, dairy animals or dairy products; poultry or poultry
products; livestock, including beef, cattle, sheep, horses, ponies, mules or
goats, and including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals
as provided for in this chapter, bees and apiary products; fruits of all kinds,
including grapes, nuts, and berries; vegetables, nursery, floral, ornamental
and greenhouse products.
ALLEY — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access
to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a public street.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:253
AMBULANCE SERVICE — The provision of nonemergency medical care and
transportation by certified trained personnel in a vehicle which is designed
and equipped to provide medical care at the scene and while transporting
sick or injured persons to or from a medical care facility or provider.
ANTIQUE STORE — Premises used for the sale or trading of articles of
which 80% or more are over 50 years old and have collectible value derived
because of age. Antique stores do not include secondhand or used pieces of
contemporary furniture.[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 34-2007]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the authority
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The City of Millville Planning Board, unless a
different agency is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the
authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Streets and highways which will be used primarily
for high vehicular speeds or heavy volumes of traffic.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to
the proprietor. In the context of this definition, "apartment" shall mean
a dwelling unit offering at a minimum one unfurnished room, private
bathroom, kitchenette, and a locked door on the unit entrance.
AUCTION, PERMANENT — The sale of goods or personal property on
a continual basis from the same location by the same individual, group,
corporation, business or organization on a daily, weekly, monthly or
otherwise regular basis, regardless of the ownership of the goods or
personal property being sold.
AUCTION, TEMPORARY — The sale by auction of goods, property, real
and personal, and other items at a given location for no more than three
consecutive days or two, two-day weekends during a thirty-day period,
regardless of the ownership of the property or goods being sold or the
person or organization doing the selling.
BASEMENT — A story of a building that is partly underground, having more
than 1/2 of its interior height, measured from the floor to finished ceiling,
below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS — A building on residential property with
rooms for rent on a daily basis, with a resident owner, occupant or manager
and no more than 10 sleeping rooms for rent.[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 29-2008]
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:254
BILLBOARD — An outdoor, off-site, lettered or pictorial advertising, but not
including signs advertising roadside farm stands.
BLOCK — The length of one side of the street between two street center
lines.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A rooming house in which the renting individuals are
served with meals prepared in one kitchen by the owner or operator of the
house in return for a valuable consideration.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69.
BOARD OF JURISDICTION — The Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment of the City of Millville, depending on the jurisdictional
requirements of an application.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
BUFFER — A strip of land containing natural or planted screening materials
and separating one kind of land use from another or separating components
of a development project.
BUILDING — The combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the areas of all enclosed and roofed
spaces of a principal building and all accessory buildings. Such areas shall
be computed by using outside building dimensions measured on a
horizontal plane at ground level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the midpoint of the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard
roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs. Conventional accessory structures, such as chimneys, spires,
aerials and elevator enclosures, shall not be included in building height
calculation.
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard in the district under
consideration. In the case of a lot abutting two streets, required front yard
setbacks from both streets shall be observed.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which the building is situated.
CAMP — A group of tents, huts, recreational vehicles or other shelters,
usually located near a lake or in a wooded area, forming a temporary
residence, especially in summer.
CAMPSITE — A place used or suitable for camping.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
a major construction project.
CARTWAY — The actual road surface area from curbline or that portion
between the edges of the paved width.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:255
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document which shall be deemed to
authorize and be required for each occupancy and use of a building or
land to which it applies, and shall continue in effect only so long as such
building and the use thereof and the use of such land is in full conformity
with the requirements of this Chapter 30 and the Uniform Construction
Code.33 A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued upon completion
or alteration or prior to any changes in occupancy of a building or land
only after it is determined by the appropriate issuing officer that said
construction or change is in full compliance with this Chapter 30 and the
Uniform Construction Code. Maintenance of a valid certificate of occupancy
shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
CHANNEL — The identifiable bed and banks of a stream which conveys a
normal, constant or intermittent flow of a stream.
CIRCULATION — The system, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and for the handling of people and goods by such means as
terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or
transhipment points.
CLEARING — Any intentional or negligent act to cut, damage, or remove all
or a substantial part of a tree or other vegetation that will cause the tree or
other vegetation to decay or die.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
CLUB — Any organization catering exclusively to members and their guests,
or any organization for religious, vocational, civic, recreational or athletic
purposes which is not conducted for financial gain.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development based on an overall density
for the entire tract allowing reduced lot sizes so that higher densities result
in individual segments of the tract, provided that the gross density of the
entire tract permitted by this chapter is not exceeded and open space
preservation is an integral part of the design.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Streets which will carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such
a development.
COMMERCIAL POULTRY FARM — A farm or industrial use designed and
intended primarily for breeding, raising and processing of poultry or fowl
for commercial sale and where the number of birds exceed 50 birds per use
at any one time.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and/or lot or dwelling owners of the development.
"Common open space" may contain such complementary structures and
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Bureau of Permits and Inspections, Art. XIV, State Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:256
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of
residents and owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — The use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location and operation of such use
as contained in this Chapter 30 and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefor by the Millville Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A multiunit property, or a method of ownership of
such a property, in which a tenant holds full title to a single residential
or commercial unit and joint ownership in the common grounds and/or
supporting facilities of the property. The term may also refer to the unit held
in single ownership.
CONGREGATE CARE APARTMENT — A rental apartment with communal
dining facilities and services such as housekeeping, organized recreational
and social activities, transportation services and other similar support
services for residents. Fees for such services may be charged on a bundled
monthly basis or may be arranged on a fee-for-service basis.
CONGREGATE CARE HOUSING — A form of age-restricted housing that
combines private living quarters with centralized dining services, shared
living spaces, and access to social and recreational activities and that
may include transportation services, personal care services, rehabilitative
services, religious programs, and other support services.[Added 3-7-2006
by Ord. No. 8-2006]
CONTIGUOUS LANDS — Land which is connected or adjacent to other
land so as to permit the land to be used as a functional unit, provided that
separation by lot lines, streams, roads, rights-of-way, and easements shall
not affect the contiguity of the land.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An age-restricted
development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care from
independent living to long-term bed care, and which enters into contracts
to provide lifelong care in exchange for the payment of monthly fees, plus
an entrance fee, in excess of one year of monthly fees conforming to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-330 et seq., as it may be amended or superseded
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — A development other than a planned
development.
CONVERSION — The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate the provision of more dwelling units than were originally
intended. "Conversions" include the alteration of a nonresidential structure
into a dwelling unit for at least one family; the modification of a singlefamily
structure so as to accommodate two or more dwelling units; and the
alteration of a multifamily structure so as to accommodate more units than
originally intended.
COUNTRY CLUB — Land area and buildings containing golf courses,
recreational facilities, a clubhouse, and customary accessory uses, open
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:257
only to members and their guests and operating as a nonprofit
entity.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plans for the physical
development of Cumberland County, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter, adopted by the County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-1 and 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Cumberland County Planning Board.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plat or lot area covered by all
structures, paving and nonporous materials other than retaining walls,
shrubbery and fences. Any area of a lot covered with porous material will
not be included in the calculation of lot coverage.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor land-service street closed at one end and having an
adequate vehicle turning area at the closed end.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed. To determine the permitted number of dwelling units in
a planned unit development (PUD), the total acres required to be reserved
for open space shall be deducted from the gross acres of residential land to
arrive at the gross acres of land to be developed.[Amended 9-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 32-2004]
DENSITY, GROSS — The total number of dwelling units per gross acre
within any existing or proposed development that includes streets and open
space portions of a development. In the case of a mixed use development,
the land devoted to nonresidential uses also is included. To calculate gross
density, the total area of the tract is divided by the total number of dwelling
units and the result is expressed in units per acre.[Amended 9-21-2004
by Ord. No. 32-2004]
DENSITY, NET — The total number of dwelling units per gross acre within
any existing or proposed development that excludes streets and open space
portions of a development. In the case of a mixed use development, the land
devoted to nonresidential uses also is excluded.[Amended 9-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 32-2004]
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — The total number of dwelling units per gross
acre of residential land area including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development. This also is known as "gross residential
density."[Added 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 32-2004]
DESIGNATED USE AREA — Areas shown on planned development wherein
particular types of dwelling units or commercial, institutional or common
open space uses may be situated and which are employed for the purpose
of calculating the maximum net density limitation and area requirements
applicable to the use. Such areas may, but need not be, coextensive with any
existing or proposed record lot lines.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:258
and to release same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the
development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in the proposed development, including
the holder of an option for contract purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; any mining,
excavation or landfill; any use or change in use of any building or other
structure or land; or the extension of use of land for which permission may
be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT — Tree trunk diameter measured in inches
at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
DISTRICT, ZONING — A portion of the territory of the City of Millville
within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation and
maintenance of stormwater facilities.
DRIPLINE — A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the
tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
DWELLING — Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or used
for residential purposes.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building detached from other buildings and
used for residential purposes by one family and which has its own cooking,
sleeping, sanitary and general living facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — Any residential structure or grouping of
structures designed to provide dwelling units in attached fashion wherein
each unit occupies its own structure from ground to roof with outside
entrance and includes such attached housing containing dwelling units
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:259
for up to four households such as plexes, patio and atrium houses, and
townhouses.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY —
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A single-family, multistory dwelling unit in a
line of at most four dwelling units, with two vertical party walls shared with
adjacent dwelling units, or one party wall if at the end of a group of dwelling
units, provided with on-site vehicular access and parking or designed as
part of a residential cluster with shared access and parking.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure
forming a single habitable area with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation by one family or
household.
EARTH EXTRACTION — See "resource extraction."
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated for limited use
within which permanent structures shall not be erected.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in the size of any other existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — Structure and physical improvements, whether
publicly or privately owned, necessary to permit the orderly development
of an area, including such facilities as streets; water, sewerage facilities;
gas, telephone or electric lines; supporting structures such as manholes and
catch basins; pumping stations; solid waste collection stations; transformer
and/or "step-up" stations; and utility poles or towers, but not including
generating or storage plants, processing plants or stations, maintenance
yards, administrative headquarters facilities or housing or quarters for
installation, repair or trouble crews; or the storage of equipment relevant
thereto.
DUPLEX or TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building
designed for and occupied by two families, one living above the other,
having a common partition between them and having no party wall in
common with an adjoining building.
A.
SEMIDETACHED HOUSE (HALF-DOUBLE) — A dwelling unit
surrounded on three sides by yard area and to be constructed so that
one wall is on a side lot and the opposite wall abuts or is a common
wall with an adjoining dwelling unit and is shared in common with the
adjoining dwelling.
B.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:260
FAMILY — One or more persons living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, but it shall not include more than three persons
unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption.
FARM — Any parcel of land including at least five acres actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural uses and/or containing a dwelling unit on land
in excess of the five acres actively devoted to agricultural or horticultural
uses.
FARM BUILDING — Any structure (barns, sheds, silos, cribs, greenhouses,
etc.) located on a farm and used for housing of agricultural equipment,
produce, livestock or poultry or for incidental or customary processing of
farm products, provided that such building is used in conjunction with
active farm operations. The term "farm building" shall not include dwelling.
FARMSTEAD — An ancillary use to an agricultural use consisting at a
minimum of a single-family detached dwelling occupied by at least one
person employed in the operation of the agricultural use on the
premises.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT — A public eating place where prepared foods
and beverages are available for on- and off-premises consumption upon a
short waiting period, and orders are placed by the customer at the counter
and primarily served in or on disposable wrappers, containers or plates,
and where waiter service is not available.[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No.
34-2007]
FENCE or WALL — A structure which permanently or temporarily prohibits
or inhibits unrestricted travel between properties or portions of properties
or between the street or public right-of-way and the property.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
preliminary approved major subdivisions or site plans after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FIRST AID, RESCUE AND AMBULANCE SQUAD — Any first aid, emergency
and rescue, or ambulance squad association incorporated as a not for profit
corporation and which has been certified by the Internal Revenue Service
of the United States Government as a tax exempt organization pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and which provides public
first aid, emergency and rescue services, ambulance services, mobility
assistance vehicle service, and other nonemergency ambulance and medical
transport services for bed-confined or wheelchair-bound patients and
possessing the necessary licenses and certifications to engage in such
services.
FIRST AID, RESCUE AND AMBULANCE SQUAD FACILITIES — Facilities
designed to house a first aid, rescue and ambulance squad, including but
not limited to business offices, communication and dispatch services,
training facilities, facilities for the storage and maintenance of equipment,
including ambulances, medical transport vehicles and other vehicles used
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:261
in the operation of the first aid, rescue and ambulance squad, recreation
areas, food preparation areas, laundry facilities, dining area and other
similar facilities for use by employees awaiting emergency calls to service.
FLOODPLAIN — The relative flat area adjoining a water channel which has
been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater.34
FLOODWAY — The channel and portions of the adjacent floodplain that
carry the greater part of flood flow at greater depths and velocities than do
the other parts of the floodplain; that constitute the minimum area required
or the passage of flood flows without aggravating flood conditions upstream
and downstream; and that are necessary to preserve the natural regimen of
the stream for the reasonable passage of the (floodway) design flood.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and additional portions of the
floodplain that are subject to flood flow at lesser depths and lower velocities
than the floodway and that are inundated by the (flood hazard) area design
flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the principal commercial structure in a lot, excluding
basement space unless designed for customary visits by the commercial
clientele, but including the areas of permanent roofed porches or terraces.
All dimensions shall be measured between exterior wall faces.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — An area fully enclosed by the inside surfaces
of walls, windows, doors, partitions and having a headroom of at least
six feet six inches, including living, eating, cooking, sleeping, storage,
circulation, service, utility and other related household spaces, but
excluding garages, carports, porches, unheated sheds and basement. Attics
or portions thereof may be considered habitable floor area, provided that
they are fully finished and meet proper height requirements.
FORESTRY — The growing and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes, except the removal of trees located on a parcel of land one acre
or less in size on which a dwelling has been constructed; directly associated
with the use of the property for a nursery, garden center, Christmas tree
plantation, or orchard; directly associated with the use of the property for
a landfill authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; necessary
for the maintenance of a public right-of-way; for the personal use by the
property owner; or necessary to ensure public safety shall not be considered
forestry.
FORMULA BUSINESS — A type of business, restaurant or establishment,
including food service, which is required by contractual or other
arrangement to maintain any of the following in each separate business
premises: standardized (formula) array of services and/or merchandise,
trademark, logo, facade, service mark, symbol, decor, architecture, layout,
signage, uniform or similar standardized features.[Added 10-2-2007 by
Ord. No. 34-2007]
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Flood Hazard Protection.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:262
FORMULA RESTAURANT — A restaurant devoted to the preparation and
offering of food and beverage for sale to the public for consumption either
on or off premises and which is required by contractual or other
arrangement to offer any of the following: standardized menus, ingredients,
food preparation, decor, uniforms, architecture, signage, facades, layout,
trademark, logo, symbol, service mark or similar standardized
features.[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 34-2007]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or portion thereof used as an accessory
to a main building on a lot designed or used primarily to provide for the
storage of not more than three motor vehicles and in which no occupation,
business or service for profit is undertaken.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building used for the off-street storage of motor
vehicles, the provision of incidental gasoline or fuel service, the sale of
accessories and the repair of motor vehicles, excluding body work.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling structure(s), not more
than two rooms in depth or 2 1/2 stories in height, designed as part of a
residential project under single management, providing joint and common
use of open areas by occupants, whether for recreation, parking or other
purposes.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including any structures
thereon, used primarily for the retail sale and direct delivery of motor
vehicles or motor fuels and lubricants, as well as such incidental services as
the lubrication and hand washing of motor vehicles and the sale, installation
and minor repair of automobile accessories such as tires and batteries.
GLARE — Illumination from a source of light producing a reading of 50 or
more on a standard Weston Photographic Light Meter, or its equivalent, at
a distance of three feet, visible from the public right-of-way, or a reading of
0.8 or more is found when such a meter or its equivalent is held anywhere
on a residential property line.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing
the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. It
also may include a clubhouse.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
GOVERNING BODY — The City Commission of the City of Millville, in the
County of Cumberland, State of New Jersey.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling shared by four or more handicapped persons
including resident, staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit
and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide
care, education, and community activities for the residents with the goal of
enabling the resident to live as independently as possible.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a
structure or building from the average elevation of the finished grade five
feet from the foundation.
HISTORICAL SITE — A building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the nation,
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:263
state, county or community and so designated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
HOME ANIMAL AGRICULTURE — The activity of producing, principally
for home use or consumption, plants, animals or their products by man,
including in a primary service the growing, harvesting, storage, preparation
for use and where any sales are incidental, when conducted and performed
within the recommendations of the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment
Station or equivalent research institution.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use such as handicrafts, dressmaking,
millinery, laundering, preserving and home cooking for sale and
consumption off site, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for residential purposes; wherein the use is conducted
entirely within the dwelling and is carried on in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and wherein the use does not impair, change or
alter the character of the dwelling or adversely affect the uses permitted in
the residential district in which the use is located.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The office or studio in the
residence of a physician, surgeon, dentist, artist, lawyer, architect,
professional planner, licensed land surveyor, psychologists, accountant,
teacher or other state or federal recognized profession, but not including a
photo studio, barbershop, beauty salon, shop, music school, dance school,
business school or school of any kind with organized classes or similar
activity, provided that such use shall meet the provisions of this chapter and
shall not be found detrimental to the character of the dwelling or the use
does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district in
which the use is proposed to be located.
HOTEL — Any facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public which may provide additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities. The term shall include hotels,
motels, suites hotels, tourist homes, lodging houses or inns or other
buildings where transient rooms are furnished for a consideration, but
shall not include properties that are residential in character.[Amended
10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
HOUSE, ROOMING OR GUEST — A single-family dwelling wherein
furnished rooms without cooking facilities are rented for valuable
consideration to one or more individuals unrelated by blood or marriage to
the owner or operator of the house.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACE — Any surface which does not permit fluids to
pass through or penetrate its pores or spaces.
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF — A restraining order issued by a court of equity,
forbidding a person to do a particular act.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract comprehensively planned for industrial uses
whether or not the buildings are erected in one development stage or over
a period of time.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:264
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any land used for the following public or private
purposes: educational facilities, including universities, colleges, elementary,
secondary, and vocational schools, kindergartens and nurseries or day-care
centers; cultural facilities such as libraries, galleries, museums, concert
halls, theaters (for live productions), and the like; hospitals, including such
educational, clinical, research and convalescent facilities as are integral
to the operation of the hospital; medical and health services facilities,
including nursing homes, supervised residential institutions, rehabilitation
therapy centers and public health facilities; law enforcement facilities;
military facilities; churches; cemeteries; and other similar facilities.
INTERESTED PARTY OR PERSON — Any person whose rights to use,
acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under
this chapter or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
chapter or under any other law of this state or of the United States has been
denied, violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter. This shall apply to any person, whether living within or without the
City of Millville.
JUNKYARD — Any area and/or structure used or intended to be used for the
business of selling, buying, storing or trading in used or discarded metal,
glass, paper, cordage, lumber or wood, cloth, or any other type of solid
material or any used or disabled fixtures, vehicles or equipment of any kind.
KENNEL — Any premises on which more than four dogs over the age of six
months are kept whether or not engaged in commercial activity.
LAND — The surface and subsurface of the earth as well as improvements
and fixtures on, above or below the surface and any water found thereon.
LANDFILL — Sites, including open dumps, where solid wastes, liquid and
dry sewage sludge, and liquid and dry chemical waste are disposed of by
land application or soil covering. For the purposes of this chapter, solid
waste transfer stations shall not be considered landfills.
LANDOWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having legal title to the land.
The holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land, may file an application as the
landowner for the purposes of this chapter.
LANDSCAPING — The installation of plant material or seed as part of
development.
LIMITS OF CLEARING — The boundaries of that area of land to be cleared
of trees and other vegetation in conjunction with a proposed development
or land use.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space not less than 12 feet in width, 70
feet in length and 15 feet in height, available for the loading or unloading of
goods, having direct access to a street or other public way and so arranged
that no vehicle is required to back into a public right-of-way.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:265
LOT AREA — The surface of a land parcel determined by its boundary lines
and expressed in terms of square feet or acres. Any portion of a lot included
in a street right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.
LOT DEPTH — A horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured at right angles to the street at two equidistant points on the front
lot lines and in the general direction of the lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lot lines measured along
the street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, said distance shall
be determined by measuring along a line located 25 feet from the center
line of the street. On lots having a curved frontage, the minimum distance
between side lot lines measured at the street line shall not be less than
75% of the required minimum lot frontage as set forth in the Schedules of
District Regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located. In the
case of corner lots, the smaller of the two lot lines coexistent with the street
lines shall be considered as the frontage.
LOT WIDTH — A horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth along the rear lines of the required front yard
space.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between 0% and 50%
of the median income established and adjusted annually for the geographic
area in which the City is located by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which, with appropriate purchase or
rental subsidy, is constructed and kept available for families or individuals
including senior citizens where incomes do not exceed low income levels
as defined and adjusted for household size from time to time, for the
geographic area in which the City is located, by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required under the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Single-family detached housing built to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent
chassis and is used as a place of human habitation, but which is not
constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of
the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and
which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or
frame.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — Minor streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:266
abutting properties and regulate vehicular access to the arterial street or
highway.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
MAY — Indicates a permissive action.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Millville.
MIGRANT LABOR HOUSING — See "agricultural employee housing."
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which:
MINOR STREET — Rights-of-way which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties. "Minor streets" include marginal access streets and
culs-de-sac.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve:
MOBILE HOME — Any unit, whether licensed or not, used for living,
sleeping or business purposes by one or more persons, built on a chassis
originally designed without permanent foundation and shall include a
dwelling, sleeping or business unit of vehicular design or, used or intended
or constructed for use as a conveyance upon public streets and highways
whether licensed or not, and shall further include non-self-propelled
vehicles and other structures so designed, constructed or reconstructed
or added to by means or accessories in such a manner as to permit the
occupancy thereof as dwelling, sleeping place or for business purposes
for one or more persons and having wheels, jacks, piers or skirtings so
arranged as to be integral with or portable by said mobile home and shall
further include that type of dwelling known as a trailer. A mobile home shall
Proposes new development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by § 30-45 of this chapter a minor site plan;
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
The creation of more than five lots, sites or other divisions of land
including a single reserved parcel, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale or building development;
A.
B. Planned development;
C. Any new street; and
Extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
D.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:267
be of such design, size and construction as to be regulated by the United
States. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
MOBILE HOME PARK (OR COURT) — Any plot of ground in singular
ownership and upon which two or more mobile homes or mobile units used
for dwelling, sleeping or business purposes are located.
MOBILITY ASSISTANCE VEHICLE SERVICE — The provision of
nonemergency health care transportation by certified trained personnel for
the sick, infirm or otherwise disabled persons who are under the care and
supervision of a physician and whose medical condition is not of sufficient
gravity to require transportation by ambulance, but does require
transportation from place to place for medical care, and whose use of an
alternate form of transportation such as an automobile, bus or taxicab might
create a serious risk to health or life.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between 50%
and 80% of the median income established and adjusted annually for the
geographic area in which the City is located by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which, with appropriate
purchase or rental subsidy, is constructed and kept available for families or
individuals including senior citizens where incomes do not exceed moderate
income levels as defined and adjusted from time to time, for the geographic
area in which the City is located by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
MOTEL — A type of hotel providing a series of rental units, not more than
two stories in height, operated as a single business for the primary purpose
of providing lodging of transient guests where only a general kitchen and
dining room are provided within the building or as an accessory thereto. An
office and single dwelling may be provided in conjunction with the operation
of a motel.
MOTEL UNIT — A combination sleeping room and private, enclosed full
sanitary and bathing facilities which is rented to transients as temporary
sleeping accommodations.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, City
Commission of the City of Millville when acting pursuant to this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Millville.
NATURAL STREAM — Any naturally eroded channel with visible evidence
of banks and bed, as distinguished from a swale which shows no evidence
of natural erosion except occasional gulleying, and from a ditch, which is an
artificially excavated channel.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Waters capable of being transversed by pleasure
craft.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:268
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of the adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 through 40:55D-36.
OFF-SITE — Any area located outside the lot lines of the lot in question,
but within the property (of which the lot is part) which is subject of a
development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Any area not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Improvements made outside the original
tract to accommodate conditions generated inside the original tract that are
transferred off site as a result of the proposed development.
ON-SITE — Any area located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Any area located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such areas, provided that such areas may
be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA — The keeping of business property or any
materials ancillary to an approved use for a period of greater than 24
hours, including items for sale, lease, processing and repair, in an open
area adjacent to the principal use. Outdoor storage does not include tractor
trailers, sheds or any other type of enclosure that must be approved during
site plan review.[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
PARCEL — Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definity that its location and boundaries may be established and which is
designed by its owner as land to be used as a unit.
PARKING LOT — An area which contains four or more off-street parking
spaces.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:269
PARKING SPACE — An area at least nine feet in width and having a total
of 162 square feet exclusive of driveway appurtenant and giving access
thereto, accessible from a street, but not located on a street, which is both
suitable and intended for the parking of a passenger motor vehicle. Any offstreet
parking space that is part of a parking lot shall be so designed so as
not to require a vehicle to back into or from a street or public right-of-way.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and governmental agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by
the City of Millville, including cash, provided that the City shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, association, company, corporation,
firm, LLC, organization, partnership or trust.
PLAN — See "plat."
PLANNED ADULT COMMUNITY — An area of land comprising a minimum
of 150 acres located within a zoning district as authorized by this chapter
to be planned, developed and maintained as a single entity containing agerestricted
homes serving the needs for independent living, congregate care
or assisted living residences with common open space, recreational and
service amenities as an appurtenance.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous acreage, as specified herein this chapter, to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity, containing one or more structures
with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses
or both and any residential or other uses incidental to the predominant use
that may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT or RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area of a
minimum contiguous acreage as specified herein this chapter, to be
developed according to a plan as a single entity, containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate residential,
commercial or both uses and any other uses incidental to the predominant
residential use as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — See "industrial park."
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — An area of land comprising a
minimum of 50 acres within the R-20 and R-15 Residential Zones to be
planned, developed, and maintained as a single entity containing residential
housing units with common open space as an appurtenance.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous 100 acres, or other minimum area as
otherwise required within this chapter, to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.[Added 3-7-2006
by Ord. No. 8-2006]
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:270
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Millville,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
PLAT — One or more maps of a subdivision or a site plan which shows the
location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties and such other
information and detail as required by this chapter.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49, prior to final approval after
specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the City
agency and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during the early and introductory stages of the design
of a project illustrating, in schematic form, its scope, scale, and relationship
to its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot and/or building is
used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES, BUILDINGS AND COMPLEXES — The office
and offices of a physician, surgeon, dentist, psychologist, lawyer, engineer,
architect, professional planner, licensed land surveyor, accountant or other
State or federally recognized professional, or an office building or group
of buildings housing such offices and related, incidental commercial uses
thereto, with appurtenant common areas.
PUBLIC AREAS — The use of land by the City Commission, school board, or
some other officially created City agency or authority, and including:
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A Master Plan, capital
improvements program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along the
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the City, a City agency, the City Board of Education, the
State of New Jersey or County of Cumberland or other public body for
recreational and/or conservational uses.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE — A nonprofit use serving the public or a significant
portion thereof, not controlled directly by a government or government
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas
and facilities;
A.
B. Other public open space;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings, structures and/or uses.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:271
agency and financed in whole or in part by either public funds or public
contributions. In addition, quasi-public facilities include those operated by
nonprofit institutions or organizations which are operated by persons or
groups of persons for public purposes but with only limited public control
or accessibility.
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Boats, campers, van, motor homes, travel
trailers and ski mobiles, but excluding mobile homes.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility that is not a junkyard and in which
recoverable resources such as paper products, glass, metal cans and other
products are recycled, reprocessed, bundled, crushed, stored or otherwise
treated, essentially by hand, to return such products to a condition in which
they may again be used for production.
RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT — A collection point for temporary
storage of recoverable resources located either in a container or small
structure. No processing of such items is permitted at the collection point.
RECYCLING PLANT — A facility that is not a junkyard and in which
recoverable resources, such as paper products, glass, metal cans, and other
products are recycled, reprocessed, bundled, crushed, stored or otherwise
treated to return such products to a condition in which they may be used
for production.
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTERS — A group of commercial establishments
planned, constructed and managed as a total entity, containing a wide range
of retail and service establishments, occupying at least 30 acres of land
containing at least one or more anchor stores and drawing clientele from
as much as an hour drive time. Customer and employee parking must be
provided on site with goods delivery separated from customer access.
RESIDENCE HOTEL/MOTEL or EXTENDED-STAY HOTEL — Any hotel
facility which offers more than 5% of its rental units for stays extending
30 consecutive days or more. A multidwelling unit extended-stay lodging
facility consisting of efficiency units or suites with a complete kitchen
suitable for long-term (30 days or more) occupancy. Meeting rooms,
clubhouses and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and
their guests are permitted accessory uses.[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 29-2008]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining
and quarrying of sand, gravel or minerals for commercial purposes, not
including, however, the private and agricultural extraction and use of
extracted material by the landowner.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designed, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:272
stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground, playfield, park
or beach area operated solely by the agency or group operating the
recreational facilities and for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall
not be deemed to be a restaurant. Restaurant does not include take-out or
drive-in establishments which permit the consumption of food within motor
vehicles.
RESTRAINING ORDER — An order which may be issued upon the filing
of an application for an injunction, forbidding the defendant to do the
threatened act until a hearing on the application can be held.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law; or the alteration of any street or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyance so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument. The designation of a
subdivision as a resubdivision shall be determined on the basis of the tract
or parcel of land affected without regard to any change ownership.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent
storage of water runoff.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The boundary lines of land used or intended for
use as streets and from which required setbacks or front yard and lot depths
shall be measured. Where existing records are vague or show a lesser
dimension, they shall be considered to be not less than 50 feet apart, or 25
feet from the street center line.
ROADSIDE STAND — Any accessory farm building or structure with
requisite off-street parking and loading space, designed for seasonal sale
of principally agricultural and/or horticultural products grown locally with
at least 25% of its sales consisting of goods produced on the farm or tract
on which the said stand is located. The intermittent sale of home-grown
produce as an accessory use not involving a building or structure, not
occupying more than 300 square feet and not creating any undue traffic
hazards, shall not be deemed to constitute a roadside stand and shall not be
subject to regulation by this chapter.
ROOMING HOUSES — A building that is the primary residence of the owner
and in which rooms are provided by the owner, for compensation, to three
or more adult persons not related to the owner by blood, marriage, or
adoption.
RURAL INFILL HOUSING — Single-family detached dwellings newly
constructed on scattered, individual sites, where there already exists a
developed character created by existing dwellings and where additional
lands are not reasonably available to create a parcel that meets farmland
assessment criteria.[Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
SCHEDULES OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS — The Zoning Schedules of
District Regulations made a part of this chapter by § 30-31 hereof.35
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:273
SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE — The level below the natural ground
surface to which water seasonally rises in the soil in most years.
SEASONAL RESORT COTTAGES — A building or buildings having one or
more dwelling units, whether provided with cooking facilities or not, which
are used only on a seasonal basis which covers the period from May 1 to
September 30 of each year.
SERVICE STATION — See "garage, repair and gasoline service station."
SETBACK LINE — See "building line."
SETBACKS — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
property line and the nearest front, side, or rear line of the building
including terraces or any covered projection thereof, excluding steps.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the City of
Millville.
SHALL — Indicates a mandatory requirement.
SIGN — Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons
not on the premises on which the sign is located; provided, however, that
the following shall not be included in the application of the sign
regulations36 as contained in this chapter:
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance required for the building line
measured from the right-of-way of the street on which the lot fronts
to the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding
uncovered steps.
A.
SETBACK, SIDE YARD — The distance required for the building line
measured perpendicular from the side property line and the closest
point of the principal building.
B.
SETBACK, REAR — The distance required for the building line
measured perpendicular from the rear property line and the closest
point of the principal building.
C.
Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property
numbers, post box numbers or names of occupants or date of
construction;
A.
Flags and insignias of any governmental agency, except when displayed
in connection with commercial promotions;
B.
Legal notices, informational or directional signs erected by
governmental bodies;
C.
Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights; and
D.
35.Editor's Note: The Schedules of District Regulations are included at the end of this
chapter.
36.Editor's Note: See Article XXIII of this chapter.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:274
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
those details and information or data required by § 30-45 of this chapter.
SPECIMEN TREE OR STAND — Any tree or grouping of trees that has been
determined to be of a high value because of its age, size, species or other
professional criteria.[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards that are adopted by
ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d regulating noise levels, glare,
earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious
odors, toxic matters, explosive and flammable matters, smoke and airborne
particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects and conditions
and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the
municipality; or required by applicable federal or state laws or other
municipal ordinances.
STORY — Any covered area with a clear headroom of six feet six inches or
more, whether finished or not, except a basement.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or is
shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or is approved by
official action as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; or is shown on a
plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINES — See "right-of-way lines."
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in either the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders,
or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter if no new streets are created:
Signs directing traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
advertising matter.
E.
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or a Subdivision
Committee thereof, to be for agricultural purposes, where all resulting
parcels are five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
C. Divisions of property upon court order; and
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:275
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION — The application for approval of a
subdivision pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), or an application for approval of a planned unit
development pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Planning Board for
the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions
of development regulations and having such other duties related to land
subdivision as may be conferred on this Committee by the Planning Board.
SUCH AS — Shall be considered as introducing a typical or illustrative
designation of items and shall not be interpreted as constituting a complete
list.
SUITES HOTEL — A hotel as herein defined with all of the following
characteristics:[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A noncommercial privately owned pool
constituting an accessory use to a residential unit or units and located on
the same lot therewith. A wading pool with a depth of less than 18 inches
or a portable swimming device, located above ground level, with an area
less than 125 square feet and a water depth less than three feet, temporary
in character and constructed of material other than concrete and masonry,
shall not be deemed a "swimming pool."
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A public or privately owned pool open to the
public on an annual membership or a daily fee basis and having dressing
rooms, off-street parking and other appropriate accessories and facilities.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling, townhouse."
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD — A compact and mixed-use
neighborhood where residential, commercial and civic buildings are located
within close proximity to each other, and housing is designed with
architectural features that encourage human interaction (e.g., porches,
close to the street).[Added 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
Conveyance so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
D.
A. At least 75 separately rentable units with service facilities;
Each rentable unit shall contain a kitchen with a full-size refrigerator, a
range or range top with at least two burners, an oven of any type, sink
and space for meal preparation;
B.
At least 75% of the rentable units shall be suites with a living room and
a separately enclosed bedroom; and
C.
D. No units shall be rentable on less than a full twenty-four-hour basis.
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-4
1:276
TRAVEL TRAILER — A self-contained unit mounted on one chassis with
wheels, intended for temporary or seasonal living or camping, not
exceeding 36 feet in length or eight feet in width (including any fixture
thereof) which when fully set up on a campsite shall not exceed a total
gross area of 400 square feet. Travel trailers may also include pop-ups, tent
trailers, folding camping trailers or recreational motor homes, including
vans, provided that they comply with size limitation set forth above. No
travel trailer shall require special equipment or tools for setup or a tractor
or heavy-duty truck for their movement on the highways. Any unit because
of its size, design or construction is regulated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) shall not be
considered as a travel trailer for purposes of this chapter.
TREE COVER — The area directly beneath the crown and within the dripline
of the tree.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
USED OR OCCUPIED — Includes the words intended, designed or arranged
to be used or occupied.
UTILITY — See "essential service."
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter or other City of Millville development regulations pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
WATERCOURSE — Any land or structure either naturally formed or
artificially designed for the storage, passage, retention or flow of water,
including but not limited to lakes, ponds, streams, canals, ditches or swales.
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water
at a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth
of hydrophytes. Wetlands include land with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the Natural Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States and as defined in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.3 to 7:50-6.5.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with the principal building,
unobstructed by building structures from the ground surface to sky, except
as otherwise provided by this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the right-of-way line and a parallel line across the lot at which
the front of a principal building may be located. The setback line shall be
synonymous with the rearmost limit of the required front yard area.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the whole width of the lot lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line at which any principal
building may be located on the lot. The depth of a rear yard shall be
measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot, or if the lot is not
rectangular, then in the general direction of its side lot lines and midway
between them.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to
the rear yard, or in the case of through lots fronting on two streets, between
the front yard lines. Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:277
a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required
by district regulations with its inner edge parallel to the side lot line.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer, which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the City
zoning regulations or a variance therefrom duly authorized by a City agency
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.
§ 30-5. Administrative procedures.
Every municipal agency shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations for the administration of its functions, powers and duties, and
shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge a
reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the administrative
officer who shall be the Zoning Officer for the Planning Board and the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 30-6. Fees.
An "application for development" means the application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for the approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or request for the issuance of a zoning permit.
A. Payment to professionals for services rendered to the municipality. The
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2) sets forth the guidelines
for establishing fees or charges for the review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspections of
improvements and other functions authorized by the Municipal Land
Use Law. Such fees and charges shall be based upon an established
schedule submitted by professional consultants and maintained on file
with the municipality. In the case of charges by the municipal staff for
any of the aforesaid functions, such charges shall be calculated based
upon hourly wages and shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the
products resulting from multiplying the hourly base salary by the
number of hours spent for review, inspection or other authorized
function. The annual base salary for each municipal employee is set
forth in the salary ordinances maintained on file in the office of the City
Clerk. A fee schedule for outside consultants and hourly wages for
professional staff of the municipality shall be maintained on file in the
Planning Board office, and shall be made available to applicants upon
request as a part of the billing for services. [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
(1) The term "professional" as used herein shall include the services of
a duly licensed appraiser, attorney, engineer, planner, realtor,
surveyor, zoning officer or other expert who provides professional
§ 30-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-6
1:278
services which are reasonable and necessary in connection with
the review of an application for development, review and
preparation of documents and inspection of improvements for a
development under construction. Any other expert whose
testimony is requested by the approving authority in an area in
which the applicant has presented expert testimony shall be
included within the term "professional" as used herein.
(2) The City or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or
charge any escrow account or deposit for any municipal clerical or
administrative function, overhead expenses, meeting room charges
or any other municipal expenses except as provided therein.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Review by outside consultants may be required when an
application for development is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the City. The
charge for these professionals shall be set at the same rate as all
other work of the same nature performed by these professionals for
the City when the fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
developers.
(5) The developer shall be required to pay a deposit toward the
anticipated municipal expenses for these professional services. Any
deposit in excess of $5,000 shall be placed in an escrow account
and administered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. The amount of
the deposit required shall be reasonable in relation to the
complexity and the scale of the development.
(6) The amount of the initial deposit required shall be 50% of the
anticipated fees for the review of an application for development,
review and preparation of documents and inspections of
improvements, plus 100% of the fees for the other purposes set
forth in the schedule of fees.
(7) The developer shall deposit for the inspection fees the greater of
$500 or 3% of the cost of the improvements.
(a) For those developments for which the inspection fees are less
than $10,000, the fees may be paid in two installments with an
initial deposit of 50%.
(b) For those developments for which the inspection fees are
$10,000 or more, the fees may be paid in four installments with
an initial deposit of 25%.
(c) The City Engineer shall not perform any inspections if
sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
(8) Each payment charged to the deposit for the review of applications
for development, review and preparation of documents and
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-6
1:279
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from
the professional submitted to the Chief Financial Officer of the
City on a monthly basis. If the services are provided by a City
employee, the City employee shall prepare and submit a statement
containing the same information as required on a voucher to the
Chief Financial Officer of the City on a monthly basis.
(9) If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to
enable the City or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvements inspections, the Chief
Financial Officer of the City shall provide the applicant with a
notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for
work to continue on the development or the application, the
applicant shall, within a reasonable time period, post a deposit to
the account in an amount to be agreed upon by the City or
approving authority and the applicant. In the interim, any required
health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back
against the replenishment of funds.
(10) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded
to the developer along with the final accounting.
B. Schedule of fees. The following schedule of fees has been established in
accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Municipal Land Use
Law. Every application for development shall be accompanied by the
deposit required by this chapter and the established schedule of fees.
C. Subdivision.
(1) Minor subdivision: $100, plus $50 for each new lot.
(2) Major subdivision preliminary plat: $1,000, plus $100 for each new
lot.
(3) Major subdivision final plat: $500, plus $50 for each new lot.
(4) Redivision when not creating a new lot: $100. [Added 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
D. Site plan.
(1) Minor site plan: $500 up to and including 5,000 square feet of land
to be developed.
(2) Major site plan: $500, plus $10 for every 1,000 square feet of land
to be developed in excess of 5,000 square feet.
E. General development plan. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
(1) Planned development: $1,500 for review of a general development
plan for a planned development project.
§ 30-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-6
1:280
(2) Amendment to general development plan: $500 for review of a
proposed amendment to an approved general development plan.
F. Conditional use: $100 for the review of the conditional use requested.
G. Special meeting: $500 for the scheduling of a special meeting of the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Added 8-3-2010
by Ord. No. 14-201037]
H. Review and preparation of documents. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
(1) Major subdivision, preliminary: $150.
(2) Major subdivision, final plat: $150.
(3) Site plan, major preliminary: $150.
(4) Site plan, major final: $150.
(5) Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a): $150.
(6) Interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(h): $150.
(7) Variance, bulk: $150.
(8) Variance, use: $150.
(9) All other resolutions: $100 per resolution.
(10) Association document review: $250.
I. Inspection of improvements: the greater of $500 or 3% of the
anticipated cost of installing improvements such as streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlights, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage structures and erosion control and sedimentation
control devices.
J. Zoning variance.
(1) Bulk variance: $100 for the review of each variance requested.
(2) Use variance: $200 for the review of the variance requested.
K. Zoning permits.
(1) Proposed new use, building or structure:
(a) Residential, attached single-family: $50 for each dwelling unit.
(b) Residential, detached single-family: $50 for each dwelling unit.
37.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections G through M as
Subsections H through N.
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-6
1:281
(c) Residential, multifamily: $25 for each dwelling unit.
(d) Commercial: $100.
(e) Industrial: $100.
(f) Other: $50.
(2) Additions to buildings or structures involving additional lot
coverage:
(a) Residential, attached single-family: $25 for each dwelling unit.
(b) Residential, detached single-family: $25 for each dwelling unit.
(c) Residential, multifamily: $25 for each dwelling unit.
(d) Commercial: $50.
(e) Industrial: $50.
(f) Other: $50.
(3) Conversion of existing building or structure changing the use or
adding additional uses:
(a) Residential, attached single-family: $50 for each use.
(b) Residential, detached single-family: $50 for each use.
(c) Residential, multifamily: $25 for each use.
(d) Commercial: $100 for each use.
(e) Industrial: $100 for each use.
(f) Other: $50 for each use.
(4) Special structures:
(a) Swimming pools, private aboveground: $20.
(b) Swimming pools, private in-ground: $20.
(c) Swimming pools, public in-ground: $50.
(d) Signs:
[1] Temporary: $20.
[2] Signs not exceeding 25 square feet in area: $25.
[3] Signs not exceeding 50 square feet in area: $50.
[4] Sign in excess of 50 square feet in area: $100.
(5) Certificate of zoning compliance: $25. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
§ 30-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-6
1:282
§ 30-7. Meetings.
(6) Temporary banner: $25. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
L. Collection of fees. All deposits and fees received by the administrative
officer designated to receive them shall be remitted to the Chief
Financial Officer in accordance with the procedure established by the
Department of Revenue and Finance. The administrative officer shall
duly record the deposits or fees upon receipt and submit a report to the
Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis. The Chief Financial Officer
shall deposit the moneys received in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.
M. Reduction of fees. The Planning Board is authorized to reduce the
deposit required by this chapter in connection with a major
development where the professional opinion of the City Engineer is that
the required deposit is not reasonable in relation to the complexity and
the scale of the proposed development. Said reduction shall not exceed
1/3 of the deposit required herein and shall only be made upon the
written request of the applicant wherein the applicant sets forth the
reasons for granting the request.
N. Dispute by applicant over professional fees. Any dispute by the
applicant over the professional fees charged shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions contained in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2a of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
A. Regular meetings and special meetings. Every municipal agency shall
by its rules fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings for
business authorized to be conducted by such agency. Regular meetings
of the municipal agency shall be scheduled not less than once a month
and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications
for development to process. The municipal agency may provide for
special meetings, at the call of the Chairman, or on the request of any
two members, which shall be held on notice to its members and the
public in accordance with this chapter. No action shall be taken at any
meeting without a quorum being present. All actions shall be taken by
majority vote of the members of the municipal agency present at the
meeting, except as otherwise provided in the Municipal Land Use Law.
Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve
an application for development shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
B. Public meetings. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be
open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in
accordance with this chapter. An executive session for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters to come before the municipal
agency shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting.
C. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of persons appearing and addressing the
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7
1:283
§ 30-8. Hearings.
municipal agency and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action
taken by the municipal agency, the findings made by it and the reasons
therefor. The minutes thereafter shall be made available for public
inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of
the minutes.
A. The municipal agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development or adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
The municipal agency shall make the rules and regulations governing
such hearings.
B. Maps and documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is
sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at
least 10 days before the date of the hearing during normal business
hours in the office of the administrative officer. The applicant may
produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
C. Administer oaths and issue subpoenas. The officer presiding at the
hearing or such person as he may designate shall have the power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses
and documents presented by the parties.
D. Testimony of witnesses. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an
application for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by
the presiding officer. The right of cross-examination shall be permitted
to all interested parties, through their attorneys if represented, or
directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding
officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and number of
witnesses.
E. Rules of evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to
the hearing, but the municipal agency may exclude irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
F. Verbatim recording of the proceedings. The municipal agency shall
provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either
stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The municipal agency
shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on
request to any interested party at their expense. The municipal agency,
in furnishing a transcript or tape of the proceedings to an interested
party at their expense, shall not charge such interested party more than
§ 30-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-8
1:284
§ 30-9. Vote by member absent from hearing.
A member of a municipal agency who is absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held or was not a member of the municipal
agency at that time shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the
hearing was conducted, provided that such board member has available to
him or her the transcript or recording of all of the hearing from which he
or she was absent or was not a member and such board member certifies in
writing to the board that he or she has read the transcript or listened to the
recording.
the actual cost of preparing the transcript or tape. Transcripts shall be
certified in writing to be accurate by the transcriber.
G. Decision reduced to writing. The municipal agency shall include
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon on each decision on any
application for development and shall reduce the decision to writing.
The municipal agency shall provide the findings and conclusions
through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law for action by the municipal
agency on the application for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. If
only one member who voted for the action attends the meeting at
which the resolution is presented for adoption, the resolution may
be adopted upon the vote of that member.
H. Decision mailed to applicant. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by
the municipal agency within 10 days of the date of the decision to the
applicant or to their attorney, if represented, without separate charge.
A copy of the decision also shall be filed by the municipal agency in the
office of the administrative officer. The administrative officer shall make
a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party for a
reasonable fee and available for public inspection at his office during
reasonable hours.
I. Notice of the decision published in the newspaper. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the City.
Publication shall be arranged by the administrative officer for the
municipal agency. The applicant shall be charged a reasonable fee for
the publication. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision
may be made shall run from the first publication of the decision,
whether arranged by the administrative officer or the applicant.
§ 30-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-10
1:285
§ 30-10. Conflicts of interest.
No member of a municipal agency shall act on any matter in which he or she
has any personal or financial interest, either directly or indirectly. Whenever
any member of a municipal agency shall disqualify themselves from acting
on a particular matter, they shall not continue to sit with the municipal
agency on the hearing of such matter nor to participate in any discussions
or decisions relating thereto.
§ 30-11. Exclusive authority of Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
Any power expressly authorized by the Municipal Land Use Law to be
exercised by the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall not be
exercised by any other body, except as otherwise provided in the Municipal
Land Use Law.
§ 30-12. Administration and enforcement.
A. The City Commission shall appoint a Zoning Officer to administer and
enforce the Municipal Land Use Law and the provisions of this chapter,
except as otherwise provided by law or by this chapter. The Zoning
Officer shall be appointed for a term of one year, beginning on the first
day of January, and shall receive compensation as set forth in the Salary
Ordinance.
B. The Zoning Officer shall perform the following duties:
(1) Issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
remodeling, conversion, removal or destruction of any building or
structure covered by this chapter or any lawful order of the
Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or City Commission.
(2) Issue permits for the use or occupancy of any building, structure or
land covered by this chapter or any lawful order of the Planning
Board, Board of Adjustment or City Commission.
(3) Issue permits or approvals for the subdivision or resubdivision of
any land covered by this chapter or any lawful order of the Planning
Board, Board of Adjustment or City Commission.
(4) Record and file all applications for zoning permits, together with
the plans and other documents accompanying the applications.
(5) Collect all fees that may be payable to the City under the provisions
of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.
(6) Prepare a monthly report for the City Commission listing all zoning
permits applied for and those granted, and all ordinance violations
and actions taken by the Zoning Officer. A copy of the monthly
report shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment, Planning Board
and Tax Assessor.
§ 30-10 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-12
1:286
(7) Institute any appropriate action or legal proceeding to prevent
violations of the Municipal Land Use Law, this chapter or any lawful
orders of the Board of Adjustment, Planning Board or City
Commission. The Zoning Officer shall seek the legal advice of the
City Attorney, Solicitor for the Board of Adjustment or the Solicitor
for the Planning Board as required for any legal actions that need
to be instituted.
(8) Maintain a record of current land use and report any changes of
land use to the Planning Board every six months. The report shall
include such information as required by the Planning Board.
(9) Such other duties or responsibilities as are directed by the Mayor
or City Commission.
C. Zoning permits. No person shall erect, construct, alter, remodel,
convert, remove or destroy any building or structure or change any use
or occupancy of any building, structure or land without first obtaining a
zoning permit from the Zoning Officer. No zoning permit shall be issued
except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter or where
authorized by written order of the Board of Adjustment, Planning Board
or City Commission.
(1) All requests for zoning permits shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Officer on forms provided by the Zoning Officer and shall be
signed by the owner of the land and building involved in the
request or by his or her authorized representative or agent.
(2) The application shall include a description of the use or intended
use of the building and of the land.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by a site plan as required by
this chapter or by a drawing drawn to scale showing any existing or
proposed building or open land uses and their exact relation to all
property lines and street lines.
(4) A written statement shall accompany the application which gives
satisfactory evidence that the building lines, property lines and the
street lines have been accurately located on the site plan or
drawing and that the building lines have been staked on the ground
and that the application is intended to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or a lawful order of the Board of Adjustment, Planning
Board or City Commission.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a zoning permit shall
be granted or refused by the Zoning Officer within 10 days after the
Zoning Officer has received an application complete in all respects,
together with the required fee. Any refusal or denial of a zoning
permit shall be made in writing detailing the reasons for the refusal
or denial of the permit.
§ 30-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-12
1:287
§ 30-13. Interpretation.
D. Duration of certain permits. If the applicant has not applied for and
received the permit within six months from the date that a zoning
permit or conditional use permit has been authorized by the Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board, then such authorization shall be null
and void and no permit shall issue unless the applicant has applied for
and received an extension prior to the expiration of the six-month
period. An extension shall be granted by the appropriate approval
authority for a period not to exceed six months upon good cause having
been shown by the applicant.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty either by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $1,000
for each and every offense or to a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof, at the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Each and every day that any violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense, punishable by a like fine or
penalty.
A. Interpretation. It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be presented first to the Zoning
Officer and thereafter to the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board
through the appeal process authorized by the Municipal Land Use Law
and the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall consult with
the City Attorney, Solicitor for the Board of Adjustment or the Solicitor
for the Planning Board if he feels a legal opinion is required.
B. State statutes and state regulations. It is the intent that current state
statutes and state regulations are controlling. In the event that there is
any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the current state
statutes or state regulations, the latter shall control.
C. County regulations or requirements. In the case of any conflict between
the provisions of this chapter and any county regulation or
requirements, the most stringent regulation or requirement shall apply.
D. City ordinances. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of
this chapter and any other City ordinance or regulation contained in the
Municipal Code, the most stringent ordinance or regulation shall apply.
E. Whenever a reference is made in this chapter to a publication, the most
recent publication or revisions thereto shall apply.
F. Pending applications. All applications for development filed prior to the
effective date of this chapter may continue according to procedures and
time schedules in effect at the time the application was filed, but any
appeals arising out of decisions made in connection with these
applications shall be governed by the current provisions of this chapter.
§ 30-12 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-14
1:288
§ 30-14. Amendment and filing of ordinances.
The land use and development regulations contained in this chapter may be
amended in accordance with the procedures established in the Municipal
Land Use Law. These amendments to the land use and development
regulations shall not take effect until a copy thereof shall be filed with the
County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16.
§ 30-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-14
1:289

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 30-15. Membership.
There is hereby established the City of Millville Planning Board which shall
consist of nine regular members and two alternate members. The regular
members shall be appointed as follows from the following four classes:
§ 30-16. Alternate members.
A. Class I: the Mayor, whose term on the Planning Board shall correspond
to his official tenure in office.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the City other than a member of the
governing body to be appointed by the Mayor subject to the limitations
contained in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. The term of the member composing
Class II shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of his or her
respective term of office, whichever occurs first.
C. Class III: one member of the governing body of the City to be appointed
by it. The term of the member composing Class III shall be for one year
or terminate at the completion of his or her respective term of office,
whichever occurs first.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the City to be appointed by the Mayor. The
members of Class IV shall hold no other City office, position or
employment, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one member may be a member of the Board of
Education. There are two other municipal positions on commissions
referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. The term of a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Board of Education
shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of such other
body or at the completion of his or her Class IV term, whichever occurs
first. The terms of Class IV members cannot exceed 4 years and shall be
staggered so that the Class IV terms shall be distributed evenly in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
E. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
A. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members to the Planning Board
who shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. The initial terms of the alternate members shall not exceed two years
and shall be staggered in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.1. Thereafter, the term of each alternate member shall be
two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-16
1:291
§ 30-17. Removal for cause.
The City Commission may remove for cause a member of the Planning
Board upon written notice to the member sent to his or her last known
address at least 20 days prior to the holding of a hearing, at which time
causes for the removal shall be heard, and the member to be removed
shall be allowed to speak on his or her own behalf. The hearing shall be
in private unless the member requests that the hearing be held in public.
Cause for removal shall include misconduct in office, unexcused absences
from a majority of the meetings held during a consecutive twelve-month
period or the conviction of a crime.
§ 30-18. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV, select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill such other
offices as established by ordinance.
§ 30-19. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of
legal counsel, other than the City Attorney or the Solicitor for the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. It may employ or contract for experts and other staff
and services as it deems necessary. However, the Planning Board shall
not exceed the amount appropriated by the City Commission for its use,
exclusive of gifts or grants.
§ 30-20. General powers.
The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law and shall accordingly exercise its power in regard to:
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
A. The Master Plan pursuant to Article 3 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. The capital improvement program pursuant to Article 4 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
C. The Official Map pursuant to Article 5 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
D. Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to Article 6 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 30-16 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-20
1:292
§ 30-21. Referral powers.
§ 30-22. Ancillary powers.
E. Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with subdivision,
site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to Article 7 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
F. The Zoning Ordinance, including conditional uses, pursuant to Article 8
of the Municipal Land Use Law.
G. The Planning Board may participate in the preparation and review of
programs or plans required by state or federal law or regulation.
H. The Planning Board may assemble data on a continuing basis as part of
a continuous planning process.
I. The Planning Board may perform such other advisory duties as are
assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the governing body of the
City for the aid and assistance of the governing body or other agencies
or officers.
A. Prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a land use and
development regulation, the Planning Board shall make and transmit a
report to the governing body of the City within 35 days after referral.
The report shall identify any provisions in the proposed land use and
development regulation which are inconsistent with the Master Plan
and provide recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and
any other matters as the Planning Board deems appropriate. When
considering the adoption of the proposed land use and development
regulation, the governing body shall review the report of the Planning
Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of
the majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its
minutes the reasons for not following such recommendation. Failure of
the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day
period provided herein shall relieve the governing body from the
requirements of this section in regard to the proposed land use and
development regulation.
B. The governing body of the City may provide by ordinance for the
referral of any matter or class of matters to the Planning Board before
final action is made by a municipal body or municipal officer having
final authority to act thereon, except any matter under the jurisdiction
of the Board of Adjustment. Whenever the Planning Board shall have
made a recommendation regarding a matter referred to it by the
governing body of the City, such recommendation may be rejected by a
municipal body only by a vote of a majority of its full authorized
membership. Failure of the Planning Board to make a recommendation
within 35 days after the referral shall relieve the other municipal body
of the voting requirement contained herein.
§ 30-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-22
1:293
§ 30-23. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Planning Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 30-24. Environmental Commission.
The governing body of the City may by ordinance establish an
Environmental Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1. If an
Environmental Commission is established, it shall prepare and submit to
the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment an index of the natural
resources of the City. The Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall
make available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of
every application for development submitted to either Board. Failure of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
A. Whenever the proposed development requires approval pursuant to
this chapter of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board shall
have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and 34.
(3) Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure not
related to a street pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, the notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
case may be.
§ 30-22 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-24
1:294
ARTICLE III
Master Plan
§ 30-25. Preparation, contents and adoption.
§ 30-26. Contents of notice of hearings.
Notice of hearings shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and the location and times at which
A. The Planning Board may prepare and after public hearing adopt or
amend a Master Plan or component parts thereof to guide the use of
lands within the City in a manner which protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare.
B. The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report and land use and
development proposals covering the following elements and contain
maps, diagrams and text:
(1) A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the City are based.
(2) A land use plan element.
(3) A housing plan element.
(4) A circulation plan element.
(5) A utility service plan element.
(6) A community facilities plan element.
(7) A recreation plan element.
(8) A conservation plan element.
(9) An economic plan element.
(10) A historic preservation plan element.
(11) A recycling plan element.
(12) A farmland preservation plan element.
(13) Appendices or separate reports containing the technical foundation
for the Master Plan and its constituent elements.
C. The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the City as developed in
the Master Plan to the Master Plans of contiguous municipalities, the
Master Plan of Cumberland County, the State Development and
Redevelopment Plan and the district solid waste management plan.
§ 30-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-26
1:295
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available for
public inspection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
§ 30-27. Notice of hearing on adoption.
The Planning Board shall give:
§ 30-28. Effect of mailing notice.
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to this article shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
§ 30-29. Hearings.
All hearings held in connection with the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan shall be held in accordance with the provisions contained
in § 30-8 of this chapter and the administrative procedures adopted by the
Planning Board.
§ 30-30. Periodic reexamination of Master Plan and land use and
development regulations.
The governing body of the City shall provide for a general reexamination
of its Master Plan and its land use and development regulations by the
Planning Board at least every six years. The Planning Board shall prepare
and adopt by resolution a report on the findings of such reexamination. A
copy of this report and resolution shall be sent to the County Planning Board
and the Municipal Clerks of each adjoining municipality. The reexamination
report shall include the information required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89.
A. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan. Such notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the City at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing;
B. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an adjoining
municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan involving property located within 200 feet of such
adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any such
hearing;
C. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Such
notice shall include a copy of the proposed Master Plan, revision or
amendment;
D. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment. Such notice shall include a copy of the Master Plan or
revision or amendment.
§ 30-26 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-30
1:296
ARTICLE IV
Capital Improvement Program and Project Review
§ 30-31. Preparation of capital improvement program.
§ 30-32. Adoption of capital improvement program.
Whenever the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvement program
pursuant to this article, it shall recommend such program to the governing
body of the City which may adopt such program with any modification
approved by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership
of the governing body and with the reasons for said modification recorded
in the minutes.
§ 30-33. Notice to County Planning Board after adoption.
Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the county
Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of the municipal
capital improvement program not more than 30 days after the date of such
adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided shall include a copy
of the municipal capital improvement program. Any notice by certified mail
pursuant to this section shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 30-34. Review of capital projects.
A. The governing body of the City may by resolution authorize the
Planning Board from time to time to prepare a program of municipal
capital improvement projects projected over a term of at least six years.
Such program may encompass major projects currently being
undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with federal, state,
county and other public funds or under federal, state or county
supervision. The program shall classify projects in regard to the
urgency and need for realization and shall recommend a time sequence
for their implementation. The program may also contain the other
information required in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
B. Whenever the Planning Board is authorized and directed to prepare a
capital improvement program, every municipal department, authority
or agency shall transmit to the Planning Board a statement of all capital
projects proposed to be undertaken by each municipal department,
authority or agency during the term of the program. This information
shall be provided upon the request of the Planning Board and shall be
utilized for study, advice and recommendation by the Planning Board.
A. Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the
Master Plan, the governing body of the City shall refer any specific
project to the Planning Board for review and recommendation in
conjunction with the Master Plan before taking action necessitating the
expenditure of any public funds incidental to the location, character or
extent of such project. The Planning Board shall have 45 days to provide
its recommendations to the governing body. This requirement shall
§ 30-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-34
1:297
apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district, or other
authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar public
agency, state, county or municipal.
B. The Planning Board shall review and issue findings concerning any
long-range facilities plan submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to
the Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act, N.J.S.A.
18A:7G-1 et seq. The purpose of the review is to determine the extent to
which the long-range facilities plan is informed by and consistent with
at least the land use plan element and the housing plan element
contained within the Master Plan. Additionally, the Planning Board shall
determine the extent to which the long range facilities plan is
consistent with the other elements of the Master Plan that the Planning
Board deems necessary to determine whether the prospective sites for
school facilities contained in the long-range facilities plan promote
more effective and efficient coordination of school construction with the
development efforts of the City. The Planning Board shall devote at least
one full meeting to the presentation and review of the long-range
facilities plan prior to the adoption of a resolution setting forth the
findings of the Planning Board.
§ 30-34 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-34
1:298
ARTICLE V
The Official Map38
§ 30-35. Preparation and referral to Planning Board.
Prior to the hearing on the adoption of any Official Map or any amendments
thereto, the governing body of the City shall refer the proposed Official Map
or amendment to the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
§ 30-36. Adoption of Official Map.
§ 30-37. Notice to County Planning Board after adoption.
Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the County
Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of the Official
Map not more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision
or amendment. Any notice provided shall include a copy of the Official
Map. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
§ 30-38. Filing with County Recording Officer.
The Official Map of the City shall not take effect until filed with the County
Recording Officer.
§ 30-39. Issuance of permits for buildings or structures.
For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map of the City, no
permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 as shown on the Official Map or shown on a plat filed
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law before adoption of the Official Map
except as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
A. The governing body of the City may by ordinance adopt or amend an
Official Map of the City which shall reflect the appropriate provisions of
the Master Plan. However, the governing body may adopt or amend an
Official Map which in whole or in part is inconsistent with the
appropriate provisions of the Master Plan, but only by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its full authorized membership with the reasons for
so acting recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
B. The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the
location and width of streets and public drainageways and the location
and extent of flood control basins and public areas, whether or not such
streets, ways, basins or areas are improved or unimproved or are in
actual physical existence.
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 11, Art. IX, Official Map and the Numbering of Buildings and
Lots.
§ 30-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-40
1:299
§ 30-40. Building lot to abut street.
§ 30-41. Appeals.
A. No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or
structure. Such street shall have been duly placed on the Official Map
or shall be an existing state, county or City street or highway; or a
street shown upon a plan approved by the Planning Board; or a street
on a plat duly filed in the office of the County Recording Officer.
B. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the governing
body or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means of
a performance guarantee, in accordance with standards and
specifications for road improvements approved by this chapter as
adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare or
the special circumstances of a particular street.
A. Where the enforcement of § 30-40 would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances of the case do not
require the building or structure to be related to a street, the Board of
Adjustment may, upon application or appeal, vary the application of
§ 30-40 and direct the issuance of a permit subject to conditions that
will provide adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances
and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health
and safety, and that will protect any future street layout shown on the
Official Map or on a general circulation plan element of the Master
Plan.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the power otherwise
granted by this section if the proposed development requires approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to direct the
issuance of a permit pursuant to its ancillary powers.
§ 30-40 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-41
1:300
ARTICLE VI
Conventional Development Review Procedures
§ 30-42. Subdivision and site plan review.
§ 30-43. Informal review of concept plan for development.
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The amount of any
fees for such an informal review shall be a credit towards fees for review of
the application for development. The developer shall not be bound by any
concept plan for which review is requested, and the Planning Board shall
not be bound by any such review.
§ 30-44. Completion of application.
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal agency
when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized administrative
officer. In the event that the municipal agency or its authorized
administrative officer does not certify the application to be complete within
45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed
complete upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless:
A. The Planning Board shall review and approve all subdivision plats by
resolution as a condition for the filing of such plats with the County
Recording Officer. The Planning Board shall review and approve all site
plans by resolution as a condition for the issuance of a permit for any
development. Subdivision or individual lot applications for detached
one- or two-unit buildings shall be exempt from such site plan review
and approval.
A. The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted by
ordinance and provided to the applicant, and the municipal agency or
its authorized administrative officer has notified the applicant in writing
of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of the
application.
B. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Planning Board and shall submit the following in connection with an
application for development 21 days before the hearing date.
(1) Fifteen copies of the application form completed as required.
[Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(2) Fifteen copies of the site plan, subdivision plan or subdivision plats
as required. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(3) Applicant's affidavit of ownership of the property in question or his
interest in the property in question.
§ 30-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-44
1:301
§ 30-45. Plat and plan conformity and details.
No development application shall be accepted for consideration unless
it conforms to the requirements as set forth herein as to form, content
and accompanying information. All plats shall be drawn by a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor and shall bear the signature, seal, license number
and address of the surveyor and comply with the Map Filing Law.39 All
drawings of improvements shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer licensed to practice within the State of New Jersey.
(4) One of the following:
(a) A letter of interpretation from the NJDEP indicating the
absence of freshwater wetlands or indicating the presence and
verifying delineation of the boundaries of freshwater wetlands;
or
(b) A letter of exemption from the NJDEP certifying that the
proposed activity is exempt from the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act and regulations promulgated thereunder; or
(c) A copy of any application made to the NJDEP for any permit
concerning a proposed regulated activity in or around
freshwater wetlands.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, a complete list of
the names and addresses of all shareholders or partners owning at
least a ten-percent interest in the company as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 et seq.
(6) Number of witnesses and their expertise, if any.
(7) Certification that all real estate taxes and assessments currently
due have been paid.
(8) A receipt indicating that all fees due under this chapter have been
paid.
C. The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the municipal agency or its
authorized administrative officer shall grant or deny the request within
45 days. The applicant shall set forth the reason why the waiver is
requested.
D. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application.
A. Minor subdivision plat details. The plat shall be clearly and legibly
drawn and shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base, at a suitable scale to enable the entire tract to
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 30-44 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:302
be shown on one sheet, and shall show or include the following
information:
(1) A key map with North arrow showing the entire development and
its relation to surrounding areas at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 2,000 feet.
(2) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers for the tract and all
adjacent lots, title, graphic scale, date of original drawing and the
date and substance of each revision.
(3) Name and address of the owner, subdivider and person preparing
the plat. If the owner is not the applicant, then the interest of the
applicant and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application.
(4) The names of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the
most recent City tax records.
(5) The signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor.
(6) The classification of the zoning district in which the proposed
subdivision is located. If the property lies in more than one zoning
district, the plat shall indicate all the zoning district boundary lines.
All front, side and rear setback lines shall be shown conforming to
this chapter.
(7) The legal description and street address, if any, of the subject
property, its entire acreage and the acreage of the area(s) being
subdivided.
(8) All existing and proposed lot lines and any existing lot lines to be
eliminated with the lines certified by a New Jersey licensed land
surveyor.
(9) All existing structures, uses and wooded areas within the portion to
be subdivided and within 200 feet of the subject property; also, any
isolated trees with a diameter of eight inches or more measured
three feet above the ground level on the property involved.
(10) All streams, lakes and drainage rights-of-way within the limits of
the tract(s) being subdivided and within 200 feet thereof, including
the location, width and direction of flow of all streams, brooks and
drainage rights-of-way; the location and dimensions of all drainage
structures; existing features to be removed or relocated; flood
hazard area and floodway lines, steep slopes, wetlands and
swamps.
(11) All existing and proposed streets, roads, easements and rights ofway
within and adjoining the proposed subdivision, with existing
right-of-way widths clearly indicated and as proposed in the City
Master Plan. Existing driveways, street names, sight triangles and
purpose of any easements shall be shown. Copies of the text of any
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:303
deed restrictions shall be provided when requested by the approval
authority.
(12) The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements in the area to be subdivided.
(13) The shortest distance between any existing building and other
structures or a proposed or existing lot line.
(14) The location of any existing or proposed open space or recreation
area.
(15) A limits of disturbance plan showing the construction line for all
building, parking and vehicular use areas, all stormwater retention
areas, and areas of required cut and fill. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
B. Minor site plan.
(1) For purposes of determining site plan details required to be shown,
a site plan will be deemed a minor site plan when it involves any
lots not abutting an arterial or collector road or street as shown on
the City Master Plan and where:
(a) A proposed building or use or a specific lot(s) which conforms
to the maximum and minimum building standards as set forth
in this chapter will not require more than five off-street parking
spaces as required by § 30-137 and is not subject to the
provisions of Article XVIII of this chapter; or
(b) The proposed expansion or alteration of an existing building or
use on a specific lot(s) will not result in additional lot coverage
in excess of 10% of the existing coverage, will conform to the
maximum and minimum building standards as set forth in this
chapter, and will not increase the number of off-street parking
spaces by more than five or eliminate existing required parking
spaces and said building or use is not subject to the
requirements of Article XVIII of this chapter.
(2) Minor site plan details. A minor site plan shall include the same
data as required in § 30-45A except that the graphic scale shall not
be less than 50 feet to the inch. All distances shall be in decimals of
a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
The error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000. In addition to
the aforementioned data required, the site plan shall also show:
(a) Existing schools, special districts and areas proposed for
dedication for public use.
(b) Location of all proposed buildings and all other structures,
such as but not limited to walls, fences, culverts, bridges and
sidewalks, with spot elevations of such structures.
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:304
(c) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and the
location of proposed buildings or individual sites, such as in the
case of campgrounds, including proposed grades.
(d) The location and design of any off-street parking and loading
areas, showing size and locations of bays, aisles and barriers
and the number of parking and loading spaces.
(e) All buffered and landscaped areas and means of vehicle access
and egress existing and proposed for the site, showing the size
and location of driveways and curb openings.
(f) The square footage of each building, total number of
employees and of the employees in the largest working shift
and where applicable, seating capacity of the structure(s).
(g) If a sign or signs are to be erected, attached or otherwise
located on the site, the site plan shall be accompanied by
additional details and information as provided in § 30-45G.
(h) If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, a list of the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners
owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of
the interest in the partnership, as the case may be. If a
corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject
to a disclosure as set forth above, the corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its
stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or 10% or
greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and
this requirement shall be followed by every corporate
stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names and
addresses of the noncorporate stockholders and individual
partners, exceeding the ownership criterion of 10% as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. have been listed.
(i) A limits of disturbance plan showing the construction line for
all building, parking and vehicular use areas, all stormwater
retention areas, and areas of required cut and fill. [Added
8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
C. Preliminary subdivision plat. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and
accurately drawn or reproduced at a suitable scale. Preliminary plats
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Article XVIII of
this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) The plat shall have a graphic scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet and be based on a certified boundary survey and drawn by
a land surveyor licensed in New Jersey with design and
improvements drawn by a professional engineer also licensed to
practice in New Jersey. Sheet size shall be 30 inches by 42 inches,
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:305
24 inches by 36 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, or 8 1/2 inches by
13 inches. If more than one sheet is required to show the entire
subdivision, a separate composite map shall be drawn showing the
entire subdivision and the sheets on which the various sections
thereof are shown.
(2) The plat shall have a key map with North arrow, showing the entire
subdivision in relation to surrounding areas, including the names of
principal roads, and at a scale of not less than one inch equals
2,000 feet.
(3) Title block with the name of the subdivision; any development
names previously associated with the application; the name of the
municipality; Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers; date of
preparation and most recent revision; meridian, graphic scale; the
names, addresses, phone numbers and signatures of the owner,
subdivider and person(s) who prepared the plat(s), including the
seal(s) of the latter. If the subdivider is not the owner, of the subject
property, the plat shall be accompanied by a statement indicating
the interest of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation or
partnership, said corporation or partnership shall list the names
and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning at
least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the interest in
the partnership, as the case may be. Listing shall be in accordance
with the provisions of § 30-45B(2)(h).
(4) The names of property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits
of the subdivision as disclosed on the most recent municipal tax
records.
(5) Tract acreage to the nearest 0.001 of an acre; the number of new
lots, each lot line dimension, scaled to the nearest foot; and each lot
area, to the nearest square foot.
(6) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. All elevations
shall be related to a bench mark noted on the plan and wherever
possible shall be based on USGS mean sea level datum or approved
local datum. Contours should show existing ground elevations and
proposed elevations in any area to be regraded.
(7) The natural features map shall delineate natural tree cover by a
circumferential line around all stands of trees with similar
characteristics such as the type or species based on the outer
perimeter of the dripline of the individual trees. Specific locations
of specimen trees which are healthy and have a diameter at breast
height of 24 inches or greater or are otherwise noteworthy because
of species, age, size, or other exceptional quality such as rarity,
uniqueness or status as landmark or species specimen shall be
noted on the natural features map. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:306
(8) Existing and proposed streams, lakes, ponds, and marsh areas
accompanied by the following data:
(a) When a running stream with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile
or greater is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation, or when a structure or fill is proposed over, under,
in or along such running stream, evidence of approval,
required alteration, lack of jurisdiction or denial of the
improvement by the New Jersey Division of Water Policy and
Supply shall accompany the plat.
(b) Cross sections and profiles of watercourses at an appropriate
scale showing the extent of the flood fringe area, top of bank,
normal water level and bottom elevations at the following
locations:
[1] All watercourses within or adjacent to the development
and at any point where a watercourse crosses a boundary
of the development (profile and cross-section).
[2] At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream
and downstream of any existing or proposed culvert or
bridge within the development (cross section).
[3] At a maximum of one-hundred-foot intervals, but at no less
than two locations, along each watercourse which runs
through or adjacent to the development (cross section).
[4] When ditches, streams, brooks or watercourses are to be
altered, improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing
slopes and measures to control erosion and siltation
during construction as well as typical ditch sections and
profiles shall be shown on the plan or accompany it.
(c) The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a development, for
the flowing streams, small-scale watershed maps developed
from the USGS sheets shall be submitted.
(d) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in that portion
of the development which drains to the structure.
(e) The location and extent of all existing and proposed drainage
and conservation easements and flood hazard area and
floodway lines.
(f) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds on or within 300 feet of the
development.
(g) Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems,
including the following:
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:307
[1] All existing and proposed stormwater sewer lines within or
in lands or roads adjacent to the development and for all
required off-site and off-tract drainage improvements
showing size, profile and slope of lines, direction of flow
and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole,
culvert and headwall.
[2] The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins, flood
control devices, sedimentation basins, or other water
conservation devices.
(9) The names, locations and dimensions, including cartway and rightof-
way widths, of all existing streets within a distance of 200 feet of
the boundaries of the development, existing driveways and any
connections from proposed streets, sidewalks and bike routes in
the development to any adjoining street(s), sidewalk(s) or bike
route(s) and what off-site extensions, if any, will be made to nearby
arterial and collector streets as those streets are shown on the
adopted Master Plan.
(10) Plans, cross sections, center-line profiles, tentative grades and
details of all proposed and existing streets in the tract and within
300 feet of the subdivision based on the United States Geological
Survey datum, together with full information as to the disposal of
surface runoff, including plans, cross sections and profiles of
streets, storm drains and drainage structures. Typical street cross
sections shall indicate the type and width of pavement and the
location of curbs, sidewalks, bike routes, typical underground
utilities and shade tree planting. At intersections, the sight
triangles, radii of curblines, crosswalks and street sign locations
shall be shown. Final street naming may be deferred. For streets
where curbs and/or sidewalks are to be provided, separate curb
and sidewalk profiles shall be required at street intersections.
(11) The names, locations, paved widths, right-of-way widths and
purpose(s) of existing and proposed easements, driveways and
other rights-of-way in the proposed subdivision. The text of any
deed restrictions shall accompany the plat.
(12) The location and description of all easements, existing and
tentatively proposed.
(13) All proposed lot lines, and all existing lot lines to remain and those
to be eliminated. All setback lines required by this chapter with the
dimensions thereof and any municipal boundary line where the
boundary is within the tract or within 200 feet of the tract. Any
lot(s) to be reserved or dedicated to public use shall be identified.
Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively beginning with the number one.
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:308
(14) Locations of all existing structures and their use(s) in the tract and
within 200 feet thereof, showing existing and proposed front, side
and rear yard setback distances, structures of potential historic
significance and an indication of all existing structures and uses to
be retained and those to be removed.
(15) Plans and profiles of proposed improvements and utility layouts
(sanitary sewers, storm sewers, erosion control, excavation, etc.)
showing location, size, slope, pumping stations and other details as
well as feasible connections to any existing or proposed utility
systems. If private utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully
with all municipal, county and state regulations. If service will be
provided by an existing utility company, a letter from that company
shall be submitted stating that the service will be available before
occupancy of any proposed structures. When on-lot water supply or
sewerage disposal is proposed, the proposed location of the well
and the location and results of percolation tests shall be submitted.
(16) Zoning district(s) and zoning district lines in which the subdivision
is located.
(17) Identification of an area to be reserved for public use and
acceptable for City recreational purposes, approved by the
Planning Board, comprising not less than 15% of the land area to
be developed. Such lands, when approved by the Planning Board,
constitute an amendment to the Master Plan of the City of Millville
and will be reserved for a period of one year from the date of
preliminary approval, during which time the City may institute
acquisition procedures.
(18) An itemization of all improvements to be made to the site, as
required in Articles XIV, XVI, XVIII, XXIII and XXIV and such other
improvements on site, off site and off tract as the public interest
may require, together with a listing of the work and materials to be
used in installing such improvements, including estimated
quantities of necessary materials, sufficient to enable the City
Engineer to formulate a performance guaranty estimate.
(19) Details and information on any proposed signs to be erected,
constructed or to be placed anywhere on the property involved in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter.
(20) In the case of a cluster development, the preliminary plat shall be
accompanied by a set of detailed development plans showing
density patterns, site design, open land designations, building
locations, utilities and other improvements and landscaping
proposals.
(21) Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact
statement in accordance with the requirements of § 30-46E shall be
submitted. [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:309
D. Preliminary site plan.
(1) Every preliminary site plan shall be at a minimum graphic scale of
one inch equals 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet or 50 feet; certified
by a New Jersey licensed architect or engineer, including accurate
lot lines certified by a New Jersey licensed surveyor, submitted on
one of four of the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 13
inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, or 30 inches
by 42 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire
territory, a separate composite map shall be drawn showing the
entire development and the sheets on which the various sections
are shown. The site plan shall include the following data:
(a) All lot lines and the exterior boundaries of the tract;
(b) North arrow;
(c) Zone district(s) in which the lot(s) is(are) located;
(d) Date of original drawing and each subsequent revision or
amendment;
(e) Existing and proposed street(s) and street name(s);
(f) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals
throughout the tract and within 100 feet of any building or
paved area under review;
(g) Title of plan and development name;
(h) Watercourse location;
(i) Total area to one square foot;
(j) Total number of parking spaces required and to be provided;
(k) All dimensions, areas and distances needed to conform with
the chapter such as, but not limited to, building lengths,
building coverage, lot lines, parking spaces, loading spaces,
setbacks and yard dimensions;
(l) A small key map giving the general location of the parcel
within the City; and
(m) A separate map showing the site in relation to all remaining
lands in the present owner's ownership.
(2) Site plan information for preliminary and final approval. Each site
plan shall have the following information shown thereon or be
annexed thereto and shall be designed to comply with the
applicable provisions of this chapter:
(a) Building and use plan. The size, height, location, arrangement
and use of all proposed buildings, structures, and signs,
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:310
including an architect's sealed elevations of the front, side and
rear of any structures and signs to be erected or modified,
to the extent necessary to apprise the Planning Board of the
scope of the proposed work, shall be shown. Any existing
structures shall be identified either to remain or to be
removed. A written description of the proposed use(s) and
operation(s) or nonresidential building(s), including the
number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of
employees on each shift; seating capacity; expected truck and
tractor-trailer traffic; emission or noise, glare, vibration, heat,
odor and air and water pollution; safety hazards; and
anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building
design. Floor plans shall be submitted upon request of the
Planning Board.
(b) Circulation plan. This plan shall show access streets and street
names, acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbs, aisles and
lanes, access points to public streets, sight triangles, traffic
channelization, easements, fire lanes, driveways, number and
location of parking and loading spaces/loading berths and/or
docks, pedestrian walks and all related facilities for the
movement and storage of goods, vehicles and persons on the
site and including lights, lighting standards, signs and
driveways within the tract and within 100 feet of the tract.
Sidewalks shall be shown from each entrance/exit along
expected paths of pedestrian travel, such as but not limited to
access to parking lots, driveways, other buildings on the site
and across common yard areas between buildings. Plans shall
be accompanied by cross sections of new streets, aisles, lanes,
driveways, and sidewalks. Any expansion plans for the
proposed use shall show feasible parking and loading
expansion plans to accompany building expansion.
(c) Natural resource plan. This plan shall show existing and
proposed wooded areas; buffer areas including the intended
screening devices and buffers; grading at two-foot intervals
inside the track and within 50 feet of its boundaries; seeded
and sodded areas; ground cover; retaining walls; fencing;
signs; recreation areas; shrubbery; trees; and other
landscaping features. These plans shall show the location and
type of man-made improvements and the location, species and
caliper of plant material and trees to be located on the track.
The natural tree cover also shall be delineated by a
circumferential line around all stands of trees with similar
characteristics such as the species or type based on the outer
perimeter of the dripline of the individual trees. Specific
locations of specimen trees which are healthy and have a
diameter at breast height of 24 inches or greater, or are
otherwise noteworthy because of age, size, species, or other
exceptional quality such as rarity or uniqueness or status as a
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:311
landmark or species specimen, shall be noted on the natural
features map. All portions of the property not utilized by
building or paved surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing
combinations such as landscaping fencing, shrubbery, lawn
area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing foliage
and the planting of coniferous and/or deciduous trees native
to the area in order to maintain or reestablish the tone of
the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact of
the structures and paved areas. The established grades and
landscaping on any site shall be planned for aesthetic,
drainage and erosion control purposes. [Amended 8-3-2010
by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(d) Facilities plan. This plan shall show the existing and proposed
locations of all drainage and stormwater runoff; open space;
common property; fire hydrants; gas, electric, telephone,
sewerage and water line locations; and solid waste collection
and disposal methods, including proposed grades, sizes,
capacities and materials and/or equipment to be used for
facilities installed by the developer. Installations by utility
companies need only show their locations on the plan. All
easements acquired or required on the tract and across
adjacent properties shall be shown, and copies of legal
documentation that support the granting of an easement by an
adjoining property owner shall be included. All proposed
lighting shall be shown, including the direction, angle, height
and reflection of each source of light. All utilities shall be
installed underground. All required state and federal approvals
for environmental considerations shall be submitted prior to
preliminary approval or shall be a condition of approval.
Drainage facilities shall include facilities to comply with
stormwater runoff provisions of this chapter. The method of
sewage treatment and solid waste disposal or collection shall
be shown, and percolation tests and soil borings from sufficient
locations on the site to allow a determination of adequacy by
the Board of Health shall be included where septic tanks and
leaching fields are permitted and are proposed.
(e) Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact
statement in accordance with the requirements of § 30-46E
shall be submitted. [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006]
(f) In the case of multifamily and apartment developments, five
copies of a housing market analysis which shall describe and
demonstrate the need for the proposed project in terms of the
regional housing market shall be submitted. Analysis shall
include data and information on vacancy rates, type and
location of other housing facilities within the City and the
region. Such analysis shall clearly indicate how it will meet a
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:312
need reasonably shown to exist for the type and cost of housing
proposed and is in compliance with the City Master Plan
Housing Element.
(g) In the case of residential development for which a homeowners
association is required, the site plan shall be accompanied by
such information as will permit the approval authority to make
detailed findings concerning the ability of the proposed
association to adequately perform the function for which it is
designed. Information to be submitted by the applicant in this
regard and subject to approval or revision is as follows:
[1] The time when the association is to be created in relation
to the project's timetable.
[2] Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the
organization by a resident and his/her successor(s).
[3] Permanence of open space and recreational area
protective convenants.
[4] Liability of organization for insurance, taxes and
maintenance of all facilities.
[5] Provisions made for pro rata sharing of costs and
assessments.
[6] Capacity of the organization to administer common
facilities and preserve the benefits of the open space and
recreational areas.
[7] The restrictions, covenants and other devices establishing
automatic membership in the association and the
responsibilities of that membership.
(h) An application form completed in full, accompanied by such
other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board in order to determine that the proposed development is
in accordance with the City Master Plan, the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable City ordinances. If the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, the corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of all
stockholders or individual partners owning at least 10% of its
stock of any class or at least 10% of the interest in the
partnership, as the case may be. Such listing shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 30-45B(2)(h) of this article.
(i) A sustainability plan as outlined in § 30-179A of these
regulations. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(3) The Planning Board, at its sole discretion, may waive or reduce the
details and/or data required to be shown on a preliminary site plan,
so long as such waiver or reduction will not unreasonably hamper
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:313
or impede the Planning Board's review of the proposed
development in relation to the City Master Plan and all applicable
ordinances.
E. Final subdivision plat. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing
cloth or Mylar at a suitable scale and in compliance with all provisions
of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The final
plat shall show or be accompanied by only the following information
and those details as specified in the aforementioned New Jersey Map
Filing Law and as follows:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision; name of the owner,
graphic scale; and reference meridian.
(2) The purpose of any easement of land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(3) Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
(4) Names of owners and adjoining unsubdivided land.
(5) Signature blocks for the Planning Board, City Engineer and other
endorsements required by law.
(6) Tract boundary lines; municipal boundary line if within 200 feet of
the tract being subdivided; street names; all lot lines and other site
lines with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and
radii, arcs and chart bearings and distances of all curves based on
an actual survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State
of New Jersey, with minimum building setback lines and the area of
each lot shown to the nearest square foot. All dimensions, both
linear and angular, of the exterior tract boundaries shall be based
on and calculated from surveyed transversing which shall have an
apparent error of field closure of 1:10,000 or better and shall be
corrected by accepted balancing methods to final errorless closure;
all final exterior and lot boundaries shall be similarly balanced to
final errorless closure. All dimensions, angles and bearings given
on the map must be referred to by at least two permanent
monuments which shall be indicated on the map.
(7) Block and lot numbers in accordance with established standards
and in conformity with the Municipal Tax Map, as prepared and
certified by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor, and all street
numbers where appropriate shall be designated as specified by the
approval authority.
(8) Plans, cross sections, profiles and established grades of all streets
and easements as approved by the City Engineer.
(9) Plans and center line profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains as approved by the City Engineer.
§ 30-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-45
1:314
(10) Location and description of all monuments as required by this
chapter and Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A 46:23-9.9 et seq).
(11) By separate exhibits, information regarding required
improvements and detailing the stage of completion of installing
said improvements, including the following certifications:
(a) By a New Jersey licensed professional land surveyor as to the
accuracy of the plat and of the surveyed dimensions.
(b) That the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement or
contract of sale.
(c) Approvals of the City Engineer.
(d) Appropriate local, county and state approvals.
(e) By the Municipal Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(f) Other certifications that may be required by law.
F. Final site plan. The final site plan shall include all data required on the
preliminary site plan drawn to incorporate all changes required as a
condition of preliminary approval and drawn by persons and to
specifications as required for a preliminary plan. To the extent
applicable, the final site plan shall be accompanied by the same
certifications as required by § 30-45E(11).
G. Site plan for signs. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, an
application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the
proposed sign(s) which shall show the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the person
preparing and/or constructing the sign(s) and the person erecting
the sign(s).
(2) Location of the building, the structure and/or the lot to which the
sign(s) is to be erected, attached or located.
(3) A scaled drawing showing the size of the existing or proposed sign;
the location of the sign on the building to which it is to be attached
or on the property on which it is to be placed (in which case setback
dimensions shall be shown); the materials to be utilized in the
construction of the sign, including whether or not the sign will be
illuminated; and the message, lettering, artwork, illustrations,
color and appurtenances to be placed or shown on the sign(s).
(4) In the case of signs to be erected, constructed or placed on
property or attached to structures not belonging to or owned by the
applicant, evidence of the property or structure owner's approval
or permission for the locating of said sign(s).
(5) Such other information as required by the Planning Board.
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:315
§ 30-46. Impact evaluation standards and documentation
requirements.
A. General provisions.
(1) Applicability.
(a) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, all
development applications, including subdivisions, site plans,
and rezoning requests shall include specific information
pertaining to the impact of the proposal upon external physical
systems, public facilities and public services. The data that
shall be included in the application are specified under this
section. The following topics are subject to the impact review
requirements of this subsection:
[1] Traffic.
[2] Sewerage collection and treatment.
[3] Potable water.
[4] Public services (fire, police, trash, collection).
[5] Schools.
(b) For each of these topics, this section specifies the City's
standards and data that must be submitted in order to
document the proposed use, available capacities, estimated
impacts, and impact mitigation. Applications for preliminary or
final subdivision or site plan review shall not be deemed
complete until the data required for each topic, as applicable,
is submitted to the Planning Board. This section specifies
methods, multipliers, and other instructions to be followed in
calculating impacts. Alternate calculations submitted by the
applicant are acceptable, subject to the Planning Board's
accepting these findings as to greater accuracy or currency.
(2) Impact mitigation. Applicants are encouraged to propose ways to
mitigate the identified impacts of their projects as part of the
application process. Mitigation may occur in several ways,
including the phasing of the project based upon public investment,
voluntary contributions or private solutions to rectify capacity
shortfalls or enable public resolution of capacity shortfalls.
[Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(3) Public facilities and services: general standard. It is the goal of the
City that adverse impacts of new development on public facilities,
such as the transportation systems, sewerage collection and
treatment systems, water systems, public services, and schools,
shall be prevented, or minimized, through careful planning by the
developer to accurately predict such adverse impacts and to take
reasonable actions in cooperation with the City to mitigate
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:316
potential adverse impacts. Adverse impacts shall include increases
in demand or usage that would exceed available capacities of road,
sewer and water, and schools, or that would exceed the fiscal
and operational capabilities of the City to provide public services
to the development. It is recommended, but not mandatory, that
the applicant participate in preapplication conference, verify
generation assumptions, existing capacities and mitigation
procedures.
B. Traffic impact.
(1) Traffic impact standard. Traffic generated by each new
development shall not cause traffic to exceed Service Level D at the
nearest intersections providing public access to the development
site.
(2) Documentation to be submitted by applicant. All rezoning petitions,
subdivision and site plan applications shall provide with the
preliminary application an estimate of additional trips generated
per day and peak hour and indicate the most recent traffic service
levels at the intersections nearest to the development site.
Trips per Indicated Measure
Office Building Employee
1,000 Gross Square
Feet of Building
Area
General office, under
100,000 gross sq. ft.
3.7 17.7
General office,
100,000 to 199,999
gross sq. ft.
3.8 14.3
General office, over
200,000 gross sq. ft.
2.9 10.9
Medical office
building
N/A 54.6
Office park 3.3 20.7
Research center 2.4 5.3
Light industrial 3.2 5.5
Industrial park 3.6 7.0
Trips per Indicated Measure
Industrial Employee
1,000 Gross Square
Feet of Building
Area
Warehousing 3.9 4.9
Mini warehouse 2.8
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:317
Trips per Indicated Measure
Lodging Employee Room
Hotel 11.3 10.5
Motel 12.8 10.1
Trips per Indicated Measure
Commercial Employee 1,000 Gross Square
Feet of Leasable
Area
Specialty retail N/A 40.7
Discount store N/A 70.1
Shopping center
Under 59,000 sq.
ft. leasable area
N/A 117.9
50,000-99,000 sq.
ft. leasable area
82.0
100,000-199,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 66.7
200,000-299,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 50.6
300,000-399,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 41.9
400,000-499,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 49.7
500,000-599,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 37.2
1,000,000-1,249,000
sq. ft. leasable
area
N/A 37.1
1,250,000 sq. ft.
leasable area
N/A 34.1
Trips per Indicated Measure
Schools Employee Student
Elementary 13.1 1.0
High school 16.3 1.4
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:318
Trips per Indicated Measure
Schools Employee Student
Junior/community
college
N/A 1.5
NOTES:
N/A = Information not available
For unique uses not listed, the applicant shall request
determination by the City staff of what trip generation standard to
follow.
C. Sewer and water impact.
(1) Purpose and scope sewer impact evaluation.
(a) The purpose of the sewer impact evaluation is to ensure that all
elements of the sewerage system servicing the proposed
development have sufficient capacity to service the additional
effluent generated by the development. All applicants that will
require sewer services shall submit with their preliminary
application information estimating the effluent generated by
their project and the capacity of each element of the system.
(b) The capacity analysis shall include information documenting
the capacities for each of the following elements, as furnished
and verified by the appropriate jurisdiction responsible for the
element:
[1] Capacity of the sewer pipe or conduit for the entire
network between the property or development site, and
the treatment plant;
[2] Capacity of the spray fields, including pipe capacity to the
field;
[3] Storage capacity of the lagoons, or effluent holding ponds;
and
[4] Capacity of the treatment plant.
(2) Method of calculating capacities. For each element in the system,
the available capacity will be computed according to the following
formula:
Q = Y - (X + Z)
Where
Q = Available capacity of the element
Y = Design capacity of the element, or capacities authorized by
the appropriate jurisdiction
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:319
X = Current usage, measured as average flows
Z = Approved usage per building permits issued or final
development approved, but not yet built or in usage. Does not
include preliminary development approvals
(3) Data for determining sewer flow demand. The data summarized in
Tables B and C, or alternate factors documented by the applicant
and acceptable to the Planning Commission, shall be utilized by the
applicant in projecting additional sewerage generated by the
development:
TABLE B
Residential Water and Sewer Demand by Type
and Size of Housing Unit
Housing
Type/Size
Number
of
Residents
Residential
Water
Demand*
(daily)
Sewer
Flow**
(daily)
Peak
Sewer
Flow***
(daily)
Single-Family Detached
2-bedroom 2.13 215 160 640
3-bedroom 3.21 320 240 960
4-bedroom 3.93 395 295 1,180
5-bedroom 4.73 475 355 1,420
Garden Apartment
1-bedroom 1.57 120 120 480
2-bedroom 2.33 175 175 700
3-bedroom 3.56 270 270 1,080
Townhouse
1-bedroom 1.69 125 125 500
2-bedroom 2.02 150 150 600
3-bedroom 2.83 210 210 840
4-bedroom 3.67 275 275 1,100
High-Rise
Studio 1.07 80 80 320
1-bedroom 1.34 100 100 400
2-bedroom 2.14 160 160 640
Mobile Home
1-bedroom 1.73 130 130 500
2-bedroom 2.01 150 150 600
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:320
TABLE B
Residential Water and Sewer Demand by Type
and Size of Housing Unit
Housing
Type/Size
Number
of
Residents
Residential
Water
Demand*
(daily)
Sewer
Flow**
(daily)
Peak
Sewer
Flow***
(daily)
3-bedroom 3.47 260 260 1,040
NOTES:
*Based on 100 gallons per day (gpd) per resident for singlefamily,
75 gpd for other units (rounded).
**Based on 75 gpd per resident for all units (rounded).
***Based on four times daily sewer flow (rounded).
Source (population): U.S. Census Public Use File (units built
1975-1980 and monitored by 1980 Census.)
TABLE C
NONRESIDENTIAL WATER DEMAND
Nonresidential Use Expected Water Consumption
Commercial
Institutional Parameter
Gallons/Day
Per Parameter Peak Hour
Office building Square foot 0.093 0.521
Medical office Square foot 0.618 4.970
Retail Square foot 0.106 0.271
Hotel Square foot 0.256 0.433
Motel Square foot 0.224 1.550
Restaurant Seat 24.200 167.000
Drive-in
restaurant
Car stall 100.000 547.000
School,
elementary
Student 3.830 37.400
School, high Student 8.020 79.900
Service station Inside sq. ft. 0.251 4.890
Theater Seat 3.530 3.330
Source: Michael Greenberg, et al., "A Primer on Industrial
Environmental Impact" (New Brunswick, N.J.: Center for Urban
Policy Research, 1979).
(4) Sewer impact standard. The available capacity for all elements of
the sewer system shall be sufficient to service the projected
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:321
demand of the proposed development. If insufficient capacity exists
the project shall not be approved until mitigation measures are
established and approved by the Planning Board which will
increase the system's capacity.
(5) Documentation to be submitted by the applicant. All projects that
will require sewer services shall submit with their preliminary
application a sewer impact evaluation analysis containing the
capacity and demand data, description of plans to tie into existing
sewer facilities, including the status of efforts to have such tie-ins
approved by the City. If insufficient capacities exist, the report shall
discuss what mitigation measures will be implemented to increase
the capacities to meet anticipated demands.
(6) Potable water impact evaluation purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of the potable water impact evaluation is to
ensure that all elements of the potable water supply system
servicing the proposed development have sufficient capacity to
furnish the additional water that will be required by the
development. All applicants that will require potable water
shall submit with their application information estimating
water usage required by the development as well as the
capacity of each element of the water supply system.
(b) The capacity analysis shall include information documenting
the capacities for each of the following elements, as furnished
and verified by the appropriate jurisdiction responsible for the
element:
[1] Capacity of the water pipe for the entire network between
the property or development site, and the well on storage
facility.
[2] Resource capacity of the aquifer, and status of saltwater
intrusion in area of wells.
[3] Storage capacity of water tanks and water pressure
capacity.
(7) Method of calculating capacities.
(a) Capacity of the water pipe and storage capacity shall be
determined by the same formula used for calculating sewer
capacities, per § 30-46C(2).
(b) The resource capacity of the aquifer and status of saltwater
intrusion shall be subject to approval and determination by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(c) The storage capacity of water tanks capacity shall be
determined by the same formula used for calculating sewer
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:322
capacities, per § 30-46C(2). Water pressure capacity shall meet
the requirements for fire-fighting protection.
(8) Data for determining potable water demand. The data summarized
in Tables B and C, or alternate factors documented by the applicant
and acceptable to the Planning Board, shall be utilized by the
applicant in projecting potable water demand.
(9) Potable water impact standard. The available capacity of all
elements of the water system shall be sufficient to service the
projected demand of the proposed development. If insufficient
capacity exists the project shall not be approved until mitigation
measures are established and approved by the Planning Board
which will increase the systems capacity.
(10) Documentation to be submitted by the applicant. All projects that
will require potable water shall submit with their application a
water impact evaluation analysis containing the capacity and
demand data and analysis of any issues related to groundwater
protection. The report shall discuss, as necessary, what mitigation
measures will be implemented to increase capacities or resolve
other water quality issues.
D. Public services and schools.
(1) Public services impact evaluation purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of the public services impact evaluation is to
enable the City to anticipate the need for additional public
services that will be required by new development and prepare
or coordinate for any increased service requirements.
(b) All applicants proposing development involving 25 dwelling
units or more, or nonresidential development (commercial,
industrial, institutional or recreational uses) that involves a
building or buildings with 50,000 square feet of space or
greater, shall submit with their preliminary application
information indicating the public services that will be required
by their development, including police, fire protection, health,
administrative, or other services. An estimate of revenues to
the City generated by the development shall be included.
[Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(2) (Reserved)40
(3) Documentation to be submitted by the applicant. Applicants
proposing development at the magnitude, defined in § 30-46A(1)
shall submit with their preliminary application the following:
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), Public services impact standards, was repealed
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006.
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:323
(a) Estimated population and/or number of employees added by
the project;
(b) Description of public services that will be required;
(c) Description, if applicable, of services that will be provided
through private auspices; and
(d) Estimated annual revenues and costs to be generated to the
City based upon current tax programs and tax rates.
(4) Schools impact evaluation purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of the schools impact evaluation is to assess the
impact of all residential development on the local public
schools and enable the long-range planning for school
facilities, operating programs and services that may be
required as a result of added school population.
(b) All applicants proposing residential development shall comply
with the schools impact evaluation requirements.
(5) Schools impact standards. Applicants are requested to analyze the
existing capacity of public school facilities to adequately serve the
distribution and number of school-aged children projected from the
new development. Applicants should utilize all available data on
existing school capacity furnished by the Millville Board of
Education as well as available information on proposed
renovations, expansions, or new construction by the Board of
Education. If insufficient classroom space exists to accommodate
the project’s projected added enrollment, the applicant shall make
recommendations for mitigation measures. [Amended
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(6) Documentation to be submitted by the applicant. Applicants
proposing residential development shall submit with their
preliminary application the following:
(a) Estimate school-age and preschool-age children likely to reside
in the housing. A substantiated estimate of the percentage of
the school-age population likely to attend private schools may
be included. Applicants must use the most recent edition of the
Urban Land Institute/Center for Urban Policy Research
(Rutgers) multiplier tables in order to project the number and
distribution of school-age and preschool-age children.
[Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
(b) The development's location in relation to existing busing
routes.
(c) The current available school capacities.
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:324
E. Environmental impact. Environmental impact statements shall include
the information contained within this subsection. [Added 3-7-2006 by
Ord. No. 8-2006]
(1) Submission of an environmental impact statement shall be made in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the soil conservation district and all forestry
management operations conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester shall be exempt from the
submission of an environmental impact statement.
(b) Any variance application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
not involving a site plan or subdivision application shall not
require an environmental impact statement unless specifically
requested by the Board. The Board may request an
environmental impact statement where there exist significant
critical areas or suspected environmental hazard on the site in
question. The Zoning Board of Adjustment or its designee shall
inform the applicant regarding the scope of the information
that may be required.
(c) Any minor subdivision and/or minor site plan applications to
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not
require an environmental impact statement unless specifically
requested by the Board. The Board may request an
environmental impact statement where there exist significant
critical areas or suspected environmental hazard on the site in
question. The Board or its designee shall inform the applicant
regarding any information that may be required.
(d) All general development plan submissions shall be
accompanied by an environmental impact statement.
(e) All preliminary major subdivision and preliminary major site
plan applications shall be accompanied by an environmental
impact statement when proposed development exceeds 50
housing units or 100,000 square feet of nonresidential
building.
(f) Notwithstanding the categories of development that are
excluded from the requirement to submit an environmental
impact statement, the Board of Jurisdiction may require the
submission of information that otherwise would be included in
the document that is reasonably necessary in order to make an
informed decision.
(2) Submission format. When an environmental impact statement is
required, the applicant shall retain one or more competent
professionals to perform the necessary work. All applicable
material on file in the Millville Engineering Department pertinent
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:325
to local conditions may be consulted. Any additional material
pertinent to the evaluation of regional impacts shall also be
considered. Furthermore, as much original research as necessary
shall be conducted to develop the environmental impact statement.
All environmental impact statements shall consist of written and
graphic materials which clearly present the required information
addressing the following areas and utilizing the following format:
(a) Project description. A description of the proposed project shall
be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be
altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed, method of
construction and the uses intended.
(b) Demographics. The resident population, working population,
and visitor population shall be estimated.
(c) Master Plan compatibility. The compatibility or incompatibility
of the proposed project shall be described in relation to the
Millville Master Plan, the municipal master plan of an adjacent
municipality within 200 feet of the proposed project, and any
relevant portion of the Cumberland County Master Plan and
the State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(d) Soils. A description of each soil type located on the site from
the USDA National Resources Conservation Service or county
Soil Conservation Service. Limitations for development shall
be identified.
(e) Topography. Describe the topographic conditions of the site,
with specific delineation of any lands with slopes exceeding
10%.
(f) Geology. When septic effluent disposal or private well is
proposed, whether individual or community, a description of
the underlying geologic formations to a depth of the impact
shall be provided.
(g) Vegetation. A description of the existing vegetation on the site
shall be provided using the categories in the Vegetative Cover
Map of the Conservation Plan Element of the Millville Master
Plan. A delineation of the tree line, where existing, shall be
depicted. Where woodlands are delineated, the forest type
shall be indicated. Any vegetation utilized by endangered or
threatened species shall be identified.
(h) Wildlife. Where the Endangered and Threatened Species Map
of the Conservation Element indicated that a site contains
federal and/or state endangered or threatened species, a
survey of the land for such species and an assessment of
critical habitat shall be performed as part of the environmental
impact statement. If critical habitat is found, the applicant
shall submit a habitat protection plan by a qualified scientist
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-46
1:326
indicating the means by which the proposed development shall
be designed to avoid degradation of the habitat and/or
mitigation measures to be undertaken.
(i) Surface water. When the natural drainage pattern will be
significantly altered, an analysis shall be conducted which will
investigate flow, depth, capacity and water quality of the
receiving waters. Floodplains and wetlands shall be delineated
and anticipated transition buffers depicted.
(j) Subsurface water. Where private or community wells are
proposed, a description of subsurface water conditions shall be
provided on the depth to groundwater and the water supply
capabilities of the site. Where existing conditions warrant,
detailed information regarding existing wells within 500 feet of
the site relative to depth, capacity and water quality shall be
described.
(k) Cultural resources. A Stage 1A cultural resources survey shall
be undertaken pursuant to the State of New Jersey Executive
Order No. 53, as it may be amended or superseded. A Stage 1B
cultural resource survey shall be conducted should the Stage
1A review provide any indication of the presence of cultural
resources.
(l) Historic resources. The historic resources that would be
affected by the proposed development shall be discussed if the
site is included within the Historic Preservation Element of the
Master Plan as an identified site.
(m) Existing development features. A description of any existing
improvements shall be provided.
(n) Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as prescribed
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Environmental performance controls. Describe in detail the
measures to be employed during the construction and operation
phases which will minimize or eliminate negative impacts on and
off site that could result from the proposed project. Of specific
interest if applicable are:
(a) Sewage disposal techniques;
(b) Water conservation proposals;
(c) Energy conservation measures; and
(d) Noise reduction techniques.
(4) Impact assessment. The anticipated impact both positive and
negative shall be assessed by the preparer. Negative impacts that
§ 30-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46
1:327
§ 30-47. Proof that no taxes or assessments are due.
are unavoidable shall be identified. The impact assessment shall
address the following, if applicable:
(a) Flooding and floodplain impact.
(b) Impact on surface water and groundwater quality.
(c) Impact on the capacity to supply groundwater.
(d) Sewage disposal impacts.
(e) Alteration to existing vegetation and its impact on wildlife and
wildlife habitats.
(f) Destruction or disturbance of cultural resources.
(g) Noise level impacts, both during construction and
postoccupancy.
(h) Energy utilization.
(i) Blighting or improving effects on neighborhoods.
(j) Alternatives. Alternatives to the arrangement of the proposed
development shall be discussed. The Board of Jurisdiction shall
reserve the right to require alternative arrangements of land,
buildings, and infrastructure to determine a design of lesser
impact.
(k) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms
of approval required by law for the construction and operation
of the proposed project. This list shall include, but not be
limited to, approvals required by the municipality, as well as
agencies of the county, state and federal governments. Where
approvals have been granted, copies of said approvals shall be
attached. Where approvals are pending, a note shall be made
to that effect.
(l) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or
other written sources of information related to the project, the
project site and the municipality which were consulted and
employed in compilation of the environmental impact
statement shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals
from whom pertinent information was obtained orally or by
written communication shall be listed separately.
A. Every application for development submitted to a municipal agency
shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which any
subdivision, site plan, or planned development application is made.
§ 30-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-47
1:328
§ 30-48. Contents of notice of hearing.
A notice of hearing on an application for development shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered
and an identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the
current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office. It shall also
include the location and times at which any maps or documents for which
approvals are sought are available pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
§ 30-49. Notice of hearing on application for development.
The notices required by this section shall be given by the applicant at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing on the application for development.
B. Every application for a variance from a zoning ordinance submitted to a
municipal agency shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of the application for a variance or
conditional use permit.
A. Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be
given for all requests for site plan approval and subdivision approval
from the municipal agency. Public notice shall be given by publication in
the official newspaper of the municipality.
B. The notice of a hearing on an application for development, requiring
public notice as set forth above, shall be given by personal service or
certified mail to the owners of all real property as shown on the current
tax duplicates located within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of the hearing as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
C. Upon the written request of an applicant and within seven days, the Tax
Assessor of the City shall make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicates of the names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant
is required to give notice pursuant to this section. The applicant shall
be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and
failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
D. The notice of the hearing on the application for development shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of a municipality
where the property is located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality.
E. The notice of the hearing on the application for development shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning Board
where the property is adjacent to an existing county road or proposed
road shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan,
adjoining other county land or is located within 200 feet of a municipal
boundary.
§ 30-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49
1:329
§ 30-50. Effect of mailing notice,
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to this article shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
§ 30-51. Hearings.
The hearings required by this article shall be held in accordance with
the provisions of § 30-8 of this chapter and the administrative procedures
adopted by the municipal agency holding the hearing.
§ 30-52. Conditional approvals.
Each application for subdivision approval, where required by N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.3, and each application for site plan approval, where required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, shall be submitted by the applicant to the
County Planning Board for review or approval, and the municipal agency
holding a hearing on such application shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§ 30-53. Conditional uses.
F. The notice of the hearing on the application for development shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Commissioner of
Transportation where the property is adjacent to a state highway.
G. The notice of the hearing on the application for development shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the State Planning
Commission where the property exceeds 150 acres or the application
involves 500 dwelling units. The notice shall include a copy of any maps
or documents required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
H. The notice of the hearing on the application for approval of a major
subdivision or a major site plan shall be given by personal service or
certified mail to a public utility, cable television company or local utility
which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the municipality and
which is registered with the municipality as required by the Municipal
Land Use Law.
I. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the municipal
agency holding the hearing on the application for development in the
event that the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this
section.
A. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of submission of a complete application by a
developer to the administrative officer or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 30-49 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-53
1:330
§ 30-54. Minor site plan approval.
§ 30-55. Minor subdivision approval.
B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any
required site plan review pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. The time
period for action by the Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to
this section shall apply to the site plan review.
C. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on the request of the applicant.
A. The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing on an
application for development if the Planning Board or Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Board appointed by the Chairman finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of a minor site
plan. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of
the site plan by the Planning Board, provided that the Board or said
Subcommittee may condition such approval on terms ensuring the
provision of improvements pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor site plan approval.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required, the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions upon which
minor site plan approval was granted, whether conditional or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date
of minor site plan approval. The Planning Board shall grant an
extension of this period for a period determined by the Board but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date if
the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals. A
developer shall apply for this extension before: what would otherwise
be the expiration date or the 91st day after the date on which the
developer received the last of the legally required approvals from the
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
§ 30-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-55
1:331
§ 30-56. Preliminary approvals.
A. The Planning Board may waive notice of public hearing on an
application for development if the Planning Board or Subdivision
Subcommittee of the Board appointed by the Chairman finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of a minor
subdivision pursuant to this chapter. Minor subdivision approval shall
be deemed to be final approval of the subdivision by the Planning
Board, provided that the Board or said Subcommittee may condition
such approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued upon request of the applicant.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required, the Planning Board shall condition any approval that
it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
A. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a completed
application for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10
dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the site plan.
B. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a completed
application for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres, or more
than 10 dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the site plan.
C. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a completed
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
D. Upon submission to the administrative officer of a completed
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
§ 30-55 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-56
1:332
§ 30-57. Effect of preliminary approvals.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall confer
upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
on which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
§ 30-58. Exceptions to performance standards.
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to, use
requirements; layout and design standards for curbs, sidewalks and
streets; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; except
that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section of the
preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be.
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards shall govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to above in this
section for such period of time, longer than three years, that shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the factors set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49d.
A. When acting upon applications for preliminary or minor subdivision
approval, the Planning Board shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval contained in this chapter if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
B. When acting upon applications for preliminary site plan approval or
minor site plan approval, the Planning Board shall have the power to
grant such exceptions from the requirements for site plan approval as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for site plan review and approval contained in this chapter if
§ 30-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58
1:333
§ 30-59. Simultaneous review and approval.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board shall
apply, whether it be for conditional use, site plan or subdivision approval.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this section, the notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 30-60. Final approvals.
§ 30-61. Effect of final approvals.
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by this chapter for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval, and the standards prescribed by
the Map Filing Law in the case of a major subdivision.
B. In the case of a planned unit development, planned unit residential
development or residential cluster, the Planning Board may permit
minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval
necessitated by a change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of preliminary approval without the developer
being required to submit another application for development for
preliminary approval.
C. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate from the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
the request of the applicant.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
this chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed
for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted. However, in the case of a major subdivision, the
rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
§ 30-58 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-61
1:334
§ 30-62. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
B. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat as required in the case of a
subdivision, the Planning Board may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions. The
granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary
approval.
C. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres of
more or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of
200,000 square feet or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights
referred to above of this section for such period of time longer than two
years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration the factors set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later.
A. The approving authority shall require and accept the following
guarantees in accordance with the standards contained herein for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-track
improvements as a condition for the recording of final subdivision plats,
final site plan approval and the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
this chapter.
(1) A performance guarantee shall be furnished in favor of the City in
an amount of 100% of the cost of installation for improvements
which the approving authority may deem necessary or appropriate,
including streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors monuments, water mains,
culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage structures,
erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space, and in the case of site plans only,
other on-site improvements and landscaping. The cost of the
installation of improvements shall be determined by the City
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4 of the Municipal Land Use Law. The City Engineer
shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
§ 30-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-62
1:335
covered by the performance guarantee which shall be attached to
each performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(2) A maintenance guarantee shall be posted with the governing body
for a period of two years after final acceptance of the improvement
in an amount equal to 15% of the cost of the improvement.
(3) The approving authority shall accept a performance guarantee or
maintenance guarantee, which is an irrevocable letter of credit. if it
constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the City for an express period of time in the
amount required; is issued by a banking or savings institution
authorized to do and doing business in the State of New Jersey; is
for a period of time of at least one year; and permits the City to
draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor fails to furnish another
letter of credit which complies with this section at least 30 days in
advance of the expiration date of the current letter of credit.
B. The time allowed for installation of the improvements covered by the
performance guarantee may be extended by resolution of the governing
body. As a condition of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may
be, as determined by the cost estimated of the City Engineer.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligator and surety, if
any, shall be liable to the City for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the City may complete
the improvements either before or after receipt of the proceeds.
D. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements and
utility improvements, the City Engineer shall inspect the improvements
within 45 days from the request of the obligor and prepare a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed improvements. The City
Engineer shall prepare a report as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and
furnish a copy to the obligor and the governing body of the City.
E. The governing body of the City shall by resolution either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the City
Engineer or reject any or all of these improvements for cause set forth
in the resolution and shall approve and authorize the amount of
reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after
receipt of the list and report prepared by the City Engineer. If the City
Engineer or the governing body of the City fail to act within the time
period set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, then the obligor may pursue the
remedies provided in that statute.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
§ 30-62 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-62
1:336
§ 30-63. Deposits with municipality.
The City shall not require that a maintenance guarantee be in cash or
that more than 10% of a performance guarantee be in cash. However, a
developer may provide at its option some or all of a maintenance guarantee
in cash or more than 10% of a performance guarantee in cash. If cash
guarantees are deposited with the City, they shall be deposited and
administered in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1
of the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 30-64. Recording of final approval of major subdivision and filing
of all subdivision plats.
improvements. Upon completion or correction, the procedures set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 apply.
G. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
City on the subdivision plat or site plan, the governing body of the City
shall be deemed to accept dedication for public use of streets or roads
and any other improvements made thereon upon the release of any
performance guarantee required by this section, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by
the City Engineer.
H. The Department of Community Affairs has adopted by regulation a
standardized form for a performance guarantee, maintenance
guarantee and letter of credit required by an approving authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. All approving authorities shall utilize
these standardized forms.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of the signing of the plat. The Planning Board may extend these time
periods if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board the factors set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
B. A subdivision plat which has been approved by the Planning Board must
have the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board appear on the instrument or a certificate must be issued before
the subdivision plat can be recorded by the County Recording Officer.
The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board
shall not be affixed to the instrument until the developer has posted the
guarantees required by this article.
§ 30-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-64
1:337

ARTICLE VII
Planned Development Review Procedures
§ 30-65. Planned developments
The following development review procedures shall apply to all planned
developments, except that the plan elements that relate to residential uses
shall not be required for a planned commercial development or a planned
industrial development. The approval process begins with the submission of
a complete general development plan.
§ 30-66. General development plan and contents.
The general development plan shall comprise a comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development which shall include the land use
and development proposals including the following elements for the subject
property.
A. A general land use plan indicating the track area and general locations
of the land uses to be included in the planned development. The total
number of dwelling units and amount of nonresidential floor area to be
provided and the proposed land area to be devoted to residential and
nonresidential use shall be set forth. Additionally, the proposed types of
nonresidential uses shall be set forth, and the land area to be occupied
by each proposed use shall be estimated. The density and intensity of
the entire planned development shall be set forth, and a residential
density and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided.
B. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access,
within the planned development and any proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development.
C. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities which may include cultural or educational
facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals, firehouses and police
stations.
D. An environmental impact statement in accordance with § 30-46E,
excepting subparagraph (3). [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006]
E. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal services
to be generated by the planned development and any other financial
impacts to be faced by the City or the school district as a result of the
completion of the planned development. The fiscal report also shall
include a detailed projection of property tax revenues which will accrue
to the City, county and school district according to the time schedule for
completion of the project.
§ 30-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-66
1:339
§ 30-67. Preapplication conference.
F. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be provided
and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the City will
be fulfilled by the development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
G. A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include water, sewer, cable and
solid waste disposal.
H. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land area to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the
operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
I. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
J. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewer and water lines, any drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
waste disposal and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities.
K. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including
any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interest of
the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned
development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
L. A written development agreement between the City and the developer
relating to the planned development.
A. Any applicant for a planned development may request a preapplication
conference with the staff of the Planning Board to informally discuss
and clarify the development review procedures and the site plan
improvement standards required by this chapter prior to the filing of a
general development plan or application for development.
B. A request for a preapplication conference is the responsibility of the
applicant and shall be made in writing to the Planning Board. The
request shall include the name and address of the applicant, the
location of the property proposed for development and a brief
description of the nature of the proposed development. Within 10
working days following receipt of a written request for a preapplication
conference, the staff of the Planning Board shall schedule a
preapplication conference and notify the applicant of the date, time and
location of the conference.
C. At the preapplication conference the applicant may present a
conceptual or schematic plan, a rough draft of a general development
§ 30-66 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-67
1:340
§ 30-68. Submission and approval of general development plan.
§ 30-69. Modifications to the general development plan.
plan or any other materials that are descriptive of the proposed
development. No representations made by the developer or the staff
during the course of the conference shall be binding on either party
with respect to any general development plan or application
subsequently submitted.
A. Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for
which the developer is seeking approval of a planned development may
submit a general development plan to the Planning Board prior to the
granting of preliminary approval of that development by the Planning
Board pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute general development plan approval
of the planned development.
C. The term of the effect of the general development plan approval shall be
determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth below,
except that the term of the effect of the approval shall not exceed 20
years from the date upon which the developer receives final approval of
the first section of the planned development.
D. In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall consider
the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor area to
be constructed; prevailing economic conditions; the timing schedule to
be followed in completing the development and the likelihood of its
fulfillment; the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development; and the contents of the general development plan,
together with any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the
approval thereof.
A. In the event that the developer desires to modify the proposed timing
schedule, the modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. In deciding whether or not to grant approval of the modification,
the Planning Board shall take into consideration prevailing economic
and market conditions, actual and anticipated needs for residential unit
and nonresidential space within the City and the region and the
availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the
proposed development.
B. In the event that the developer desires to make any variation in the
location of land uses within the planned development or to increase the
density of residential development or the floor area ratio of
§ 30-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-69
1:341
§ 30-70. Findings for planned developments.
Prior to the approval of a planned development, the Planning Board shall
find the following facts and conclusions which shall be incorporated in the
resolution approving the planned development:
nonresidential development in any section of the planned development
after the approval of the general development plan, such modifications
shall require the approval of the Planning Board prior to any action
taken by the developer in connection with those modifications.
C. Any variation in the location of land uses or increase in density or floor
area ratio proposed by the developer in reaction to a negative decision
made or condition imposed by the Pinelands Commission or the
Department of Environmental Protection shall be approved by the
Planning Board if the developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Planning Board that the variation being proposed is a direct result
of the determination made by the state agency.
D. In undertaking any section of the planned development, a developer
may reduce the number of residential units or amounts of
nonresidential floor space by no more than 15% or reduce the
residential density or nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than
15% without applying for and obtaining the approval of the Planning
Board. However, the developer may not reduce the number of
residential units to be provided pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 without
prior approval.
A. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the Zoning
Ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate.
C. That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment are adequate.
D. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
§ 30-69 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-71
1:342
§ 30-71. Preliminary approval.
All planned developments shall be subject to the development review
procedures set forth in Article VI of this chapter and shall require
preliminary approval of a subdivision and site plan.
§ 30-72. Final approval.
All planned developments shall require final approval of a subdivision and
site plan in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
§ 30-73. Notice of completion and termination of approval.
The planned development shall be developed in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board notwithstanding
any changes in the Municipal Land Use Law or any changes to the Land Use
and Development Regulations contained in this chapter which were adopted
after the effective date of the approval.
A. Upon completion of each section of the planned development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer shall
notify the administrative officer, by certified mail, as evidence that the
developer is fulfilling his obligations under the approved plan. If the
City does not receive such notification at the completion of any section
of the development, the administrative officer shall notify the developer,
by certified mail, in order to determine whether or not the terms of the
approved plan are being complied with.
B. If a developer does not complete any section of the planned
development within eight months of the date provided for its
completion in the approved general development plan, or if the City has
cause to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his obligations under
the approved development plan, the administrative officer shall notify
the developer, by certified mail, that the developer shall have 10 days
within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations under
the approved plan. Thereafter, the City shall conduct a hearing to
determine whether or not the developer is in violation of the approved
plan. If the City at such hearing finds good cause to terminate the
approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the developer and
the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
C. In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of the approved general development
plan within five years of the date upon which the plan was approved by
the Planning Board, the City shall have cause to terminate the approval.
D. In the event that a planned development which is the subject of an
approved general development plan is completed before the end of the
term of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion
of the planned development. A planned development shall be
§ 30-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-73
1:343
considered complete on the date upon which a certificate of occupancy
has been issued for the final residential or nonresidential structure in
the last section of the planned development in accordance with the
timing schedule set forth in the approved general development plan
and the developer has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the
approval.
§ 30-73 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-73
1:344
ARTICLE VIII
Zoning
§ 30-74. Power to zone.
§ 30-75. Referral to Planning Board.
Prior to the hearing on adoption of a Zoning Ordinance or any amendments
thereto, the governing body shall refer the proposed ordinance or
amendments to the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
§ 30-76. Contents of notice of hearing.
Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the date,
time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be
considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 30-77. Notice to adjoining municipality.
Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the Clerk
of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of a zoning regulation involving property situated within 200
feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any
such hearing.
A. The governing body of the City may adopt or amend a Zoning Ordinance
relating to the nature and extent of the uses of land and of buildings and
structures thereon. Such ordinance shall be adopted after the Planning
Board has adopted the land use plan element and the housing plan
element of a Master Plan, and all of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance or any amendment or revision thereto shall either be
substantially consistent with the land use plan element and the housing
plan element of the Master Plan or designed to effectuate those plan
elements. However, the governing body of the City may adopt a Zoning
Ordinance or amendment or revision thereof which in whole or in part
is inconsistent with or not designed to effectuate the land use plan
element and the housing plan element, but only by an affirmative vote
of a majority of the full membership of the governing body, with the
reasons of the governing body for so acting set forth in a resolution and
recorded in its minutes when adopting the Zoning Ordinance.
B. The Zoning Ordinance shall be drawn with reasonable consideration to
the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular
uses and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. The
regulations in the Zoning Ordinance shall be uniform throughout each
district for each class or kind of buildings or other structures or uses of
land, including planned unit development, planned unit residential
development and residential cluster, but the regulations in one district
may differ from those in other districts.
§ 30-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-78
1:345
§ 30-78. Notice to County Planning Board.
Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the County
Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of
any Zoning Ordinance at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Any notice provided herein shall include a copy of the proposed Zoning
Ordinance or any proposed revision or amendment thereto.
§ 30-79. Notice to adjacent property owners.
§ 30-80. Adoption of Zoning Ordinance by governing body.
§ 30-81. Filing of ordinances.
A. Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning
district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes recommended
in a periodic general reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning
Board, shall be given at least 10 days prior to the hearing by the City
Clerk to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicates located within 200 feet in all directions of the boundaries of
the district in the case of a classification change and located within 200
feet in all directions of the proposed new boundaries of the district in
the case of a boundary change.
B. A notice pursuant to this section shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an
identification of the affected zoning districts and proposed boundary
changes, if any, by street names, common names or other identifiable
landmarks and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the
current tax duplicate in the office of the Tax Assessor.
C. The City Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of the notices
required by this section and shall keep the affidavits on file along with
the proof of publication of the required public hearing on the proposed
zoning change.
A. When considering the adoption of a Zoning Ordinance, revision or
amendment thereto, the governing body shall review the report of the
Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by
a vote of a majority of its full membership and shall record in its
minutes the reasons for not following such recommendation .
B. Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirtyfive-
day period shall relieve the governing body from the requirements
of this section in regard to the proposed Zoning Ordinance, revision or
amendment referred to the Planning Board.
A. A Zoning Ordinance shall not take affect until a copy thereof shall be
filed with the County Planning Board.
§ 30-78 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-81
1:346
§ 30-82. Conditional uses.
A "conditional use" is a use which is suitable to a zoning district but not
to every location within that district. A Zoning Ordinance may provide
for conditional uses to be granted by the Planning Board according to
standards which shall be clearly set forth with sufficient certainty to guide
the Planning Board and developers in determining whether the proposed
conditional use is suitable for the particular site.
§ 30-83. Nonconforming uses and structures.
"Nonconforming uses and structures" are uses or structures which do not
conform with current zoning regulations, but whose continued existence is
statutorily protected by virtue of having been lawful when first established.
This statutory protection includes the right to repair or rebuild in the
event of partial destruction, but does not include the right to enlarge a
nonconforming structure or expand or intensify a nonconforming use.
B. A Zoning Ordinance or amendment or revision thereto which in whole
or in part is inconsistent with or not designed to effectuate the land use
plan element of the Master Plan shall not take effect until a copy of the
resolution required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 shall be filed with the County
Planning Board.
A. Definitions.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a Zoning Ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
B. Variances required if nonconforming use is changed or enlarged. An
existing nonconforming use will be permitted to continue only if it is a
continuance of substantially the same kind of use as that to which the
premises were devoted at the time of the passage of the Zoning
Ordinance. In that regard, nonconforming uses may not be changed or
enlarged except where the change or enlargement is so negligible that
it does not warrant administrative review. An owner desiring to change
or expand a nonconforming use shall seek a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)(2) of the Municipal Land Use Law.
C. Destruction of nonconforming uses and structures. The statutory
protection of nonconforming uses and structures includes the right to
repair or rebuild a nonconforming use or structure in the event of the
partial destruction thereof. The case law interpreting the statutory
§ 30-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-83
1:347
§ 30-84. Request for rezoning. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
34-2005]
reference to "partial destruction" does not allow rebuilding in every
situation where the structure has not been destroyed.
D. Abandonment of use. The protection of the nonconforming use status
shall be lost by abandonment of the nonconforming use. However, the
mere cessation of the nonconforming use, in and of itself, does not
result in the loss of the protected nonconforming use status. A cessation
of use and an overt act or failure to act shall evidence an intent by the
owner to abandon the use.
(1) An example of a cessation of use and an overt act evidencing an
intent to abandon occur when the owner of a structure changes a
nonconforming use to a conforming use. Once that occurs, the
owner has no right to resume the prior nonconforming use.
(2) An example of a cessation of use and a failure to act evidencing an
intent to abandon occurs when the owner of a structure ceases to
use it and fails to maintain the structure allowing it to fall into a
state of disrepair.
A. Requests for rezoning may originate with, or be submitted by, the
governing body of the City, the Planning Board or the Planning Director.
B. Requests for rezoning made by private applicants shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk, who shall refer the request to the Planning
Board within 10 days of its receipt. All such requests shall be in writing
in a form prescribed by the Zoning Officer and include the following
information:
(1) An application signed by the applicant or the attorney for the
applicant which sets forth the block and lot numbers for the
property in question and a brief description of the property
location.
(2) Documentation which verifies property ownership.
(3) Fifteen copies of a detailed site plan with an engineer's seal which
sets forth the property lines for the subject property and a
delineation of any natural features, including wetlands. Dimensions
for all buildings, property lines and setbacks must be shown.
(4) A map which shows the existing boundaries for the zoning district,
together with a map which shows the proposed new boundaries for
the zoning district.
(5) A statement why the rezoning of the lots, or a portion thereof, is
substantially consistent with the land use plan element and the
housing plan element of the Master Plan. Additionally, the applicant
shall submit a statement as to why the rezoning of the lots in
§ 30-83 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-84
1:348
question is consistent with the character of the zoning district, and
why the lots are suitable for the particular uses permitted in that
zoning district.
(6) An application fee, if required by this chapter.
(7) The Planning Board or professional staff may require an impact
evaluation analysis as set forth under Article VI.
C. All requests for rezoning made by private applicants shall be reviewed
by the professional staff for completeness.
D. All requests for rezoning shall be reviewed by the Planning Board
before a zoning ordinance is adopted by the governing body of the City.
The Planning Board shall adopt a resolution which sets forth its
recommendation. A report also may be provided by the Planning
Director or the Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
§ 30-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-84
1:349

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 30-85. Membership. [Amended 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017;
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 31-2017]
There is hereby established the City of Millville Zoning Board of Adjustment
which shall consist of seven regular members with no more than four
alternate members.
§ 30-86. Alternate members. [Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
21-2011]
A. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint seven regular members to
the Board of Adjustment who are citizens of the City and who do not
hold any elective office or position with the City.
B. The terms of the members first appointed shall not exceed four years
and shall be staggered in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69. Thereafter, the terms of each regular member shall be four
years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled for the unexpired term only.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint four alternate members to
the Board of Adjustment who are citizens of the City and who do not
hold any elective office or position with the City. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1,"
"Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." [Amended
1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
B. The terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first two years after
their appointment. The initial term of no alternate member shall exceed
two years. Thereafter, the term of each alternate member shall be for
two years. In a municipality where more than two alternates have been
appointed, the terms of not more than two alternate members shall
expire in any one year.
C. Alternate members may participate in all matters, but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the
size of the Zoning Board of Adjustment established by ordinance of the
governing body. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate
members shall vote in the order of their numerical designations.
§ 30-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-87
1:351
§ 30-87. Removal for cause.
The City Commission may remove for cause a member of the Board of
Adjustment upon written notice to the member sent to his or her last known
address at least 20 days prior to the holding of a hearing, at which time
causes for the removal shall be heard and the member to be removed shall
be allowed to speak on his or her own behalf. A hearing shall be in private
unless the member requests that the hearing be held in public. Cause
for removal shall include misconduct in office, unexcused absences from a
majority of the meetings held during a consecutive twelve-month period or
the conviction of a crime.
§ 30-88. Organization.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
regular members, select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of
the Board of Adjustment or a City employee, and create and fill such other
offices as established by ordinance.
§ 30-89. Experts and staff.
The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the City Attorney or the Solicitor
for the Planning Board. It may employ or contract for experts and other
staff and services as it deems necessary. However, the Board of Adjustment
shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the City Commission for its
use, exclusive of gifts or grants.
§ 30-90. General powers.
The Board of Adjustment shall follow the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law and shall exercise the following powers in regard to:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any decision, order, requirement or refusal made by an
administrative officer in connection with the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
Board of Adjustment is authorized to hear by any zoning or official map
ordinance.
C. Upon an application or an appeal for a variance relating to a specific
piece of property, the Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from
the strict application of the zoning or land use regulations:
(1) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or of the exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property, or of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely
affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully
§ 30-87 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-90
1:352
§ 30-91. Appeal powers.
The Board of Adjustment may affirm, reverse or modify the action, decision,
order, requirement, interpretation or determination appealed from. To that
end, it shall have all of the powers of the administrative officer from whom
the appeal is taken.
§ 30-92. Other powers.
existing thereon, the strict application of any zoning or land use
regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or exceptional or undue hardship for the developer of
the property.
(2) Where the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law would be
advanced by a deviation from the zoning or land use regulations
and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment resulting from the grant of a variance to allow departure
from the regulations.
(3) No variance from those departures enumerated in Subsection D of
this section shall be granted under this subsection.
D. Upon an application or appeal for a variance relating to a specific piece
of property, the Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the
strict application of the zoning or land use regulations.
(1) In particular cases and for special reasons, permit: a use or
principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure; an expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation
from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional
use; an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in this
chapter; and an increase in the permitted density as defined in this
chapter except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots
for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots
are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision.
(2) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by an
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board of
Adjustment.
(3) No variance or other relief may be granted under this subsection
unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
E. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report, provided that such referral shall not
extend the period of time within which the Board of Adjustment shall
act.
§ 30-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-92
1:353
§ 30-93. Report on Zoning Ordinance provisions.
At least once a year, the Board of Adjustment shall review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution
a report on its findings on Zoning Ordinance provisions which were the
subject of variance requests. The report shall include recommendations for
Zoning Ordinance amendment or revision, if any are required. The Board of
Adjustment shall send copies of the report and resolution to the governing
body of the City and the Planning Board.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to
(1) Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of
a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and
40:55D-34; or
(2) Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to
a street pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Board of
Adjustment shall have the power to grant subdivision or site plan
approval or conditional use approval to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Planning Board under Article VI of this
chapter.
§ 30-92 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-93
1:354
ARTICLE X
Zoning Variances and Other Relief
§ 30-94. Appeals from decisions of administrative officer.
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the City based on
or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days of the decision by filing a written
notice of appeal with the administrative officer from whom the appeal is
taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The administrative officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
§ 30-95. Application for development.
A. A developer may file an application for development requesting a
variance with the Board of Adjustment for action under any of its
powers without prior application to an administrative officer.
B. An application for development requesting a variance shall be complete
for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action by the
Board of Adjustment, when so certified by the authorized administrative
officer. In the event that the administrative officer does not certify the
application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its submission,
the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the
forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable time
period unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant and the authorized
administrative officer has notified the applicant in writing of the
deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of the
application.
C. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment and shall submit the following in connection with
an application for development requesting a variance at least 21 days
before the hearing date:
(1) Thirteen copies of the application form completed as required.
(2) Thirteen copies of the site plan, subdivision plan or subdivision
plats as required.
(3) Applicant's affidavit of ownership of the property in question or his
interest in the property in question.
(4) If applicable, one of the documents required for freshwater
wetlands pursuant to § 30-44B(4) of this chapter.
§ 30-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-95
1:355
§ 30-96. Contents of notice of hearing.
The contents of the notice of hearing on an application for development
requesting a variance shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and an identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot
and block number as shown on the current tax duplicate in the office of the
Tax Assessor. It shall also include the location and times at which maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available for public inspection
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
§ 30-97. Notice of hearing.
The notices required by this article shall be given by the applicant at least
ten days prior to the date of the hearing on the application for development
requesting a variance. The notice requirements as set forth in § 30-49 of this
chapter shall be applicable.
§ 30-98. Effect of mailing notices.
Any notice made by certified mail pursuant to this article shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, a complete list of
the names and addresses of all shareholders or partners owning at
least a ten-percent interest in the company as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 et seq.
(6) The number of witnesses and their expertise, if any.
(7) Certification that all real estate taxes and assessments currently
due have been paid.
(8) A receipt indicating that all fees due under this chapter have been
paid.
D. The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the Board of Adjustment or its
authorized administrative officer shall grant or deny the request within
45 days. The applicant shall set forth the reason why the waiver is
requested.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application and the request for relief.
F. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report, provided that such referral shall not
extend the period of time within which the Board of Adjustment shall
act.
§ 30-95 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-99
1:356
§ 30-99. Hearings.
The hearings required by this article shall be held in accordance with
the provisions of § 30-8 of this chapter and the administrative procedures
adopted by the municipal agency holding the hearing.
§ 30-100. Time for decision.
§ 30-101. Appeals from Board of Adjustment to governing body.
An appeal to the governing body of the City may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of the Board of Adjustment in connection
with the granting of a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. Such
appeal shall be taken within 10 days from the date of publishing the notice
of decision by the Board of Adjustment by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk specifying the grounds of such appeal.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or the submission of a complete application for development to
the Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
B. The failure of the Board of Adjustment to render a decision within the
one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to
the applicant.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required in the case of a subdivision or in the case of a site
plan, the Board of Adjustment shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time.
§ 30-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-101
1:357

ARTICLE XI
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 30-102. Zoning districts enumerated.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the City of Millville is hereby divided into
the following base zoning districts: [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
34-2005; 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2006]
AC Agricultural Conservation District
DR Downtown Riverfront District
LC Land Conservation District
POS Public Open Space District
RC River Conservation District
R-40 Residential District
R-20 Residential District
R-15 Residential District
R-10 Residential District
R-5 Residential District
R-MH Residential Mobile Home District
OR Office Residential
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Professional Services District
B-3 Central Business District
B-4 General Business District
B-5 Tourism Services District
I-1 General Industry District
I-2 Interchange Mixed Use District
I-3 Air Park Industry District
B. Furthermore, the base zoning districts are overlaid in certain locations
which are delineated on the Zoning Map by the following special
purpose overlay zones: [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-1009;
10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
Airport Hazard Overlay Zone
Arts District Overlay Zone
Environmental Overlay Zone
Seasonal High Water Table Overlay Zone
Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
§ 30-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:359
§ 30-103. Zoning Map.41 [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 34-2005]
The boundaries of all zoning districts shall be shown on a map known as the
"Zoning Map of the City of Millville," dated July 31, 2005, or as amended by
law. This Map is attached hereto and is incorporated herein and declared
to be part of this chapter, including all notations and references contained
on the Map. The original of the Map shall be maintained in the office of the
City Engineer, and all changes made to the zoning districts shall be entered
upon the Map at the time of adoption of any ordinance amending the Map.
§ 30-104. Zone boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the zone boundaries as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 30-105. Overlay zones.
All lots or properties within the City of Millville lie within a particular
base zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map. Additionally, certain lots
or properties also fall within an overlay zone. In instances where the lot
or property falls within an overlay zone, the regulations and standards of
both the base zoning district and the overlay zone shall control the land
use and development of the property. Unless otherwise indicated, where
the regulations and standards conflict the more restrictive regulation or
standard shall govern.
A. A zone boundary line is intended to follow the center line of the streets,
the edges of lot lines, the edges of railroad rights-of-way and streams as
they exist on plats of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless the zone boundary line is fixed by dimensions shown on the
Zoning Map.
B. Where a zone boundary line approximately follows lot lines and does
not scale more than ten feet therefrom, the lot lines shall be construed
to be the zone boundary line, unless the zone boundary line is fixed by
dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
C. Where a zone boundary line divides a lot which is not subdivided, the
location of the zone boundary line shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing thereon, unless the zone boundary line is fixed by
dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
41.Editor's Note: A table listing the amendments to the Zoning Map is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 30-103 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-105
1:360
ARTICLE XII
Zoning District Regulations
§ 30-106. Schedule of district regulations.
§ 30-107. Airport Hazard Overlay District.
A. The schedules of regulations entitled, "City of Millville Schedule of
District Regulations," attached hereto, related to the districts
appearing on the Zoning Map made a part hereof this chapter, applying
to the uses of land and buildings, the yard and other open spaces to be
provided contiguous thereto, and all other matter contained therein, as
indicated for the various zones established by this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a part of this chapter.
B. The regulations listed for each zone are designated, reading from left to
right across the schedule, are hereby prescribed for such zones, subject
to the other provisions contained in this chapter and shall be deemed to
be the minimum requirements in every instance of their application,
unless otherwise stated. Supplementary regulations relating to special
cases and conditional uses are contained in Articles XIV, XVIII, XXII,
XXIII and XXIV of this chapter. The Board of Adjustment shall decide
questions of interpretation of the use lists as set forth on the schedule
above referenced.
A. Purpose. An Airport Hazard Overlay District is established in
accordance with the requirements of the Air Safety and Hazardous
Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq. The City shall not grant site
plan or subdivision plat approval, or variances for land use or
development activity within the Airport Hazard Area which would be
contrary to the standards of this chapter. The purpose of the overlay
district is to establish minimum standards for the control of airport and
land use adjacent to airports to prevent the creation of airport hazards.
No person shall build, rebuild, create or cause to be built, rebuilt or
created any object or structure, or plant, or cause to be planted or
permit to grow, any tree or vegetation which will interfere with,
diminish, change, or obstruct the airspace, landing, and takeoff area
available for the landing and take off of aircraft at the Millville
Municipal Airport.
B. Applicability. All lands located within the Airport Hazard Area, as
delineated in the Millville Zoning Map, shall be governed by the
standards and procedures specified in this chapter. Applicants seeking
development approval for lands within the Airport Hazard Area should
consult with the City development review staff for further guidance and
interpretation of these requirements.
C. Delineation of the Airport Hazard Area. The Airport Hazard Area shall
consist of a runway subzone, two runway end subzones, and two clear
zones, as defined below. The outermost boundaries of the runway
§ 30-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-107
1:361
subzone and runway end subzones shall comprise the full extent of the
Airport Hazard Area. (Refer to Figure 3.)42
D. Delineation of runway subzone. The runway subzone consists of a
rectangle having the same center line and length of each runway and a
width of 2,350 feet. (Refer to Figure 1.)43
E. Delineation of runway end subzones. The runway end subzones consist
of trapezoids located at either end of the runway subzone along the
flight approach and departure path. Each runway end subzone shall
extend 3,000 feet from the end of the runway subzone, as measured
along the extended center line of the runway. The base of the runway
end subzone coincides with the end of the runway subzone, and has a
width of 2,350 feet. The width of the runway end subzone narrows as
the distance from the end of the runway subzone increases. Its final
width is 850 feet. (Refer to Figure 2.)44
F. Delineation of the clear zones.
(1) The clear zones consist of trapezoids located within the runway end
subzone along the flight approach and departure path.
(2) Each clear zone extends 1,000 feet from the end of the runway
subzone, as measured along the extended center line of the runway.
(3) The base of the clear zone is collocated with the end of the runway
subzone, and has a width of 250 feet. The width of the clear zone
increases as the distance from the end of the runway safety zone
increases. Its final width is 450 feet. (Refer to Figure 7.)45
G. Permitted uses. Uses permitted within the Airport Hazard Overlay Zone
shall include those permitted in the underlying base zoning district, as
limited or restricted by the following standards prescribed by the Air
Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act (N.J.S.A. 6:1-81 et seq.):
(1) Prohibited uses within the Airport Hazard Area shall include:
(a) Residential single-family dwelling units on lots less than three
acres in size;
(b) Planned unit developments;
(c) Multifamily dwellings;
(d) Hospitals;
(e) Schools;
42.Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
44.Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-107 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-107
1:362
(f) Aboveground, bulk tank storage of compressed flammable or
compressed toxic gases and liquids;
(g) Any use that may attract masses of birds;
(h) Above grade major utility transmission lines and/or mains; and
(i) Within the runway end subzones only, the aboveground, bulk
tank storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids.
(2) Permitted uses within the Airport Hazard Area shall include:
(a) Residential, single-family dwelling units on a minimum lot size
of three acres and not located in the clear zone. All residential
dwellings must be physically located outside the clear zone;
(b) Open space;
(c) Agricultural uses;
(d) Roads, highways, rail rights-of-way;
(e) Airports;
(f) Commercial uses, if not located in the clear zone; and
(g) Industrial uses, if not located in the clear zone.
(h) Minimum obstruction height standards.
H. Vertical standards. The following shall define vertical standards for the
development of structures or growth of trees within the Airport Hazard
Area:
(1) For purposes of determining vertical standards, the horizontal
plane of the runway elevations at the Millville Airport shall be 87
feet above sea level.
(2) Within the runway subzone, for a distance of 125 feet
perpendicular to the runway center line, no development shall be
permitted above the natural grade of the soil except for runway and
flight safety equipment.
(3) Within the remainder of the runway subzone maximum height
standards shall be determined by establishing a plane which slopes
upward and outward, from the edge of the area defined in
Subsection H(2) above, at a rate of seven feet horizontally to one
foot vertically, or 7:1. This upward plane ceases when it reaches the
outer longitudinal borders of the runway subzone, at an elevation
of 150 feet. (Refer to Figure 5.)46
(4) The height standards within the runway end subzone are
determined by first establishing a plane with a rising slope of one
46.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-107
1:363
§ 30-108. Arts District Overlay Zone.
foot upward to 20 feet outward from the end of the runway subzone
to the outermost end of the runway end subzone. This plane is
bisected by the extended runway center line and is 250 feet in total
width at its innermost dimension and widens uniformly along its
three-thousand-foot length so as to have a total width of 850 feet
at its outermost dimension where it intersects with the outermost
portion of the runway end subzone at the elevation of 150 feet
above its starting point.
(5) The vertical standards within the remainder of the runway end
subzone are determined by establishing sloping planes from the
outermost longitudinal edges of the plane established in
Subsection H(4) above. These planes rise upward at a rate of one
foot upward to seven feet outward from the plane established in
Subsection H(4) above, to where they meet the outermost
longitudinal boundaries of the runway end subzone at the elevation
of 150 feet. (Refer to Figure 6.)47
I. Variance procedures. Any variance or other relief from the standards of
this chapter granted by the City of Millville shall be conditioned upon
the issuance of a permit by the New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation allowing the variance or relief. Provision for the
issuance of a permit by the Commissioner shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 16:62-6.
J. Airport master plan. In the event that any condition or standard as
prescribed or set forth in the Schedules of District Regulations in
relation to an I-3 Air Park Industry District are inconsistent with the
requirements of the Millville Municipal Airport Master Plan, the
requirements of the Master Plan shall be followed to the exclusion of
the requirements set forth in this chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Artists Overlay District is to create and
sustain an environment that encourages the settlement of artists and
craftspeople as a form of economic development and downtown
revitalization. For that reason, special zoning is enacted that will permit
art related uses within specific sections of the downtown core area to
create an artists-in-residence land use category.
B. Applicability. The Art Overlay District shall apply to the downtown areas
designated on the amended Zoning Map as B-3 and attached as part of
this section. This zoning district shall apply as an overlay, meaning that
it applies as an alternative zoning pattern, when and if chosen by the
property owner. Within the Art Overlay District the existing B-3 zoning
or redevelopment plan regulations continue unrestricted. The
application of the Arts District provides for a series of new permitted
47.Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-107 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-108
1:364
land uses which are in addition to those provided in the standard zoning
or redevelopment plans.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARTIST — A person or persons regularly engaged in the arts as a
career and not as a hobby. This does not mean that the creation of art
generates the person's primary source of income, but rather that the
artist has a body of work that demonstrates the development of the art
and intends to pursue that work for the foreseeable future. As used
herein, the arts shall include but not be limited to painting, sculpture,
pottery, beadmaking, glass blowing or other forms of glass art; music;
theater; choreography; textiles; and jewelry making.
WORK/LIVE ARTIST STUDIO — A single, enclosed private living and
work space of not less than 1,000 square feet where at least 50% of
the total space is devoted to work space for the creation, display and
sale of art and the remaining is used for living purposes. A minimum of
500 square feet of living space on the upper levels of a building shall be
required.
D. Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the Art Overlay District
shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted as principal uses in the B-3 Zone.
(2) Studios for arts and crafts.
(3) Art galleries.
(4) Live/work studios. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(5) Retail sales of goods and services related strictly to the arts,
including but not limited to art supply stores, framing shops,
bookstores.
(6) Art performance space, including but not limited to theater, poetry,
dance performance or recitals for live music. Such performance
space shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of permanent installation.
Temporary installations may exceed this maximum but may not be
used for more than 30 consecutive days. All uses must abide by
noise regulations contained within the development regulations.
Mixed use of any of the above, with living space restricted to the
upper levels of a building.
E. Prohibited uses in the Art Overlay District.
(1) First floor living space.
F. Parking requirements. No off-street parking shall be required for any
principal or accessory uses permitted by the Arts Overlay District. The
requirement is based upon the existing B-3 zoning regulations, the
unique character of the downtown and existing public parking areas.
§ 30-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-108
1:365
§ 30-109. Environmental Overlay Zone.
G. Signage. All signs permitted in the B-3 Zoning District shall be
permitted in the Overlay District.
A. Purpose. An Environmental Overlay District is hereby established to
assure protection of wetlands, floodplains, and floodways. Owners or
applicants with lands in the Environmental Overlay District, seeking
development approval, shall be required, as part of their preliminary
application, to verify the coverage or extent of each particular
environmental feature.
B. Applicability.
(1) Each applicant should verify from the Millville Zoning Map whether
their property falls within the Environmental Overlay District and,
if so, consult the maps and data on file with the Planning Board. It
shall be the applicant's responsibility, as part of the preliminary
application submission, to verify the precise location on their
property of wetlands, floodplains and floodways.
(2) Development within the Environmental Overlay District also shall
be subject to the separate review and permitting authority of the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (wetlands) and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) [wetlands,
floodplains, and floodways]. All applications submitted to the
Planning Board for lands mapped within the Environmental
Overlay District, and verified as within the district must receive
approval from the appropriate federal or state agency before final
approval can be granted by the City.
(3) Development adjacent to the Environmental Overlay District may
be subject to additional restrictions resulting from transition areas
adjacent to wetlands of exceptional resource value and or
intermediate resource value, as regulated by the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.).
C. Permitted uses. Uses permitted within the Environmental Overlay
District shall be those permitted in the underlying base zoning district,
subject to all restrictions as to use, area and bulk required by federal or
state regulations governing the environmental features.
D. Wetlands.
(1) Initial municipal review.
(a) The Construction Official, or development review officer, shall,
upon receipt of an application for development, initially
determine whether or not all or part of each application falls
within a wetlands area as defined by the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Act. If an affirmative determination is
made, the applicant shall be instructed in writing to submit to
§ 30-108 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-109
1:366
the NJDEP a request for the freshwater wetlands letter of
determination pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7A-7 et seq. No such
application for development shall be deemed complete unless
and until a response from the NJDEP is received.
(b) In lieu of the above, any applicant who acknowledges the need
for a NJDEP freshwater wetlands permit may waive the initial
municipal determination and NJDEP letter of determination
and submit a direct application to NJDEP for a freshwater
wetlands permit.
(c) If NJDEP determines a permit is necessary, no application for
development shall be considered complete, for the purpose of
the City's review, until such time as said permit is obtained.
Nothing contained herein shall limit the authority of the
Planning Board to conduct a conceptual review of any
development application while the NJDEP review is underway.
(d) If the NJDEP determines that a freshwater wetlands permit is
not necessary, then the applicant shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection D(3) below.
(2) Transition area standards. Strict adherence to transition area
requirements established by the freshwater wetlands protection
regulations shall be enforced. Transition areas are required around
exceptional resource value and intermediate resource value
freshwater wetlands to protect them from adverse impacts.
(a) Applications must include a letter of interpretation for a
classification determination from the NJDEP or a letter of
exemption for transition areas.
(b) Development must be avoided within 150 feet of the property
line if the adjacent wetlands are of exceptional resource value
or within 50 feet of the property line if the adjacent wetlands
are of intermediate value.
(c) Transition area widths may be reduced by the NJDEP by
applying for a transition area waiver. A copy of all information
sent to and received from NJDEP must be filed with the City.
(3) Use standards for non-state-regulated wetlands. For wetland areas
not within NJDEP jurisdiction, notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, no building, on-lot sewage disposal facility or
parking lot shall be erected or constructed, either above or below
ground level, within any wetlands area in the City of Millville.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as to prohibit the use
of any wetlands area for farming, grazing, plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, wild crop harvesting or open
recreation areas, such as parks, playgrounds, picnic areas,
hunting, fishing or the like provided the same is permitted in the
zone in which the premises are located.
§ 30-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-109
1:367
§ 30-110. Seasonal High Water Table Overlay Zone.
E. Floodplains. Any development proposed in or adjacent to floodplains
and/or floodways shall be subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 20 of the Code of the City of Millville.
A. Purpose.
(1) A Seasonal High Water Table/Critical Areas Overlay District is
hereby established to avoid development within areas exhibiting or
prone to exhibit poor environmental conditions, specifically low
depth to seasonal high water table (SHWT) and/or soils with poor
drainage characteristics, and to incorporate such areas into larger
lot areas. It is recognized that the development of any parcel of
land is impacted by existing environmental conditions, and
negative impacts on site development can be exacerbated by
existing dense development and small lot sizes. The City of Millville
adopts the following standards governing the modification of
development density in all R-10 Zones where municipal sanitary
sewer connection is not available.
(2) These standards have been developed based on a special study of
affected areas, adopted as part of the 1990 Master Plan, entitled
"Land Use, Environmental Conditions and Alternative Solutions for
the community of Laurel Lake, Millville, New Jersey." Based on the
conclusions and recommendations of the aforementioned report
the minimum lot size standards contained herein shall be strictly
enforced.
B. Applicability. Land falling within the following classification shall be
subject to the standards contained in this chapter:
(1) Critical areas. Nonsewered land located within an R-10 Zoning
District as shown on the City of Millville Zoning Map.
(2) Seasonal high water table. All areas within the R-10 where the
seasonal high water table is encountered within 10 feet of the
surface as indicated by mottling or other physical evidence. Such
areas will include those soil classifications as contained in the "Soil
Survey of Cumberland County." For purposes of this chapter,
seasonal high water table is defined as the upper limit of the
shallowest zone of saturation which occurs in the soil.
Measurement of the seasonal high water table is more fully
described in § 30-110C of this chapter.
C. Regulation for Critical Areas/Seasonal High Water Table District.
(1) Minimum parcel size; SHWT factor.
(a) Any use which is permitted in the R-10 Zone shall be permitted
in the Critical Area/Seasonal High Water Table District,
provided that the minimum size parcel permitted for
§ 30-109 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-110
1:368
development is determined in accordance with the following
table:
Depth to SHWT
(feet)
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
2 or less 40,000
3 to 4 30,000
5 to 7 20,000
8 to 9 16,000
10 or more 10,000
(b) The SHWT factor shall be determined based on the average
depth to SHWT within the parcel being considered for
development, and must be established and certified by a
licensed professional engineer. In determining the SHWT
factor, the depth to SHWT shall be rounded off to the nearest
even foot.
(c) In establishing the average depth to SHWT, the engineer shall
provide a minimum of one soil boring to a depth of 10 feet at a
location being at the average elevation between the upslope
and downslope sides and as near to the center as possible of
the parcel being considered for development. The soil log shall
describe in detail all profiles and characteristics of the soils
encountered. Additional soil borings, topography and other
site specific information may be required on parcels exhibiting
extreme variations in site conditions, and shall be provided as
necessary to support the establishment of the average depth to
SHWT within the said parcel.
(2) Any of the following uses are permitted uses in the overlay zone
area without regard to SHWT, provided that no building or
structure, including swimming pools, driveways and parking areas,
on-lot sewage disposal facilities, shall be constructed within the
critical area as herein defined.
(a) Woodland preserves and open spaces.
(b) Reforestation in accordance with recognized conservation
practices.
(c) Recreation uses.
In such case where there is a conflict between the minimum
lot size required based on depth to seasonal high water table
and the minimum permitted by the R-10 Schedule of District
Regulations the more stringent requirement shall apply.
§ 30-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110
1:369
(3) In considering a development application for subdivision within a
critical area, the Planning Board shall place such conditions on the
development as may be necessary to ensure that the development
is designed in such a way as to minimize the impact of the
development on the critical area and on the public health, safety
and welfare of the City. Such conditions include, but are not limited
to:
(a) Prohibiting development in all or parts of the critical area;
(b) Requiring deed restrictions governing uses of the critical areas
of the property;
(c) Limiting tree or vegetation removal in the critical areas;
(d) Limiting the size of the structure or the amount of disturbed
area;
(e) Requiring specific erosion or stormwater quantity or quality
controls;
(f) Acquisition of any other local, state, county or federal permits.
D. Submission requirements.
(1) Subdivision (major or minor). Any development application for
subdivision approval for lands within the areas regulated by this
chapter must submit to the Planning Board the following:
(a) All materials and documents required by § 30-45 of this
chapter;
(b) Results of soil boring test conducted and certified by a
licensed, professional civil engineer as specified in § 30-110C
of this chapter and any additional information as required by
§ 30-110C;
(c) Calculations for minimum lot size based on the formula
contained in § 30-110C.
(2) Single-family dwellings. Any person constructing a single-family
dwelling within the areas regulated by this chapter must submit to
the Zoning Officer the following:
(a) Zoning permit application;
(b) Results of a soil boring test conducted and certified by a
licensed, professional civil engineer as specified in § 30-110C
of this section;
(c) A calculation for minimum lot size based on the formula
contained in § 30-110C.
E. Exceptions and variances for critical areas.
§ 30-110 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-110
1:370
§ 30-111. Agricultural Conservation District.
(1) Variances to the critical area regulations shall be heard as "C"
variances. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a variance to
any provisions of these critical area regulations in accordance with
the procedures for a "C" variance. The Zoning Board may request
detailed plans, sketches, and the preparation of an environmental
impact study or modified form thereof. In considering such
requests for exceptions, the Zoning Board may refer the request for
exception to the City Engineer, Planner and County Board of Health
for recommendations. Such recommendations shall be made within
30 days after receipt of referral. Where applicable, in accordance
with the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, the Planning Board
may act in place of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(2) Where actual site work demonstrates that the seasonal high water
table estimate resulting from the soil boring as required in
§ 30-110C is incorrect, the zoning permit is no longer valid.
(3) If a septic system design has been approved and permit issued by
the Cumberland County Department of Health for an affected
parcel prior to the effective date of this chapter, the minimum
requirements established by the R-10 Zoning District shall be
enforced for purposes of obtaining a zoning permit.
A. Purpose. This zone serves the following purposes, otherwise set forth in
the Master Plan's description of the agricultural conservation section of
the land use element:
(1) To preserve and enhance the economic viability and quality of
existing agriculturally productive lands, farms, and agricultural
homesteads in outlying areas of the City of Millville designated as
Agricultural Conservation Zones.
(2) To allow higher density planned residential development and rural
infill housing to occur in existing or developing areas while insuring
that adequate clustering, open space, and perimeter screening
shall buffer and preserve environmentally sensitive lands, rural
viewsheds and agricultural operations.
B. (Reserved)48
C. Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the Agricultural
Conservation District shall be as follows: [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-2006; 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Agricultural or horticultural purposes and uses.
(2) Farms.
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Definitions, was repealed 3-7-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006.
§ 30-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-111
1:371
(3) Single-family detached dwellings.
(4) Planned Village Development in conformity with the generally
applicable requirements of Article XIX and the specific
requirements of § 30-228, Planned Village Development.
(5) Forests and wildlife conservation areas or uses.
(6) Parks, playgrounds, playfields and other similar facilities.
(7) Public educational or cultural facilities including museums or
libraries.
(8) Cemeteries.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, located on the same lot
with and intended for use in conjunction with the above permitted
principal uses, shall be permitted.
(1) Any use customarily incidental to agricultural uses, purposes, and
activities including agricultural employees housing as per § 30-193
and the keeping of animal or livestock as per § 30-203.
(2) (Reserved)49
(3) Private swimming pools pursuant to § 30-139.
(4) Fences pursuant to § 30-133.
(5) Signs pursuant to Article XXIII.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Communications towers and facilities pursuant to § 30-220.
(8) Windmills pursuant to § 30-220.
(9) Temporary structures pursuant to § 30-219.
(10) Transmission lines.
(11) School bus shelters in accordance with § 30-217. [Added 3-7-2006
by Ord. No. 8-200650]
(12) Any other use or structure customarily incidental to any permitted
use.
E. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted in
accordance with § 30-53 and the following criteria: [Amended
3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
(1) (Reserved)51
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), pertaining to nonresidential uses or structures,
was repealed 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006.
50.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection D(11) as D(12).
§ 30-111 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-111
1:372
(2) Rural infill housing, only if the Planning Board determines that
each of the following conditions are fully met:
(a) The existing character of the area is a developed one. Infill
development is to be utilized only where existing residential
development has been created in pockets or sporadically,
isolating existing developments. Examples include: existing
large lot subdivisions that have only been partially
constructed, or lots that abut existing residential development
on over 75% of the perimeter of the property and are currently
too small for effective agricultural or open space use. In no
case, should the Planning Board accept as infill new
development that would protrude into areas which are
currently undeveloped or environmentally sensitive.
(b) Additional lands cannot, economically or otherwise, be
acquired to permit agricultural operations in the area.
(c) The density shall not exceed one unit per two acres, with no
more than five lots resulting from a residential subdivision.
(d) The design of the infill housing, including the frontage,
setbacks, landscaping, buffering, screening, and the siting of
the dwelling units, is in harmony with the existing developed
area.
(e) The development of the infill housing will incur no detriment to
existing agricultural operations nor will it displace current
farm related activities.
(f) The infill development shall have no direct frontage on county
roads so as to preserve rural viewsheds and functional
roadway corridors.
(3) Home occupations pursuant to § 30-134.
(4) Roadside stands pursuant to § 30-216.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Parochial or private schools pursuant to § 30-211.
(7) Churches or similar places of worship pursuant to § 30-198.
(8) Parish houses or convents.
(9) (Reserved)
(10) (Reserved)
(11)Kennels and animal hospitals pursuant to § 30-203.
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1), regarding residential clusters, was repealed
8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008.
§ 30-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-111
1:373
§ 30-112. Riverfront Mixed-Use District. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 21-2009]
(12) Camps and campgrounds pursuant to § 30-196.
(13) Private clubs such as hunting and swimming, lodge buildings, and
social halls pursuant to § 30-213.
(14) Golf courses, inclusive of accessory activities associated with a
clubhouse pursuant to § 30-213.
F. Area, yard, height and lot coverage requirements shall be as indicated
in the following development standards and the Schedule of District
Limitations for the Agricultural Conservation District: [Amended
8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Residential density shall not exceed one dwelling per five acres,
except as indicated in § 30-111F(2).
(2) Clustering requirements. Tracts of land 20 acres or greater in size
shall only be developed as indicated herein. Development on tracts
less than 20 acres in size may utilize these standards or the area,
yard, height and lot coverage standards for single-family detached
dwelling, conventional, as indicated in the Schedule of District
Limitations. Agricultural Conservation District.
(a) The minimum open space set-aside shall be 50% of the total
tract area. The open space shall meet the standards of § 30-210
and may be used for any of the enumerated purposes therein.
(b) Each building lot shall have a minimum of 40,000 square feet
of contiguous developable land; additional undevelopable land
shall be included within the lot to meet the minimum lot area
as established by the Schedule of District Limitations. This
standard is established to provide a minimum area on each lot
to support a residence, accessory buildings and structures,
usable yard area and adequate space for on-site wells and
septic systems and space for future replacement systems.
(c) Buffers between adjacent land uses shall conform to the
minimum width requirements of § 30-155E.
(d) No existing or proposed rights-of-way or utility easements shall
be included in the calculation of the minimum required open
space area.
(e) Lots shall meet the development standards for single-family
detached dwellings, clustered, in the Schedule of District
Limitations.
A. Purpose. The Riverfront Mixed-Use District is established in downtown
Millville for the purpose of providing an appropriate mix of planned new
development and redevelopment of existing sites along the Maurice
§ 30-111 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-112
1:374
River. The private and public properties along the Maurice River and
the surrounding neighborhoods are uniquely situated for planned
development and integration into an overall downtown riverfront
strategic plan. The intent of this district is to provide for a diverse
mix of compatible land uses and densities that promote high quality
development in a manner consistent with the Master Plan and the
Maurice River Development Plan, a strategic plan for redevelopment
along the Maurice River in Millville's downtown. The intent also is
to retain the Maurice River waterfront property as a valuable asset
of the community for the quality of life it provides and for economic
development. The goals of this district and the Maurice River
Development Plan, dated December 2006, include the following:
(1) Attracting new, compatible businesses and jobs;
(2) Creating a diverse range of housing opportunities, including
affordable housing;
(3) Providing recreational, civic and cultural opportunities;
(4) Ensuring and encouraging public access to the Maurice River
through a continuous waterfront walkway and park system for the
public enjoyment and use of the river and an appreciation of its
scenic qualities;
(5) The protection of open space and valuable environmental resources
associated with the Maurice River;
(6) Facilitating planned development that reconnects the waterfront to
the downtown and surrounding neighborhoods;
(7) Encouraging continuity of new private and public development
with existing design themes; and
(8) Providing a system of density bonuses for the creation of a variety
of building forms, a pedestrian-friendly streetscape and quality
design reflective of the City's unique industrial heritage.
B. District boundaries. The boundaries of the district shall be set forth on
the municipal Zoning Map and in the general boundary description set
forth herein as follows: Blocks 352, 410, 417, 418, 461, 462, 562, Lots 1
through 5 and Lot 6 on the Millville Tax Maps. The specific block and
lots included in this district are: Block 352, Block 410, Block 417, Block
418, Block 462, Block 461, Block 526, Lots 1 through 6. The entire
zoning district is made up of five distinct subareas as set forth in
Subsection C below. For purposes of these regulations, the subarea
boundaries, with the exception of the Transit District, will extend to the
westerly side of Buck Street and Columbia Avenue.
C. Description of the subareas within the district. The Maurice River
Development Plan identified five distinct subareas located within the
§ 30-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-112
1:375
Riverfront Mixed-Use District. These five subareas are described herein
and set forth below:
(1) Millyard Mixed-Use District: canal village commercial, mixed-use
and loft development, condominiums, apartments and lofts,
redevelopment of brownfields and old industrial buildings,
riverfront promenade, parking, trail system.
(2) Overlook Arts and Entertainment District: public access along the
waterfront, extension of existing parks and walkways, medium
density infill residential, commercial mixed-use and office
development, office development and restaurants, parking garage
and parking areas, infill commercial, townhomes and
condominiums, artists village.
(3) Transit District: an area at Broad and High Streets, where the
original passenger rail station was located, that is proposed as a
future transit-oriented development; possible location of a
potential multimodel transit station, mix of residential and
commercial and office uses within walking distance; a public
parking station, parks and civic uses.
(4) Civic and Recreation District: new civic complex and library,
commercial and mixed-use development, public open space, senior
housing, realigned Ware Avenue and High Street extension,
apartments, lofts, riverfront festival parks.
(5) Glassworks Transit and Marina District: brownfields
redevelopment of mixed-use commercial/residential integrated into
the surrounding neighborhoods, marina-oriented commercial and
water-dependent businesses, public walkways, apartments,
community parks, infill single-family housing, linkages with the
downtown arts district and retain core.
D. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be as specified in the five
individual development areas designated in the Riverfront Development
Plan of 2006 and as outlined below.
(1) Residential, including: single-family attached and detached
dwellings, townhomes, apartments, multifamily dwellings, group
homes, community residences, artisan live/work space, and
continuing care facilities;
(2) Retail sales and businesses, including: apparel and accessories
stores, art galleries, furniture and home decorating, general
merchandise, food stores, liquor stores, printing or publishing,
office equipment and supplies, and specialty stores;
(3) Eating and drinking establishments with indoor and outdoor
seating, including: coffee shops, delicatessens, ice cream parlors,
restaurants, tea rooms, bars, lounges, pubs, and taverns;
§ 30-112 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-112
1:376
(4) Office uses, including: banks, business offices or corporate
headquarters, government offices, legal offices, medical offices,
and other professional offices;
(5) Cultural, public and recreational uses, including: auditoriums,
boathouses and boat-launching facilities, canoe and kayak rental
facilities, conference centers and meeting halls, health and fitness
centers, farm markets, libraries, marinas, parks, post offices,
schools and theaters;
(6) Municipal purpose offices;
(7) Accommodations and services, including: assisted living and
community living facilities, bed-and-breakfast facilities, hotels and
motels, hospitals, nursing homes, and veterinary offices;
(8) Personal services, including: barber shops and hair salons, day
care, dry cleaning and laundromats, funeral parlors, and
pharmacies;
(9) Parking facilities, including aboveground and underground parking
structures;
(10) Art galleries;
(11) Artist live/work space;
(12) Wholesale showrooms with storage and repair facilities;
(13) Utilities; and
(14) Transient shelters and depots.
E. Accessory uses.
(1) Temporary structures such as sales buildings;
(2) Accessory structures considered customarily incidental to
residential uses, including: carports, garages, sheds and storage
buildings, and outdoor barbeques;
(3) Home occupations pursuant to § 30-134 of this chapter;
(4) Bank automatic teller machines;
(5) Fences;
(6) Signs pursuant to this chapter;52
(7) Community centers and community swimming pools;
(8) Maintenance buildings and management buildings; and
(9) Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis courts.
52.Editor's Note: See Art. XXIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 30-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-112
1:377
§ 30-113. Interchange District.
F. Conditional uses.
(1) Parochial or private schools pursuant to § 30-211 of this chapter;
(2) Houses of worship pursuant to § 30-198 of this chapter;
(3) Parish houses and convents; and
(4) Private clubs, lodge buildings, and social halls.
G. Prohibited uses.
(1) Adult sexually oriented businesses;
(2) Arcades;
(3) Billboards;
(4) Check-cashing establishments;
(5) Heavy industrial uses;
(6) Junk, salvage and recycling yards;
(7) Mini self-storage facilities;
(8) Motor vehicle sales or repair facilities and car washes;
(9) Mobile homes; and
(10) Tattoo and body-piercing parlors except for ear piercing.
A. Purpose.
(1) This zone serves the purposes set forth in the Master Plan land use
element and intends to encourage the development of large tracts
of land, offering a variety of permitted uses and limiting the impact
on municipal services. In order to accomplish this intent, the zone
plan should consider the maximum impact on services if 100%
development occurs, including:
(a) Water and sewer capability.
(b) Traffic impact.
(c) Police and fire requirements.
(d) Other municipal services.
(2) The zone shall encourage the use of existing highway accesses or
the creation of common accesses for all proposed development
within the zone in the interest of creating an overall traffic
circulation plan for the zone and the general area.
§ 30-112 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-113
1:378
B. Zone boundaries. This zone is located at the intersection of State
Highways 55 and 47. It includes parcels which have frontage on one or
both of these major routes in proximity to the physical interchange of
the highways.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS OFFICES AND CENTERS — A group of buildings planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity containing a range of
business products or services of a predominantly administrative or
clerical nature, including accessory or supporting services and parking.
A business office or center can contain one building or separate
buildings managed in an integrated and coordinated basis.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES — An area of a commercial
development plan designated and equipped for the conduct of leisure
time activities or a recreation facility operated as a business and open
to the public for a fee.
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS AND OFFICES — A building or group of
buildings utilized for conducting the affairs of local, state, or federal
divisions of government or like activity, and may include ancillary
services for office workers such as restaurants, newsstands, or childcare
facilities.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES AND CENTERS — A group of buildings
planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity containing a range
of professional services and including accessory or supporting services
and parking. A professional office or center can contain one building or
separate buildings managed in an integrated and coordinated basis.
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTERS — A group of commercial
establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity,
containing a wide range of retail and service establishments, occupying
50 to 100 acres of land containing at least one or more anchor stores,
and drawing clientele from as much as an hour drive time. Customer
and employee parking must be provided on site with goods delivery
separated from customer access.
THEATERS AND AUDITORIUMS — A building or part of a building
devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or
other live performances.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS FACILITIES — Establishments developed
singly or as a group of buildings primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or
professional business users or to other users.
D. Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the Interchange District
are as follows:
(1) Business offices and centers.
§ 30-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-113
1:379
(2) Professional offices and centers.
(3) Government buildings and offices.
(4) Regional shopping centers.
E. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses to the permitted uses in
the Interchange District are as follows:
(1) Essential services.
(2) Signage.
(3) Parking facilities.
(4) Any use incidental and subordinate to the permitted use on the
same parcel.
F. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in
accordance with § 30-53 of this chapter.
(1) Commercial recreational facilities.
(2) Theaters and auditoriums.
(3) Wholesale business facilities.
(4) Child day-care facilities in conjunction with an above permitted
use.
G. Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically permitted by right or by
conditional use permit in the Interchange District.
H. Nonconforming uses. Any lawful use or structure existing at the time of
adoption of this section or amendment thereof shall be considered to be
a nonconforming use and shall be governed by Article VII of this
chapter.
I. Nonconforming lots. Any lot that exists on the effective date of this
section shall not be subdivided or reduced in area or dimension below
the minimum requirements of the Interchange District. Existing
nonconforming lots may be developed in accordance with § 30-124 of
this chapter.
J. Site plan design criteria.
(1) Building design and architectural criteria.
(a) Facades. No uninterrupted facades in excess of 100 feet shall
be permitted. Facades greater than 100 feet must incorporate
recesses and projections along at least 20% of the facade
length.
(b) Entrances. Each principal building shall have a clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrance.
§ 30-113 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-113
1:380
(c) Rooflines. Rooflines must use parapet walls to conceal rooftop
equipment and utilize eaves or different roof slopes to
minimize the appearance of a continuous roof plane.
(d) Materials and colors. Exterior building material shall be of
attractive and durable materials such as textured concrete,
masonry, stone, brick, stucco, glass or finished wood.
Unfinished concrete block and prefabricated metal panels shall
be prohibited. Facade colors shall be of low reflectance and use
neutral or earth tones. Building trim may utilize brighter
shades for enhancement of the structures.
(2) Signage.
(a) Freestanding signs. One for each entrance from a primary
roadway with a maximum of two with a maximum height of 50
feet and an area of 150 square feet.
(b) Facade signage. Signage for principal uses up to 200 square
feet on the front facade and up to 50% of front facade along a
side. Signage for individual use a designated area along the
facade with a maximum of three square feet per store frontage.
(3) Parking requirements.
(a) One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(b) No more than 56% of the required off-street parking area shall
be located between the front facade of principal building and
the primary abutting roadway.
(4) Pedestrian access and circulation.
(a) Sidewalks at least eight feet in width shall be provided along
any facade abutting a public parking area or any facade with a
customer entrance.
(b) Pedestrian walkways at least 12 feet in width shall be provided
at intervals of no less than 120 feet in all public parking areas.
The walkways must feature lighting, landscaping, benches and
other such materials and facilities for their entire length. The
walkways must be clearly distinguished from the driving
surfaces to enhance pedestrian safety and the attractiveness of
the walkways.
(5) Landscaping and buffering.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the developed area shall be utilized for
landscaping.
(b) There shall be a minimum of 30 feet landscaped buffer around
the entire perimeter of the property.
§ 30-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-113
1:381
§ 30-114. Lakeshore Conservation District. [Amended 1-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 1-2007]
(c) Undeveloped areas shall be seeded, mowed and maintained.
There shall be a concerted effort to maintain any significant
trees or vegetation natural to the site.
(6) Outdoor storage.
(a) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited
without the granting of a site plan waiver by the Planning
Board.
(7) Trash collection, delivery areas.
(a) All delivery areas are to be located at nonpublic entrances to
the structures.
(b) Trash collection areas are to be adequately screened by berms,
plantings and/or fencing.
(8) Lighting. Site lighting shall be integrated into the original site plan
and must reflect the architectural design of the plan. No direct
glare from any internal or external light source shall be visible from
off site.
(9) Traffic circulation (site specific and overall). A traffic circulation
plan for both on-site and off-site traffic must be submitted as part of
the overall site plan. The off-site plan shall include all roadways
within one mile of the site. The plan shall include the proposed
impact on the affected roadways at the buildout of the proposed
project.
A. Purposes. The Lakeshore Conservation District is intended to preserve
the environmental integrity of Union Lake through proper mitigation
measures that minimize the effects of development, preserve the view
of the shore from the lake, maintain a corridor for wildlife along the
lake's edge and to provide appropriate locations for passive recreation
and other open space while recognizing the District's superior
transportation access and suitability for development. It is intended
that these purposes will be achieved either through low-density
residential development or through appropriate planned unit
residential development.
B. (Reserved)
C. Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the Lakeshore
Conservation District shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Planned unit residential development in conformity with the
generally applicable requirements of Article XIX, Planned Unit
§ 30-113 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-114
1:382
§ 30-115. Professional Services District.
Development, and the specific requirements of § 30-229, planned
lakeshore community development.
(3) Forests and wildlife conservation areas or uses.
(4) Parks, playgrounds or other similar facilities.
(5) Municipal purpose.
D. Accessory uses. The following uses and structures accessory to the
above uses shall be permitted:
(1) Any use customarily incidental to forest management or wildlife
conservation.
(2) Uses or structures customarily incidental to residential uses
including carports, garages, shed, storage building and outdoor
barbecue structure.
(3) Private swimming pools pursuant to § 30-139.
(4) Fences pursuant to § 30-133.
(5) Signs pursuant to Article XXIII.
(6) Essential services.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) (Reserved)
(9) Temporary structures pursuant to § 30-219.
(10) Home occupations pursuant to § 30-134.
(11) Any other use or structure customarily incidental to any permitted
use.
E. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance
with § 30-53 and those standards referenced below, and as set forth by
the Planning Board.
(1) Parochial or private schools pursuant to § 30-211.
(2) Houses of worship pursuant to § 30-198.
(3) Parish houses or convents.
(4) Marinas pursuant to § 30-206.
(5) Camps and campgrounds pursuant to § 30-195.
(6) Private clubs such as hunting and swimming, golf courses, lodge
buildings and social halls pursuant to § 30-213.
§ 30-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-115
1:383
A. Purpose. This zone serves the following purposes, otherwise set forth in
the Master Plan's section on the Professional Service District:
(1) To preserve and enhance the opportunities for professional and
service-oriented uses, including medical offices, clinics, and
laboratories, and special population housing, including continuing
care facilities, convalescent homes, and congregate care and agerestricted
independent living quarters within the area surrounding
the existing South Jersey Health Systems - Millville Division Center.
(2) To ensure, via adequate buffering techniques, that the Professional
Services District and adjacent residential and commercial areas do
not impact each other with specific emphasis on traffic circulation,
pedestrian circulation, adequacy of parking, emergency motor
vehicle access, adequate light and air, viewsheds, and the visual
environment.
(3) To ensure that all expansion and new construction of existing
medical service facilities and structures and special population
housing shall conform to all buffering requirements in order to
mitigate any potential negative impacts on adjacent uses.
B. Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the Professional
Services District shall be as follows:
(1) Professional offices and professional office centers for doctors,
dentists, and allied medical professionals, in conformity with the
regulations set forth in § 30-214 of this chapter requiring
architectural and aesthetic uniformity in professional centers
containing more than one structure.
(2) X-ray and diagnostic facilities, clinics, and medical laboratories,
including pathological testing laboratories, ancillary to the offices
and office centers of doctors, dentists, and allied medical
professionals and intended to serve the needs of patients of
doctors, dentists, and allied medical professionals.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, playfields and other similar facilities.
(4) Public educational or cultural facilities.
(5) Municipal offices and similar governmental uses.
(6) Bank, insurance, financial, real estate or business offices or
studios, including, but not limited to brokerage offices, physicians
and architects offices and other professional and administrative
offices of a similar type and nature.
(7) Data processing centers.
(8) Medical and electronic equipment sales and services.
(9) Medical, dental and pharmaceutical sales.
§ 30-115 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-115
1:384
§ 30-116. River Conservation District.
(10) Funeral homes.
(11) Cemeteries.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses accessory to the above uses and
incidental and customarily accessory to the medical offices shall be
permitted:
(1) Essential services.
(2) Bus and taxi shelters.
(3) Signs pursuant to Article XXIII.§
(4) Parking facilities pursuant to § 30-137.
(5) Temporary structures pursuant to § 30-219.
(6) Newsstands.
(7) Restaurants.
(8) Drug stores.
(9) Office supply stores.
(10) Reproduction or copy centers.
(11) Any use or structure customarily incidental to any permitted
principal use excluding residential uses.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance
with § 30-53 and those standards referenced below, and as set forth by
the Planning Board.
(1) Special population housing, including nursing homes, continuing
care facilities, convalescent homes, and congregate care and age
restricted living quarters, pursuant to the Planning Board's
determination that the following conditions be fulfilled:
(a) The population to be served has a demonstrated, heightened
need for proximity to the professional health services and
health care provided within the Professional Services District.
(b) The required site planning and design standards and open
space requirements for the age restricted and congregate care
housing located within the Professional Services District shall
be developed at a gross density not to exceed six dwelling units
per acre.
(2) Professional or business centers pursuant to § 30-214.
§ 30-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116
1:385
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this zone to provide measures that ensure the
protection and enhancement of the natural resources of the Maurice
River and its tributaries, as well as promote the public health, safety
and general welfare of this community. These zoning regulations are
enacted to achieve the following stated public purposes:
(1) Protect the health, safety and welfare of river corridor residents
and the community in general;
(2) Protect and enhance the natural resource values of the Maurice
River and its tributaries;
(3) Permit reasonable and compatible uses of land, including the
continuation of existing land and water uses;
(4) Preserve and protect existing wetlands, floodplains, fish and
wildlife habitat areas, historic resources, natural recreation values
and other environmentally sensitive areas within the river corridor;
(5) To delineate specific development and site design standards
regulating land use within the river corridor;
(6) To conserve the water quality of the river and prevent degradation
of its quality, purity, clarity and free-flowing condition;
(7) To ensure that any development which may occur shall be done in
an orderly manner consistent with the natural environment and
aesthetic qualities of the river and its tributaries;
(8) To encourage the identification, preservation and interpretation of
historical and archaeological sites along Maurice River and its
tributaries;
(9) To prohibit the siting of landfills, dumps, waste storage and
incineration facilities, sludge farming, radioactive waste facilities
and/or any other uses that pose a direct threat to the outstandingly
remarkable resources and attributes of the Maurice River and its
tributaries.
B. Intent. It is the general intent of these rules to define terms used and to
regulate and restrict lot coverage and use, density, and the size and
location of all structures by the delineation of permitted uses and
development standards so as to promote the purposes identified in this
section. It is not the intent of these rules to revoke, annul, cancel, or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of law, ordinances,
or any rules, regulations or with any private restrictions placed upon
property by covenant or deed.
C. River Conservation District boundaries. This zoning district established
a definable area within which local zoning shall guide future
development and use. The boundaries of the Maurice River
Conservation District shall be described and attached to this section
and depicted on the City of Millville Zoning Map. It is noted that the
§ 30-116 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-116
1:386
R-10 Zone known as Laurel Lake, was included in the study area
boundaries of the River Conservation Zone because it is part of the
Maurice River Watershed. However, this particular area shall be
governed by the standards imposed by the Seasonal High Water/Critical
Areas Overlay Zone Ordinance (27-1990) adopted October 16, 1990. It
is recognized by this ordinance that pre-existing development patterns
in the Laurel Lake area preclude the application of the specific
standards contained herein. It is further recognized that Ordinance
27-1990, Seasonal High Water/Critical Areas Overlay Zone, achieves
the goals and purposes listed in § 30-116A. Therefore, while the unique
historical settlement pattern of Laurel Lake mandates the development
regulations contained in Ordinance 27-1990, the purposes of this
section and Ordinance 27-1990 are consistent.53
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLUFF — The top of a steep bank rising from the river's edge on a lot
or parcel.
DEVELOPABLE AREA — The portion of the tract or parcel upon which
development may occur and from which lot size and open space can be
calculated after subtracting any state-claimed tidal land.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The line between upland and
bottomland, which persists through successive changes in water level
below which the presence and action of the water is so common or
recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the
upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface
of the soil and the vegetation. Within areas of tidal influence, the
ordinary high-water mark may be interpreted as being the mean highwater
line as designated by the NJDEP.
RIVERFRONT SETBACK LINE — The minimum required distance for a
principal structure to be set back from the river's edge.
REFORESTATION — The renewal of vegetative cover by seeding,
planting or transplanting.
E. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted, provided they are in
conformance with the standards contained in § 30-116J and K herein:
[Amended 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Conservation activities.
(3) Recreational uses, excluding shooting ranges and campgrounds,
provided that there is minimal disruption of wildlife habitat and
minimal clearing.
(4) Hunting, fishing, trapping.
53.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 27-1990 is included as § 30-110 of this chapter.
§ 30-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116
1:387
(5) Hunting and conservation clubs.
(6) Nurseries and forestry uses with approved management plans.
(7) Reforestation with approved forestry management plans.
(8) Site or route location, construction, or enlargement of:
(a) Public utility transmission lines.
(b) Publicly provided access sites, roads, bridges only with
appropriate review and approval of permits required by local,
state, and federal agencies, including but not limited to the
Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(9) Maintenance and repair reasonable and necessary for the
continuance of an existing use.
(10) Municipal purpose.
F. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to
permitted uses, provided that they are in conformance with the
standards contained in § 30-116J and K herein: [Amended 8-19-2008
by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Private residential tool sheds, garages, and storage buildings
customarily incidental to residential uses.
(2) Private residential swimming pools, tennis courts and other usual
recreation facilities pursuant to § 30-139.
(3) Hunting lodge in conjunction with a hunting club.
(4) Environmental center in conjunction with a conservation club.
(5) Farm storage sheds and barns associated with a nursery use.
(6) Wholesale sales and processing of agricultural products associated
with a nursery use.
(7) Any other use or structure customarily incidental to any permitted
principal use.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Fences and walls pursuant to § 30-133.
G. Conditional uses. The following are conditionally permitted, provided
they are in conformance with the standards enumerated and any
pertinent additional standards in § 30-116J and K herein. [Amended
8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Home occupations and home professional occupations pursuant to
§ 30-134.
§ 30-116 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-116
1:388
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Rural infill housing use, provided that the approving authority
determines that each of the following conditions are fully met or
variance granted:
(a) The property or tract, contains at least five contiguous acres in
single ownership, described in one all-inclusive deed.
(b) The density shall not exceed one dwelling per 2 1/2 acres.
(c) The maximum number of new lots created shall be two.
(d) The tract of land shall be surrounded by existing residential
development on 75% of its abutting perimeter.
(e) Each lot can meet the area, yard, height and lot coverage
standards for single-family detached dwellings in the Land
Conservation District without variance.
(f) The design of the housing, including landscaping, buffering,
screening and siting of the dwelling units, is in harmony with
the surrounding residential uses.
(g) The soils are satisfactory for the design and construction of the
septic system in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A and the
Cumberland County Board of Health permit requirements and
will not result in detrimental impacts to the ground or surface
water; or public sewer connection can be obtained.
(h) A deed restriction will be recorded prohibiting any further
subdivision of the properties.
H. Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically permitted by right or by
conditional use permit are prohibited in the River Conservation Zone.
Subsections A and B are hereby referenced for determining the intent
and purpose of the section.
I. Area, yard, height and lot coverage requirements shall be as indicated
in the following development standards and the Schedule of District
Limitations for the River Conservation District: [Amended 8-19-2008
by Ord. No. 21-2008]
(1) Residential density shall not exceed one dwelling per five acres,
except as indicated in § 30-116G(3).
(2) No hunting lodge or environmental center shall exceed 10,000
square feet in floor area.
(3) Clustering requirements. Tracts of land 20 acres or greater in size
shall only be developed as indicated herein. Development on tracts
less than 20 acres in size may utilize these standards or the area,
yard, height and lot coverage standards for single-family detached
§ 30-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116
1:389
dwelling, conventional, as indicated in the Schedule of District
Limitations. River Conservation District.
(a) The minimum open space set-aside shall be 50% of the total
tract area. The open space shall meet the standards of § 30-210
and may be used for any of the enumerated purposes therein.
(b) Each building lot shall have a minimum of 40,000 square feet
of contiguous developable land; additional undevelopable land
shall be included within the lot to meet the minimum lot area
as established by the Schedule of District Limitations. This
standard is established to provide a minimum area on each lot
to support a residence, accessory buildings and structures,
usable yard area and adequate space for on-site wells and
septic systems and space for future replacement systems.
(c) Buffers between adjacent land uses shall conform to the
minimum width requirements of § 30-155E.
(d) No existing rights-of-way or utility easements shall be included
in the calculation of the minimum required open space area.
(e) Lots shall meet the development standards for single-family
detached dwellings, clustered, in the Schedule of District
Limitations.
J. Site plan design criteria. In addition to the site plan and subdivision
criteria contained in Article VI of this chapter, the Planning and/or
Zoning Board shall also consider whether uses proposed for site plan or
subdivision approval in the River Conservation District meet the
following design criteria:
(1) Situated on a portion of the site that will most likely conserve shore
land vegetation and the integrity of the buffer strip.
(2) Integrated into the existing landscape through features such as
vegetative buffers and through retention of the natural shoreline
and the preservation of ground cover.
(3) Will not result in erosion or sedimentation.
(4) Will not result in water pollution.
(5) Situated on the most suitable soils for subsurface septic disposal as
provided in the Cumberland County Soil Survey.
(6) Situated on the least important soils for natural vegetation
important to wildlife as provided in the Cumberland County Soil
Survey.
K. River conservation standards. All land uses shall comply with the
following standards:
§ 30-116 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-116
1:390
(1) A vegetational buffer, composed of indigenous species, extending
at least 50 feet in depth measured landward from the bank of the
river. If any lot, existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
does not contain sufficient depth, measured landward from the
ordinary high-water mark or wetland delineation as appropriate, to
provide a fifty-foot buffer strip, this requirement may be reduced
50%. For the purposes of normal pedestrian access to the
waterfront, an opening of not more than 10 feet may be excluded
from the buffer requirements.
(2) The removal of natural vegetation shall be controlled in accordance
with the following criteria:
(a) Clear-cutting shall be prohibited, except as necessary for
constructing public facilities, roadways, utilities and parking
areas.
(b) Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after
any construction project.
(c) Selective cutting of trees and underbrush shall be allowed as
long as sufficient cover is left to screen structures when viewed
from the water.
(d) Dead, diseased, unsafe or fallen trees and noxious plants and
shrubs (such as poison ivy) may be removed.
(e) The selected removal or trimming of trees for timber harvest
access, or woodlot improvements, landscaping, or public utility
lines to service private single-family dwellings and other
permitted uses is allowed.
(f) No greater than 20% of the total lot area shall be cleared.
(3) Pollution controls such that the location and nature of the septic
systems must ensure that effluent from the septic tank(s) will not
reach the ground or surface waters in a condition which will
contribute to health hazards, taste, odor, turbidity, fertility, or
otherwise impair the character of the adjacent or nearby waterway.
All sanitary waste disposal facilities must conform to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A and the permit specifications of the
Cumberland County Board of Health.
(4) Grading and filling for the purpose of preparing a parcel for
permitted development, provided that the Planning Board
determines that each of the following conditions are met:
(a) The smallest amount of bare ground shall be exposed for as
short a time as feasible.
(b) Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, shall be used and
permanent vegetative cover, such as sod shall be provided.
§ 30-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116
1:391
§ 30-117. Tourism District.
(c) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be
employed.
(d) Fill shall be stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
(e) All federal, state, or local permits must be obtained.
(f) Applicant must provide a justification for the necessity of
requiring fill and/or extensive grading.
L. Nonconforming uses. Any lawful use, building, structure, premises,
land or parts thereof, existing at the effective date of this chapter or
amendments thereof shall be considered to be a nonconforming use.
Said nonconforming use shall be regulated by § 30-83 of this chapter.
M. Nonconforming lots.
(1) Any lot that exists on the effective date of this chapter shall not be
subdivided or reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements of this zone. Lots that are created after the effective
date of this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements of this
zone or application must be made for relief to the Millville Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Any lot that has preliminary plat approval but which does not meet
the area or bulk requirements of this chapter shall, on final plat
approval, be permitted to be used as a nonconforming lot of record.
N. Hardships, exceptions and variances. To avoid undue hardship, nothing
in this section shall be deemed to require a change in design,
construction, or intended use of any structure for which a building
permit was legally issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Such construction shall be completed within two years from the
effective date of this chapter, or such construction shall conform to the
standards contained herein.
O. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. Because of the potentially severe
adverse effects on riverfront vegetation, fish, wildlife, and water quality
from improper use of even small amounts of pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers, their use on lands within the River Conservation District is
strongly discouraged except when utilized in accordance with the
advice and supervision of qualified professionals.
A. Purpose. This zone serves the following purpose, otherwise set forth in
the Master Plan's tourism policies: to preserve and enhance Wheaton
Village's structures and ongoing living history activities, related to the
nineteenth century glassmaking industry and village life, craft and
artisan activities, and commercial use of culturally significant
production processes, related retail opportunities, and related
recreational opportunities.
§ 30-116 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117
1:392
B. Permitted uses. In the Tourism Zone the principal permitted uses shall
be as follows:
(1) Planned development devoted to tourism, subject to the Planning
Board's determination that said development meets the site
planning, design, dimensional, buffering, density, and application,
processing, review and approval requirements of Article XIX,
Planned Unit Development, and the following conditions:
(a) The subject area shall be designed to provide opportunities for
Wheaten Village to improve, expand, and increase its
commercial, lodging, and dining facilities and capacities in
order to support and enhance public enjoyment of, and access
to, the village's historical and culturally significant structures
and activities; and
(b) The subject area shall be designed as a whole or complete
complex, with a single architectural and landscape theme, and
with continuity between areas and uses, regardless of phase of
construction.
(2) Pursuant to the aforementioned conditions, planned development
devoted to tourism shall include the following uses:
(a) Facilities designed to demonstrate, illustrate, or display
historical and cultural material for purposes of preservation
and public education, recreation, and participation.
(b) Commercial use of culturally significant activities and
processes associated with Millville's historic glassmaking
industry and other historic and culturally significant industries
native to Southern New Jersey.
(c) Hotel and motel facilities, inclusive of meeting rooms,
convention facilities, conference centers, food service, and
ancillary retail and service facilities and activities.
C. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, located on the same lot
with and intended for use in conjunction with a permitted principal use,
shall be permitted:
(1) Outdoor storage pursuant to § 30-138.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Communication towers and facilities pursuant to § 30-220.
(4) Bus and taxi shelters.
(5) Parking facilities pursuant to § 30-137.
(6) Temporary structures pursuant to § 30-219.
§ 30-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-117
1:393
§ 30-117.1. Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District. [Added
7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009; amended 10-1-2013 by Ord. No.
28-2013]
(7) Any accessory use customarily incidental to any permitted
principal use.
D. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted in
accordance with § 30-53 and as set forth by the Planning Board:
(1) Banks and convenience stores for the retail sale of foodstuffs,
housewares, sundries, periodicals, stationery, tobacco and
newspapers.
(2) Windmills pursuant to § 30-220.
(3) Clubs, lodges and assembly halls of nonprofit organizations
pursuant to § 30-213.
(4) Theaters, auditoriums, arenas and similar entertainment facilities.
(5) Indoor commercial recreational facilities such as gyms, fitness
centers, bowling alleys, tennis and racquetball courts, skating rinks
and swimming pools.
(6) Employee housing which is integrated into structures necessitated
by other uses necessary for the advancement of the overall theme
and purposes of the planned development.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to authorize development
and redevelopment of land within the Traditional Neighborhood
Overlay District (TNO) consistent with the design principles of
traditional neighborhoods or neotraditional design. This type of
development is consistent with the principles of smart growth, and it
encourages the efficient use of urban land and delivery of services
through flexible design standards. This type of development also
recognizes site-sensitive design in that each site plan must be shaped
by the context of that site, using the existing neighborhood fabric of
buildings and streets as a template for new development. A traditional
neighborhood development has the following design elements:
(1) Compact, using neighborhoods as basic building blocks for
development;
(2) Designed for the human scale;
(3) Provides a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic and
open space, in close proximity to one another within the
neighborhood;
(4) Provides a mix of housing styles, types and sizes to accommodate
households of all ages, sizes and incomes;
§ 30-117 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117.1
1:394
(5) Incorporates a system or grid pattern of relatively narrow,
interconnected streets with sidewalks, bikeways and transit that
offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and
alternative modes of transportation and provides for the
connections of those streets to existing and future developments.
(6) Retains existing buildings with historical features or architectural
features that enhance the visual character of the community;
(7) Integrates natural features and undisturbed areas in the open
space plan;
(8) Utilizes public buildings, parks and other visual features as
landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity or as a
town center; and
(9) Consistent with the latest municipal Master Plan, Center City
Redevelopment Plan and the Maurice Riverfront Redevelopment
Plan.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARK — An open space, available for recreation, its landscape
consisting of paved paths and trails, some open lawn, trees, plantings,
site furnishings, open shelters, or active recreational facilities.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — A development
strategy or concept that is comprised of three or more significant
revenue-producing uses (such as retail, entertainment, office,
residential, hotel and/or civic, cultural, recreation) or may be
exclusively residential. Uses must be well-planned and mutually
supporting with significant physical and functional integration of
project components to develop a sense of community and promote
community interaction. Traditional neighborhood development shall
promote a relatively close-knit and intensive use of land that maximizes
space in accordance with a coherent plan that clearly defines the types
and scale of uses, densities, amenities, and related elements. Plans for
traditional neighborhood development shall demonstrate architectural
expression and detail, and shall be pedestrian-oriented so as to mitigate
traffic and sprawl. Architectural styles shall promote compatible design
features to create a harmonious visual character to the neighborhood
that reflects vernacular styles and maintains a human scale.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT —
A traditional neighborhood residential development is exclusively
residential and is a development strategy or concept that is comprised
of a diversity of housing types and a compatible mix of housing styles,
types, and sizes to accommodate households of various ages, sizes
and incomes. Traditional neighborhood residential development shall
promote a relatively close-knit and intensive use of land that maximizes
space in accordance with a coherent plan that clearly defines the types
and scale of housing, densities, amenities, and related elements. Plans
§ 30-117.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-117.1
1:395
for traditional neighborhood residential development shall demonstrate
architectural expression and detail, and shall be pedestrian-oriented
so as to mitigate traffic and sprawl. Architectural styles shall promote
compatible design features to create a harmonious visual character to
the neighborhood that reflects vernacular styles and maintains a human
scale.
C. District boundaries.
(1) The Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District is a set of design
standards for development and redevelopment within the Center
City Redevelopment Area excluding the Arts District Overlay Zone
for new and infill development as well as the redevelopment of
existing parcels.
(2) The Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District shall apply as an
overlay, meaning that it applies as an alternative zoning pattern,
when and if chosen by the applicant. Within the overlay, the
existing zoning regulations or redevelopment plans shall continue
unrestricted should this overlay not be applied. The application of
the overlay provides for a series of new permitted land uses which
are in addition to those provided in the standard zoning or
redevelopment plans.
D. Eligibility criteria.
(1) All uses in the TNO District shall be served by public water and
sewer services in adequate capacity for the intended use(s) as per
Municipal Code.
(2) Any proposal for a traditional neighborhood development must be
comprised of a tract of no less than three acres.
(3) A proposed traditional neighborhood development shall have no
less than 15% dedicated public park land which shall be improved
by the applicant as part of the project.
(4) The total footprint of nonresidential uses, including off-street
parking areas, shall not exceed 15% of the total traditional
neighborhood development.
(5) Residential density shall be determined per net acre which is
calculated by subtracting nonresidential uses, except parks, from
the total traditional neighborhood development area.
(6) A traditional neighborhood development shall comply with the
conventional development review procedures set forth in Chapter
30, Article VI(E), Land Use Standards.
E. Permitted uses. In order to achieve the proximity necessary to make
neighborhoods walkable, it is important to mix land uses. If the project
is exclusively residential, there must be a variety of housing styles or
types.
§ 30-117.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117.1
1:396
(1) A mix of residential uses of the following type may occur in the
traditional neighborhood development using the Master Plan land
use element, the Center City Redevelopment Plan, and Maurice
Riverfront Redevelopment Plan as guides for desired land use
patterns. For infill development, the mix of residential uses may be
satisfied by existing residential uses adjacent to the proposed
development. Permitted uses include:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings;
(b) Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes and
townhomes;
(c) Multifamily dwellings, including senior housing;
(d) Special needs housing, including community living
arrangements, and assisted-living facilities; and
(e) Live/work units that combine a residence and the resident's
workplace or studio.
(2) Commercial uses of the following types may occur in the traditional
neighborhood development:
(a) Food services, including neighborhood bakeries, cafes, coffee
shops, grocery stores, restaurants, taverns and similar uses;
(b) Retail uses, including artist and artisan galleries and shops,
bookstores, florists, hardware stores and specialty retail
stores;
(c) Personal service activities of and similar to barber or beauty
shops, laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners, shoe repair
shops, television and radio repair shops and travel agencies;
(d) Child-care centers; and
(e) Room accommodations, including bed-and-breakfast
establishments, small hotels or inns not exceeding 25 rooms.
(3) Professional office uses of the following types may occur in the
traditional neighborhood development:
(a) Law offices;
(b) Medical offices;
(c) Financial or insurance offices and institutions; and
(d) Other licensed professional consulting services.
(4) Civic or institutional uses of the following types may occur in the
traditional neighborhood development:
§ 30-117.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-117.1
1:397
(a) Municipal offices, fire stations, libraries, museums, community
meeting facilities, post offices;
(b) Transit shelters;
(c) Places of worship;
(d) Educational and cultural facilities; and
(e) Parking lots and parking structures.
(5) Open space uses of the following types may occur in the traditional
neighborhood development:
(a) Pocket parks and playgrounds;
(b) Passive open space; and
(c) Natural areas.
F. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
(1) Bulk standards. In order to provide full flexibility in the design and
layout of residential and nonresidential lots and structures and to
insure a compatible relationship between all residential uses and
residual land uses, an application for development shall not be
required to meet the minimum lot size, minimum depth and
minimum yard dimensions of the underlying zones within the TNO
District. The TNO District commands reduced front setbacks,
smaller lot sizes and rear accessed alleys.
(2) Coverage.
(a) Nonresidential uses. Building coverage shall not exceed 70%
and impervious coverage shall not exceed 90% of the total
nonresidential development area. Parks and public rights-ofway
shall be excluded from this calculation.
(b) Residential uses. Building coverage shall not exceed 55% and
impervious coverage shall not exceed 65% of the total
residential development area.
(3) Density.
(a) Base density. The permitted number of dwelling units within
the TNO District is eight to 10 units per acre.
(b) Density bonuses. Additional density may be obtained for
providing amenities as follows:
[1] Twenty-percent park land: maximum of 12 units per acre.
G. General design standards.
§ 30-117.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117.1
1:398
(1) Pedestrian circulation. Convenient pedestrian circulation systems
should minimize pedestrian-motor vehicle conflicts. All streets,
except for alleys, shall be bordered by sidewalks on both sides in
accordance with the specifications of § 30-181. Traffic-calming
features such as queuing, curb extensions, traffic circles and
medians may be used to encourage streets with a designated speed
of 25 miles per hour or less;
(2) Street layout. The traditional neighborhood development should
maintain or extend the existing street grid, and restore any
disrupted street grid where feasible;
(3) Parking. Parking areas for shared or community use are
encouraged. Adjacent on-street parking may apply toward the
minimum parking requirements. All off-street parking should be
located at the rear of the lot or, if necessary, to the side of the lot,
accessed by alleys or driveways and shall be screened from view,
mitigating visual impacts;
(4) Paving. Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of
interlocking pavers, porous pavement or other impervious surface
technology is strongly encouraged;
(5) Street trees. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all
streets in accordance with an approved landscape plan. Trees shall
be evenly spaced along the street between the curb and the
sidewalk as existing site conditions permit. Location and spacing
shall be predicated upon adequate soil volume for root growth and
adequate space and sunlight for tree canopy expansion. In
commercial areas with wider sidewalks that extend to the curb,
trees shall be placed in tree wells with ornamental devices and/or
construction methods that protect the trunk from damage and
prevent compaction of exposed soil around the base of the tree.
(a) Such tree wells shall have sufficient soil volume to support tree
growth as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity
(height in feet)
Soil Volume
(in cubic feet)
Large trees (45 or more) 200
Medium-sized trees (30 to 45) 150
Small trees (up to 30) 100
(b) A maximum depth of 24 inches shall be used for the purpose of
computing soil volumes. Lengths and widths may vary but shall
not overlap with adjacent tree areas.
(c) Areas under sidewalks may be used to meet the soil volume
requirement, provided no more than 50% of the volume is
located under such hard paving.
§ 30-117.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-117.1
1:399
(d) When required soil volumes cannot be obtained, alternate
construction and planting methods shall be required such as
structural soils or modular suspended pavement systems.
(e) When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along
streets, spacing shall depend on the tree size.
Tree Size at Maturity
(height in feet)
Planting Interval
(in feet)
Large trees (45 or more) 40
Medium-sized trees (30 to 45) 30
Small trees (up to 30) 20
(f) Trees may be planted closer together in order to avoid
interference with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight
easements, streetlights and other street furniture.
(6) Parking area landscaping and screenings. All parking lots and
loading areas fronting public streets or sidewalks, and all parking
and loading areas abutting residential areas shall provide:
(a) A landscaped area of at least five feet wide along the public
street or sidewalk;
(b) Screening at least three feet in height and not less than fiftypercent
opaque; and
(c) One tree for each 25 lineal feet of parking lot frontage.
(7) Parking area interior landscaping. The corners of parking lots,
islands and all other areas not used for parking or vehicular
circulation shall be landscaped. Vegetation can include turf grass,
native grasses or other perennial flowering plants, vines, shrubs or
trees. Such spaces may include a combination of vegetation and
architectural features such as decorative pavement, benches,
informational kiosks or bicycle parking.
(8) Site lighting. Public spaces shall have decorative lighting
compatible with the architectural character of the area.
H. Building design standards.
(1) Existing structures.
(a) Existing structures, if determined to be historically significant,
shall be rehabilitated on their exterior surfaces to reflect the
original architectural integrity of the building.
(2) New structures.
(a) Height. New structures within a traditional neighborhood
development shall be no more than three stories for single-
§ 30-117.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117.1
1:400
family residential or four stories for commercial multifamily
residential or mixed use.
(b) Entries and facades.
[1] The architectural features, materials, and the articulation
of a facade of a building shall be continued on all sides
visible from a public street;
[2] Architectural details such as porches, windows and roof
dormers articulate a building's facade and enhance visual
quality and contribute to human-scaled development;
[3] The front facade of the principal building on any lot in a
traditional neighborhood development shall face onto a
public street;
[4] The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly
toward a parking lot;
[5] Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hood front doors or
other similar architectural elements shall define the front
entrance to all residences;
[6] For commercial buildings, a minimum of 50% of the front
facade on the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting
of a window or door openings allowing views into and out
of the interior; and
[7] New buildings shall be designed within the context of the
architectural styles and elements on both sides of the
street upon which the buildings front.
(3) Garages. Private residential garages may be placed on a singlefamily
detached residential lot within the principal building or
accessory building, provided that the unit shall not exceed 400
square feet. Garages may be accessed from a local street or an
alley and may be detached behind the house.
(4) Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be directed downward in
order to reduce glare onto adjacent properties. Generally, more
smaller lights, as opposed to fewer high-intensity lights, should be
used.
(5) Landscaping. The overall composition and location of landscaping
shall complement the scale of development and its surroundings. In
general, larger well-placed contiguous planting areas shall be
preferred to smaller disconnected areas. Screening shall be at least
three feet in height, unless otherwise specified by the board of
jurisdiction. Required screening shall be satisfied by one or some
combination of a decorative fence, not less than fifty-percent
opaque behind a continuous landscaped area, a decorative
masonry wall or a hedge.
§ 30-117.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-117.1
1:401
I. Procedure for submitting application for development.
(1) Prior to the submission of any plans for development or
redevelopment within the TNO District, an applicant shall have an
initial conference with the staff of the Planning Department and
Engineering Department to discuss the proposed project and to
have a clear understanding of the meaning and purpose of the
Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District. A conceptual site plan
shall be required for the meeting.
(2) For projects of 25 housing units or more, the applicant shall submit
a housing plan with a marketing study that sets forth the following:
the targeted real estate market, sales prices, any incentives for
purchasing the units, demographic characteristics of proposed
buyers, and any covenants or deed restrictions that will be placed
on the proposed units. The housing plan also shall indicate how the
affordable housing obligation will be met.
(3) The housing plan shall identify the architectural style(s) that exist
within the targeted area for development, and it shall set forth the
housing styles proposed for the traditional neighborhood
development. The design style of the development shall be
illustrated with drawings or computer simulations of typical
proposed building elevations (including dimensions of building
height and width, and facade treatment).
(4) For all traditional neighborhood development projects, the
applicant shall also provide a market analysis and proforma
demonstrating the economic viability and financial structure of the
proposed project.
J. Waivers and adjustments. The Planning Board may grant a waiver or an
adjustment up to a maximum variance of 25% from either minimum or
maximum lot area, frontage and depth, setbacks and height
requirements contained in this article if the Board finds that the use of a
more flexible design or performance standard will achieve or enhance
the benefit intended by this article. No design or performance standard
contained in this article shall be waived where it adversely affects
public health, safety, or general welfare.
§ 30-117.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-117.1
1:402
ARTICLE XIII
Application of Regulations
§ 30-118. Use regulations.
No use or occupancy of any building, structure, land or open space, either
singularly or in any combination thereof, shall hereafter be changed to a
different use or occupancy, and no building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, moved or structurally altered unless in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 30-119. Area regulations.
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected to exceed the
height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families or
households, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area or to have a
narrower or smaller rear yard, front yard, side yard or other open spaces
than are required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 30-120. Height limitations.
§ 30-121. Overlapping of required space.
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building or use for the purpose
of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open
space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building, except as might otherwise be specified herein.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to silos, church
spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not used or intended for human
occupancy, or to municipal water towers or tanks. Chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, television and radio antennas and
similar features, and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually
carried on and above the roof level, may exceed the height limitation of
this chapter by not more than 15 feet. If such equipment is constructed
as an accessory building or use, the height restrictions of this chapter
shall apply.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection
above the building height limit for a parapet, wall or cornice for
ornament (and without windows) extending above such height limit not
more than five feet. Public and quasi-public buildings, schools,
churches and other similar permitted uses shall increase the front, rear
and side yards by one foot for each foot by which the building exceeds
the height limit herein established for such zone in which it is located,
and further provided that in no case shall any building have a height
greater than 50 feet unless explicitly permitted by the Schedules of
District Regulations contained in this chapter.
§ 30-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-122
1:403
§ 30-122. Setback line determination.
The front setback lines shall be determined from the proposed right-ofway
of the street on which the lot fronts. Rear and side yards shall be
determined from the lot lines. All front yard setbacks shall be observed
except in such cases as exists a pronounced alignment observing a different
setback, in which case the Construction Official shall be authorized to
issue a building permit for construction in alignment with the pronounced
alignment without the necessity of obtaining a variance. Pronounced
alignment exists when four adjacent, existing structures to the premises
in question observe a structurally different setback than what is required
under this chapter.
§ 30-123. Yard reduction.
§ 30-124. Existing lots.
A lot which is of public record and in single and separate ownership and
not of contiguous frontage with other lots in the same ownership at the
time of enactment of this chapter may be used for a permitted use in
the district in which it is located even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for bulk and frontage, or both, that are generally applicable
in the district in which it is located, provided that the yard requirements
or other requirements not involving bulk or frontage of lot shall conform,
or a variance for such requirements not involving bulk or frontage shall be
obtained. This provision shall not apply to the Seasonal High Water Table/
Critical Soils Overlay District.
§ 30-125. Contiguous lots.
If two or more lots or combination of lots or portions of lots with contiguous
frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter and if all or part of the lots do not meet
the requirements for lot frontage and bulk as established by this chapter,
the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this chapter unless approval for such lots has been obtained
under the provisions of subdivision regulations of the City of Millville, and
no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot
frontage and bulk requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any
division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with frontage
or bulk below the requirements stated in this chapter.
A. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter, or
a variance for such requirements shall be obtained.
B. Within each district the regulations set by this chapter shall be the
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land.
§ 30-122 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-126
1:404
§ 30-126. Public access.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a public
street or road improved to meet the City of Millville's requirements or for
which such improvements have been insured by the posting of a sufficient
performance guaranty.
§ 30-127. Measurement of frontage on a street proposed for
widening.
Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the adopted Master
Plan or the Official Map of the City of Millville indicates is proposed for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard shall be measured from such
proposed right-of-way line.
§ 30-128. One building per lot.
No lot in any zone shall have erected upon it more than one single-family,
detached dwelling unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. No yard
or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to provide
a yard or open space for any other building.
§ 30-129. Clear vision at intersections.
At the intersection of two or more streets, or a driveway and a street in a
business or industrial zone district, no hedge, fence or wall (other than a
signal post or tree) which is higher than three feet above curb level, nor any
obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street lines and a line joining each 30 feet above curb level, nor
any obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the triangular area formed
by the intersecting street lines and a line joining each 30 feet distant from
the intersection along the street lines.
§ 30-130. Flag lots.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit, regulate,
and control the establishment of flag lots in designated residential
zoning districts to direct the development of lands within the City in a
manner promoting the public health, safety and welfare and consistent
with the intent of the Municipal Master Plan.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the
meaning given in the Municipal Land Use Law, or if not defined therein,
then they shall have the meaning given in Webster’s Unabridged
Dictionary. [Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007]
FLAG LOT — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements
along a public roadway, where access to the public roadway is limited
to a narrow strip of land containing a private right-of-way or driveway.
§ 30-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-130
1:405
C. Eligibility criteria.
(1) Flag lots, as defined and regulated herein, may be created in the
following residential zones: LC, AC and R-40. [Amended
7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007]
(2) The flag lot shall contain a minimum gross area equal to or greater
than the minimum lot area required in the residential zone district
in which the flag lot is proposed.
(3) Each flag lot shall abut an existing public, improved roadway,
meeting the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55d-35 by way of an access
strip which shall be owned in fee, rather than served by an
easement or right-of-way, and shall be conveyed as part of the flag
lot; such access strip shall have a width of no less than 50 feet for
its entire length and shall front upon such roadway; and such fiftyfoot-
wide access strip shall remain open and not built upon at all
times. [Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007]
(4) To avoid a continuous strip of abutting access drives, the location of
access strips to flag lots shall be spaced at a distance equal to the
minimum lot frontage in the particular zone.
(5) The entire lot shall be located only upon one side of the said access
strip.
(6) Flag lots shall not be further subdivided. [Amended 7-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 24-2007]
(7) In determining the compliance of the proposed flag lot with the
minimum area requirements set forth herein, all wetlands shall be
included in the calculation.
(8) An applicant requesting a flag lot subdivision may not own any
contiguous lot or lots which would, if combined, provide sufficient
lot frontage and width to create conforming, non-flag-type lots.
(9) Not more than one flag-type lot may be created by the subdivision.
(10) Any structure constructed on the flag-type lot shall have a
minimum front setback measured from the rear lot line of the front
lot equal to the minimum building setback for the respective zone.
Side and rear yard setbacks shall equal the minimum for the
respective zone.
(11) These standards and criteria shall not pertain to major
subdivisions. The regulations contained herein apply only to
individual, single lot subdivisions.
§ 30-130 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-130
1:406
ARTICLE XIV
Supplementary Zoning District Regulations
§ 30-131. Conversion of dwelling.
The conversion of a dwelling which is in conformity with the zoning
regulations of the district in which it is located shall be permitted as
provided in the Schedule of District Regulations subject to and in
accordance with the following provisions:
A. Within an R-5 Residence District, any single-family, detached dwelling
having at least three bedrooms may be converted by its owner to:
(1) One additional dwelling unit; or
(2) A maximum of two professional offices or one professional office
and one dwelling unit.
B. The floor area of the original dwelling shall not be enlarged, nor the
number of stories increased in connection with any dwelling unit
conversion.
C. Any dwelling unit created through conversion of an existing dwelling,
provided that:
(1) Each accessory or additional dwelling unit resulting from a
conversion shall contain at least two rooms in addition to a
complete kitchen, toilet, bathing and washing facilities.
(2) All additional dwelling units shall have minimum habitable floor
areas according to the following:
(a) One-bedroom units: 550 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom units: 700 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom units: 900 square feet.
D. No efficiency units shall be permitted. The Planning Board may permit a
greater or lesser amount of habitable floor area where, in its reasonable
opinion, such is warranted by the specific circumstances of the
particular building. In case of dwelling conversions as provided for in
Subsection C above, any new dwelling unit or professional or business
office shall not occupy more than 25% of the original dwelling floor
area.
E. There shall be no external entrance that faces a street and that is
separate from any other external entrance to any dwelling on the same
lot facing the same street, but this restriction shall not apply to two or
more entrances in existence on January 1, 1983.
F. Any additional dwelling units or professional offices shall be created
only through internal conversions except for any required fire exits or
escapes which when required shall be placed at the rear of the building,
§ 30-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-131
1:407
§ 30-132. Dumping.
No garbage, rubbish, refuse, solid or liquid wastes, tree limbs, roots or
stumps, or other waste materials, except clean soil, sand and/or gravel, or
rock deposited for the purpose of regrading or landscaping the land on
which deposited, shall be dumped, pumped or deposited in any zone district
within 500 feet of any municipal, county or state roadway or any lake,
stream, river or property line, except after issuance of a zoning permit for
such, subject to the following standards and regulations:
unless such placement interferes with necessary exit requirements. The
present existing exterior architectural design of the original dwelling
shall be maintained to preserve the single-family dwelling character of
the neighborhood.
G. Each dwelling unit, professional office or boardinghouse resulting from
a conversion shall provide parking area as provided in § 30-137 herein.
All parking areas shall be located in the side or rear yard areas
wherever possible.
H. Each room resulting from such conversion shall be of reasonable size
for the use intended and shall have adequate light and air from the
outside which complies with the Existing Structures Code, the Uniform
Construction Code and/or the requirements of the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
I. Each dwelling unit resulting from such conversion shall have safe,
adequate and convenient means of access and egress which complies
with the Existing Structures Code, the Uniform Construction Code and/
or the requirements of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq.
J. Each dwelling unit existing on the property in question shall have a
minimum of 1,000 square feet of open space for aesthetic, recreational
and related uses, which open space shall be in addition to any space
created to fulfill parking requirements established by this chapter.
A. The disposition of materials shall:
(1) Not be objectionable by reason of dust, fumes, smoke or odor or
otherwise be detrimental to the public health and safety.
(2) Not be found to cause an adverse effect on the environment.
(3) Be in accordance with the health and environmental standards and
regulations of the Board of Health and any appropriate agencies of
the New Jersey Departments of Health and Environmental
Protection.
(4) Be undertaken during normal working hours and not require the
building, construction or establishment of a road or driveway to the
dumping area.
§ 30-131 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-132
1:408
§ 30-133. Fences, walls and hedges.
(5) Not require the destruction or removal of existing trees of twentyfour-
inch caliper or larger.
(6) Conform to the performance standards contained in § 30-135 and
Article XIV of this chapter.
B. The site where the disposition of materials is made shall be
rehabilitated to its natural state through regrading and landscaping. A
plan for such rehabilitation shall be submitted in conjunction with any
site plan submitted for such proposed use. The posting of adequate
performance guaranties to assure implementation of the rehabilitation
plan shall be required.
C. An application for a zoning permit to dump or deposit materials in the
City of Millville shall be made to the Zoning Officer in accordance with
the procedures and subject to the requirements of a major site plan
application as provided in § 30-45D of this chapter.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to promote a desirable aesthetic
and visual environment in all zoning districts within the City, and to
promote the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the
commercial districts including the Central Business District.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
FENCE or WALL — A structure which permanently or temporarily
prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel between properties or between
the street or public right-of-way and the property.
HEDGE — A clustering or configuration of plant material which
permanently or temporarily prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel
between properties or between the street or public right-of-way and the
property.
C. Permits required. In all zones fences, walls and hedges may be located
within the property boundaries so long as they are authorized by a
zoning permit and do not encroach on any public right-of-way or any
adjacent property line. Further, the fence, wall or hedge cannot exceed
the height of 36 inches in the required front yard building setback area
for the zoning district in which the fence, wall or hedge is located. This
height may be increased to 48 inches where the fence is no more than
twenty-five-percent opaque. Fences, walls and hedges located along the
portions of the side property lines which are outside the required front
yard building setback area and fences, walls and hedges located along
rear property lines may not exceed six feet in height without site plan
approval from the local planning board or zoning board of adjustment.
In order to provide an avenue for the aesthetic integrity of fences, walls
or hedges, the regulations shall permit the “scalloping” of the height of
the fence, wall or hedge so that the fence, wall or hedge is not required
§ 30-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133
1:409
§ 30-134. Home occupations.
Within any LC Land Conservation or Residence District all dwelling units
with direct access to a public street or right-of-way, except apartment units,
may be used for the practice of home occupations, subject to the following:
to reduce its height from six feet to three feet immediately at the
front yard building setback line. Zoning permits shall be required for
all fences, walls and hedges covered by this subsection. Construction
permits shall be required for all fences over six feet in height.
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
D. (Reserved)54
E. Other codes. All fences, walls, and hedges shall be maintained in
accordance with Chapter 11, Bureau of Permits and Inspections, Article
XI, Property Maintenance Code,55 of the Code of the City of Millville. All
fences that serve as barriers to private and public swimming pools shall
conform to applicable state regulations and Chapter 11, Bureau of
Permits and Inspections, Article XIV, State Uniform Construction
Code.56
F. General standards. It is not the intent of this section to set forth
approved materials for the construction of fences and walls. This can be
reviewed and approved by the appropriate official or board. However,
the construction materials used shall be consistent with the aesthetic
and visual environment of the particular zoning district where the fence
or wall is to be erected. Furthermore, within the Central Business
District, construction shall conform to the extent possible with the
aesthetic and visual standards established by the streetscape
constructed by the City.
G. Agriculture. This section shall not apply to fences, walls and hedges
that are constructed to control pests and predators on farmland
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-9 of the Right to Farm Act, provided that the
construction or erection is in accordance with approved management
practices established by the State Agriculture Development Committee.
A. No home occupations shall require interior or exterior alterations of the
principal structure.
B. Home occupations shall be limited to one per principal structure and
shall be operated by a resident(s) of the dwelling unit in which it is
located.
C. No display of products shall be visible from the street, and the sale of
merchandise on the premises shall be prohibited.
54.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding site plan approval for fences, walls and
hedges, was repealed 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Art. VI.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Art. X.
§ 30-133 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-134
1:410
§ 30-135. Industrial use standards.
No use shall be permitted within the City of Millville which does not
conform to the standards of use, occupancy and operation contained in
this section. The standards contained herein are hereby established as the
minimum requirements to be maintained within the City of Millville in all
cases, except where superseded by a state or federal agency requirement
having jurisdiction.
D. No more than 20% of the principal residential structure nor more than
300 square feet of an accessory structure shall be used or occupied by
the home occupation.
E. In the case of home professional occupation as defined in § 30-4, the use
shall:
(1) Be carried on entirely within the principal structure.
(2) Not occupy more than 25% of the principal structure, except in the
case of a professional office as permitted under § 30-131A(2)
wherein the maximum area so utilized shall not exceed 50% of the
habitable floor area of the principal structure.
(3) Permit the employment of no more than one employee not living on
the premises, except in the case of professional office as provided
in § 30-131A(2) where the number of employees not living on the
premises shall not exceed two.
F. Parking spaces required to be provided in accordance with § 30-137 of
this chapter for any home occupations in addition to those required of
residential units shall not be located in any required front or side yard
areas.
G. Signs for home occupations shall be in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXIII of this chapter.
A. Noise. (See noise pollution control regulations set forth in Article VIII of
Chapter 52 of the Municipal Code.) [Amended 8-17-2004 by Ord. No.
23-2004]
B. Odor. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous material shall be
permitted in such quantity as to be offensive at the lot lines or beyond.
C. Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building so that no operation
will produce heat or glare beyond the property line of the lot on which
the operation is located.
D. Radiation. No activity involving ionizing radiation shall be permitted
which will cause radiation at any point on or beyond any lot line in
excess of limits contained in the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's Rules and Regulations as amended from time to time.
§ 30-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-135
1:411
E. Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible without
instruments at any point on or beyond any lot line on which the use is
located.
F. Smoke. There shall be no emission of smoke from any source whatever
to a density greater than that prescribed by the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
G. Toxic or noxious matter. No use shall, for any period of time, discharge
any toxic or noxious matter in such concentration as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or cause
injury or damage to property, business, marine life or wildlife.
H. Dust or dirt. No emission which can cause any detrimental effect on
human beings, animals, vegetation or property or which can cause an
excessive soiling at any point, and in no event any emission from any
chimney or otherwise of any solid or liquid particles shall be permitted
in excess of that prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
I. Fire and explosion hazard. All industrial activities shall be carried on in
such a manner and with such precaution against fire and explosion
hazards as to produce no explosion hazard, as determined by state or
local officers, to a use on an adjacent property. Free- or active-burning
materials shall be enclosed with noncombustible walls and shall be set
back at least 40 feet from any lot line or shall be protected with
automatic sprinklers. Materials or products which produce flammable
or explosive vapors under ordinary weather temperatures shall be
adequately safeguarded.
J. Liquid or solid waste.
(1) No discharge at any point into any private sewage disposal system
stream or into the ground or any materials in such way or of such
nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or
otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable
elements shall be permitted except in accordance with the
standards approved by the County Board of Health and the State
Department of Health where it has jurisdiction; or, in the event that
such standards as may be required for controls are not included in
such department, then standards equivalent to those shall apply.
No accumulation of solid waste conducive to the breeding of
rodents and insects shall be permitted, and no materials or wastes
shall be deposited upon any lot in such form or manner or quantity
as may be transferred off that lot by natural causes or forces.
(2) Effluent from a treatment plan shall at all times comply with the
following standards:
(a) Maximum quantity of effluent shall be 10% of the minimum
daily stream of flow.
§ 30-135 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-135
1:412
§ 30-136. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading requirements and maneuvering space shall be provided
for the loading and unloading of vehicles on the lot on which is located the
use for which the loading space is required as set forth herein:
(b) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand shall be 25
parts per million.
(c) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand after dilution
(BOD of effluent multiplied by quantity divided by quantity of
stream flow) shall be 25 parts per million.
(d) Maximum total solids shall be 5,000 parts per million.
(e) Maximum phenol shall be 0.01 part per million.
(f) No effluent shall contain any other acids, oils, dust, toxic
metals or corrosive or other toxic substances in solution or
suspension which would create odor, poison or otherwise
pollute any stream in violation of applicable laws of the State of
New Jersey.
K. Electromagnetic interference. No activities shall be permitted, except
domestic household appliance use, which produce electromagnetic
interference in excess of standards prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
L. Buffer zones. Any permitted industrial use located adjacent to a district
boundary line shall observe a building line setback of 200 feet from the
district boundary line. This area shall constitute a buffer zone that may
be utilized only for Planning Board approved uses.
A. A minimum of one space per nonresidential use shall be provided,
except that, where more than one use shall be located in one building or
where multiple uses are designed as part of a self-contained complex,
the number of loading spaces shall be based on the cumulative number
of square feet within the building or complex and shall be dispersed
throughout the site to best serve the individual uses.
B. There shall be at least one central point for trash/garbage pickup in
multifamily and nonresidential uses which shall be separate from
parking and loading areas by locating such facility either within a
building or outside the building in totally enclosed metal container(s),
obscured from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent
residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or
combination of the three. If located within the building, doorway(s) may
serve both the loading and trash/garbage collection functions. If a
container is used outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or
within the general loading area(s), provided that the container or
containers do not interfere with or restrict in any manner loading and
unloading functions.
§ 30-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-136
1:413
C. The minimum number of loading spaces required shall be:
(1) Funeral homes: one space per 2,500 square feet of floor area.
Dimensions of a loading space may be reduced to 33 feet by 12 feet.
(2) Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes and sanitoria: one
space per 10,000 square feet of floor area and exclusion of any
emergency vehicle loading space.
(3) Retail stores: one space for every 4,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(4) Office uses: one space for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(5) Warehousing, indoor storage, shipping and receiving: one space for
every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Research, testing, laboratory, manufacturing and assembly: one
space for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(7) Public and quasi-public office buildings: none.
(8) Schools, philanthropic institutions, assembly halls: one space for
every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
D. Within the B-3 Central Business District, the Planning Board may waive
the requirement for off-street loading space where constraints of land
and access do not make provision of same feasible in the reasonable
opinion of the Planning Board. Wherever possible such loading space
shall be provided.
E. Where any use is located on a tract of at least 50 acres and no portion of
a loading area, including maneuvering areas, is closer than 200 feet to
any property line and where the length of the driveway connecting the
loading area to the street is at least 300 feet, the number of off-street
loading spaces may be fewer than the number required by the above
schedule, provided that the applicant, as part of the site plan
application, shall indicate on the site plan and shall document to the
approving authority that the number of spaces to be provided will be
adequate to meet the needs of the specific use proposed.
F. The conformance for any use requiring loading facilities shall remain
valid so long as such facilities are provided and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) They shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists
which the facilities are designed to serve; and
(2) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
delivery and pickup vehicles that they are designed to serve.
§ 30-136 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-136
1:414
§ 30-137. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
G. Access to loading space shall be provided directly from a public street
or alley or from any right-of-way that will not interfere with public
convenience, and that will permit orderly and safe movement of truck
vehicles.
H. Loading space(s) as required under this section shall be provided as
area in addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered
as supplying off-street parking.
I. Off-street loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced with a dustless,
durable, all-weather pavement, which shall be adequately drained, all
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
J. Any use which can reasonably be expected to have a number of trucks
making deliveries or pickups on a daily basis which may require delays
in order to make such delivery or pickup shall, in addition to any
required loading space, provide a truck waiting or standing area in
order to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets or
alleys.
A. Purpose. This section sets minimum standards for off-street
requirements for new construction and expansion of or changes to
existing uses. The purpose of this section is to ensure that uses have a
minimum level of off-street parking to avoid congestions on
surrounding streets while avoiding excessive parking which dries up
the cost of development, invites excessive levels of traffic congestion
and creates increases in flooding and nonpoint source pollution. The
parking ratios contained herein reflect the City's commitment to reduce
its impact on the environmental and natural resources as outlined in the
Environmental Sustainability Element of the Master Plan. The parking
standards advance the goal of reducing runoff volume and providing
water quality benefits.
B. General applicability. The minimum parking ratio standards apply to all
zoning districts except the B-3 Central Business District. The Zoning
Officer shall determine the parking requirement for uses that do not
correspond to the categories listed in the Parking Standards Table.57 In
such instances the applicant shall provide adequate information as
requested by the Zoning Officer in order to make a determination.
C. Multiple uses. Where the application identifies accessory or multiple
uses within a structure or multiple structures, the minimum standards
shall apply to each use or structure. This does not apply to shared
parking.
57.Editor's Note: See § 30-137F.
§ 30-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-137
1:415
D. Shared parking. Parking spaces required by this section may be
provided cooperatively for two or more uses in a development or for two
or more individual uses, subject to the requirements of this section and
the following conditions:
(1) The off-site, off-street parking facilities are within 300 feet of the
property.
(2) The parking demands of the individual uses, based upon the
minimum parking requirements of this section, are such that the
total parking demand of all the uses at any one time is less than the
total parking stalls required.
(3) A written agreement between the owners and lessees is executed
for a minimum of five years and a copy of said agreement is
maintained in the Planning office. The Planning Board shall be
notified when any agreement is canceled or expires. Should the
lease terminate, the lessee must return to the Planning Board with
a revised parking plan.
E. Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking spaces shall be required for all
nonresidential uses and structures. One bicycle parking space shall be
required for each 20 parking spaces. Such spaces may be provided
through bicycle storage racks or other fixtures securely affixed to the
ground.
F. Parking ratios. The following table establishes the minimum number of
parking spaces required for the uses indicated:
Parking Requirements
Use Number of Spaces
Residential
Dwelling conversion 2 per unit
Multifamily dwellings 1.75 per unit
Duplexes, twin houses 2 per unit
Senior citizen multifamily 1 per 3 units
Rooming houses 1 per 3 beds plus 1 for owner/
manager
Nursing homes 0.3 per room; 1 per 4 employees
Assisted living facilities 0.3 per room; 1 per 4 employees
Commercial and Retail Uses
Hotels 0.8 per room plus 1 per 800
square feet of public meeting area
and restaurant space plus 1 per 2
employees
Bed-and-breakfast inn 1 per guest room plus 2 spaces for
owner
§ 30-137 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-137
1:416
§ 30-138. Outdoor storage.
Parking Requirements
Use Number of Spaces
Restaurants 1 per 3 seats
Bars, taverns and nightclubs 1 per 2 seats
Fast-food restaurants 1 per 150 square feet of GFA
Drive-through food service 1 per 250 square feet of GFA and
the ability to stack 8 cars
Supermarkets 1 per 250 square feet of GFA
Department store, standalone 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Neighborhood or regional
shopping center
4 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Retail stores 1 per 250 square feet of GFA
Big-box retail stores 1 per 500 square feet of GFA
Convenience stores 3 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Warehouse 1 per 7,500 square feet of GFA
Office or bank building 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Professional or medical offices 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Industrial
Industrial buildings/
manufacturing plants
1 per 500 square feet of GFA
Recycling, demolition 1 per employee
Construction-related uses 1 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Institutional and Community Facilities
Hospitals 1 per 6 seats or 1 per 100 square
foot of GFA
Movie theaters 1 per 6 seats or 1 per 100 square
feet of GFA
Amusement or theme parks,
sports, recreation
If no permanent seats, 1 per 2
employees
Library 1 per 500 square feet of GFA
Schools/kindergarten through
grade 12
1 per faculty and other employees,
and 1 per 10 auditorium seats
Schools/colleges and other
secondary schools
1 per faculty and other employees
Child-care facilities/day care 1 per 500 square feet of GFA
Churches 1 per 8 seats
§ 30-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-138
1:417
§ 30-139. Swimming pools.
The following standards and regulations shall apply to swimming pools:
A. Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage
is normally incidental to the permitted use or structure and part of the
normal operations or business conducted on the premises. All outdoor
storage shall be subject to the requirements of the prevailing zoning
district, including setbacks, area and coverage requirements, and shall
be screened as provided for in § 30-155 from any property used or
zoned for residential purposes or whenever required by the Planning
Board in order to eliminate or reduce an adverse effect or impairment
of visual or aesthetic scenes or vistas.
B. No front yard of a residential property shall be used for the parking or
open storage of boats, campers, private passenger motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles or equipment, except for the parking of motor
vehicles on driveways or designated parking areas improved to the
standards required by municipal regulations. [Amended 12-7-2004
by Ord. No. 42-2004]
C. No residential property shall be used for the parking or open storage of
more than one motor vehicle in any of the following conditions: 1)
without current license plates and registration; or 2) in a mechanically
inoperable condition; or 3) in an obvious condition of disrepair.
[Amended 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004]
D. No residential property shall be used for the parking or open storage of
commercial motor vehicles or commercial equipment, including, for
example, omnibuses, school buses, dump trucks, tractor-trailers, snow
plows and the like. [Added 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004]
E. Any motor vehicle or equipment which is parked or stored in violation of
this section shall be removed by the owner or occupant of a residential
property within three days when requested to do so by the Zoning
Officer. The failure to comply with the request of the Zoning Officer
shall constitute a separate violation for each day the motor vehicle or
equipment remains beyond the deadline for removal. [Added
12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004]
A. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. [Amended 7-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 24-2007; 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
(1) Open pools, hot tubs and spas in excess of 24 inches deep or having
the ability to hold 24 inches of water or more and either below
grade or above grade shall be considered as accessory uses for the
purpose of zoning and building permits and regulations. For the
purpose of this chapter, swimming pools, spas and hot tubs,
exclusive of patio area, shall not be considered in lot coverage
calculations. Setbacks for swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall
comply with the setbacks in the Schedules of District Regulations.58
§ 30-138 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-139
1:418
(2) Swimming pool, spa and hot tub enclosures shall comply with
Section 3109 of the International Building Code in effect at the time
of the submission of the permit.
(3) All swimming pools shall be provided with a filtering system
utilizing chlorinated water, meeting New Jersey State Department
of Health requirements or standards.
(4) All swimming pools shall drain in conformance to a system
approved by the City Engineer.
B. Semipublic and public swimming pools and swimming clubs.
Semipublic and public swimming pools and swimming clubs operated
on a nonprofit, annual membership basis shall be permitted as
indicated in the Schedules of District Regulations, provided that:
(1) Proof is furnished to the Zoning Officer that the proposed use is a
bona fide nonprofit activity organized solely for the use and
enjoyment of the membership.
(2) The parcel involved in the use shall contain at least three acres and
shall have 200 feet of highway frontage.
(3) No more than a total of 20% of the lot shall be covered by
structures, paved parking areas and the pool together with its
adjoining hard-surfaced areas.
(4) No part of the pool, accompanying hard-surfaced area or other
supporting structures or activity area shall be located within 75
feet of a property line, or less than 300 feet from the nearest
dwelling.
(5) The maximum membership of the club shall be fixed at the time of
application and shall be commensurate with the size of the parcel
and the scale and facilities contemplated. No expansion of the
membership shall take place subsequently without supplemental
application to and approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(6) Any pool established in connection with public swimming clubs
shall be constructed and operated according to the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 through 26:3-69.6, as amended and supplemented.
The above-mentioned regulations, commonly known as the
"Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey, 1970," is hereby adopted by
reference. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text thereof.
(7) All pools shall be surrounded on all sides by a yard 25 feet in width,
exclusive of parking area.
(8) All pools shall have permanent and direct access to a public street.
58.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-139
1:419
§ 30-140. Farm irrigation, drainage or industrial ponds.
The following regulations and standards shall apply to all farm (irrigation),
drainage or industrial ponds within any zoning district within the City of
Millville:
§ 30-140.1. Transfer of development credits.59 [Added 3-7-2006 by
Ord. No. 8-2006]
Where the transfer of development credits from noncontiguous parcels is
permitted within a zoning district, the process of determining the number of
credits, restriction of use after the transfer, recording of such transfer and
other provisions shall meet the requirements of this section.
(9) All pools shall be surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height,
the entrance to which shall be kept locked when an attendant is not
present.
(10) All lot boundaries shall be screened in accordance with the
screening provisions of § 30-155 of this chapter.
(11) Adequate parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 30-137 and 30-171 of this chapter.
A. All such ponds shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to
avoid steep slopes or embankments.
B. Where such ponds are located within 100 feet of a residential use, other
than the residence of the farmer on whose land the pond is located,
shall have appropriate fencing around the man-made pond when
required by the Planning Board. Such fencing shall be not less than four
feet in height and shall have adequate safeguards to prevent access to
the pond.
C. Specific drainage requirements as set forth herein this chapter or other
applicable ordinances or regulations shall be applicable to such manmade
ponds where determined by the Planning Board to be necessary
to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
A. The transfer of development credits to a noncontiguous parcel shall be
for residential purposes only.
B. The number of development credits that may be transferred from a
parcel shall be equal to the gross land area multiplied by the base
zoning density or residential cluster density specific to the zoning
district, at the option of the applicant. All land used in the
establishment and transfer of development credits shall be located
within the City of Millville.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 30-140.1, Uses granted special status, the first section in Art. XV,
Specially Protected Uses, was repealed 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006.
§ 30-139 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-140.1
1:420
C. Application for the development transfer option shall be made in
conjunction with a general development plan application that includes
all or part of a village node as depicted on the Land Use Plan of the
Master Plan, dated May 9, 2005, as it may be amended or superseded.
D. Recording of development easement. A development easement shall be
placed on all lands under which a noncontiguous transfer of credits is
approved by the Board of Jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of this
section. The development easement shall prevent the further
development of the parcel, except as may be permitted pursuant to
Subsection G herein, and shall be subject to the review and approval of
the City Attorney or designee prior to recording with the office of the
Cumberland County Clerk. The credits shall have been deemed
established at the time of recording of the development easement.
E. Use of credits. Credits from restricted land may be applied to areas
proposed for residential development within a planned unit
development or planned unit residential development to increase the
density of development, provided that net residential densities are not
exceeded. One credit shall equal one residential dwelling unit.
F. Record of transfers. The Tax Assessor shall mark each transfer of
credits from the sending parcel to the receiving parcel in a record of
transfers. The record of transfers shall include the block and lot
number(s) to which credits shall be transferred from and to the
respective landowners and their addresses, the transferring entity, and
the use of credits by date, number, and any other information deemed
pertinent by the Administrative Officer or designee. The record of
transfer shall be a public record. The Tax Assessor shall so record the
transaction in the record of transfer and annually provide a copy to the
Community Development Office, or designee, to be kept on file.
G. Use of land after transfer. Property from which development credits
have been transferred shall be deed restricted to the following allowed
uses:
(1) Common open space maintained by homeowners' association
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(2) Public open space dedicated to a government, governmental
agency or land trust.
(3) Golf course, in accordance with the standards of § 30-213. Any golf
course shall be deed restricted from further development, except
for accessory building, structures and uses as otherwise permitted.
Such deed restriction shall contain a reversion clause whereby the
use shall be converted to agriculture, conservation or open space in
the event of a cessation in operations.
(4) Agricultural use.
§ 30-140.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-140.1
1:421
(5) Permissible improvements allowed in conjunction with the
principal use of Subsections B(1) through B(2):
(a) Playground and recreation equipment, athletic fields, nature
and fitness trails with ancillary parking and restroom facilities.
(b) Equipment and maintenance building not exceeding 1,000
square feet in area.
(c) Installation of underground utilities and stormwater
management facilities due solely to open space and
agricultural use improvements.
(d) Widening of existing street right-of-way by governmental
agency.
(6) Permissible improvements allowed in conjunction with an
agricultural use:
(a) Farmstead.
(b) Buildings to house agricultural equipment and supplies,
livestock and crops.
(c) Corrals and pens.
(d) Windmills for water supply and irrigation.
§ 30-140.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-140.1
1:422
ARTICLE XV
Specially Protected Uses
§ 30-141. Airports and heliports.
Under the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983, the State Commissioner of
Transportation has mapped areas around licensed public airports which
are considered to be airport hazard areas. The Municipal Land Use Law
requires that these airport hazard areas be shown on the land use plan
element of the Master Plan. Additionally, the standards adopted by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation governing permitted uses and
heights of structures within designated airport hazard areas is incorporated
by reference. The state regulations allow for a variance procedure after
municipal approvals have been obtained. See N.J.A.C. 16:61-6.1 et seq.
§ 30-142. Cemeteries.
Cemeteries must conform with both municipal and state standards pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 8A:3-1. Additionally, state law requires that the governing body
of the City consent to a new cemetery or the enlargement of an existing one.
Thus, approval by the governing body and the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment will be necessary.
§ 30-143. Child-care centers and family day-care homes.
§ 30-144. Community residences for developmentally disabled and
similar homes.
Community residences for the developmentally disabled are licensed
facilities which provide services to no more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons. Community shelters for victims of domestic
violence and residences for persons with head injuries are also covered by
A. Under the Child Care Center Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.,
child-care centers are facilities for six or more children and must be
licensed by the State Department of Human Services. The Municipal
Land Use Law requires that child-care centers be permitted in all
nonresidential zones. The state adopted mandatory standards for the
general location of child-care centers, as well as minimum standards for
the physical plant and facilities, food staff, sanitation and outdoor
recreational space. See N.J.A.C. 10:122-1 et seq. The Municipal Land
Use Law requires that child-care centers be exempt from parking and
density standards which otherwise apply to nonresidential uses.
B. Family day-care homes are residences approved by the Division of
Youth and Family Services. These homes provide day-care services to
between three and five children on a weekly basis. The Municipal Land
Use Law requires that family day-care homes be permitted in all
residential zones and be subject to the same standards which apply to
single-family dwellings.
§ 30-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-144
1:423
the Municipal Land Use Law. All of these facilities are permitted uses in all
residential zones, provided the occupancy does not exceed 15 persons.
§ 30-145. Condominiums and cooperatives.
The Municipal Land Use Law requires that buildings to be occupied in the
condominium or cooperative form of ownership be subject to the same site
plan, subdivision and design standards applicable to similar buildings in
other forms of ownership.
§ 30-146. Farms.
The Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq. preempts municipal land
use authority over commercial farms where agriculture is a permitted use
under the municipal Zoning Ordinance as of December 31, 1997. Primary
jurisdiction to regulate agricultural management practices rests with the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) or the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC). Those entities must consider the limitations imposed by
local land use and Zoning Ordinances adopted pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law in connection with issues related to public health and safety.
§ 30-147. Groundwater remediation facilities.
Structures and equipment needed to remove or treat groundwater pollution
are mandatory accessory uses in all zoning districts pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law. Although site plan review may not be required,
municipalities may adopt reasonable siting standards.
§ 30-148. Manufactured housing.
Manufactured housing is housing built in sections which are transported
to the site, installed on a permanent foundation and are manufactured in
accordance with federal and state codes. The Municipal Land Use Law
requires that manufactured housing be subject to the same standards as
similar uses, provided that the home is a minimum of 22 feet in width,
installed on a permanent foundation and the same person owns the home
and the lot on which the home is located.
§ 30-149. Schools.
Municipalities have the right to determine through zoning where schools
will be permitted. However, once that decision is made, a school board
is not required to conform with municipal site plan or design standards.
Rather, the new school must comply with standards adopted by the State
Board of Education. Where public schools are permitted by zoning, the
Municipal Land Use Law requires that private nonprofit schools also shall
be permitted.
§ 30-150. Utilities and cable television.
§ 30-144 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-150
1:424
A. Public utilities are not exempt from local zoning and land use
requirements. However, utilities have a special right of appeal to the
state Board of Public Utilities who can override local zoning if it finds
that the proposed use is necessary for the service, convenience or
welfare of the public.
B. Cable television companies are not exempt from local zoning and land
use requirements. However, cable television companies have a special
right of appeal to the Office of Cable Television.
§ 30-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150
1:425

ARTICLE XVI
General Site Improvement Standards
§ 30-151. Applicability.
The provisions and performance standards set forth in this article shall
apply to all development within the City as provided in the Schedules of
District Regulations and this chapter.
§ 30-152. Satisfaction of standards required.
The following provisions and standards shall be addressed and satisfied in
connection with development review and approval.
§ 30-153. Air quality.
No use governed by state and federal air quality regulations shall emit heat,
odor, vibrations, noise or any other pollutant into the air which exceeds
the most stringent requirements of the applicable state or federal
requirements.
§ 30-154. Blocks.
§ 30-155. Buffers and screening.
Whenever buffers or screening are required as provided by this chapter
or as a condition imposed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, it shall be installed in accordance with the following standards
and requirements:
A. The length, width and acreage of street blocks shall be sufficient to
accommodate the size lot required in the zone district in which it is to
be located and to provide for convenient access, circulation control, and
traffic study.
B. Blocks over 1,000 feet in length within residential areas shall be
discouraged, but where they are used, pedestrian crosswalks or
bikeways between lots may be required in locations deemed necessary
by the Planning Beard. No block within a residential area shall exceed
1,500 feet in length.
C. Within commercial and industrial areas, block lengths shall be
sufficient to meet area and yard requirements for such uses and to
provide proper street access and circulation.
A. Buffer areas shall require site plan review and are required along all lot
lines and street lines which separate a nonresidential use from either
an existing residential use or residential zoning district. Buffer areas
shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the primary purpose of
screening views and reducing noise perception beyond the lot. No
structure, use, activity, storage of materials, stormwater management
facility or parking of vehicles shall be permitted within a buffer area,
§ 30-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155
1:427
except as may be permitted within an individual zoning district. This
provision shall not be construed to prevent driveways and walkways
between the street and the use within the site or utilities providing
service to such use. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
B. The standards for the location and design of buffer areas are intended
to provide flexibility in order to provide effective buffers. The location
and design of buffers shall consider the use of the portion of the
property being screened, the distance between the use and the
adjoining property line, differences in elevations, the type of buffer such
as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or fence, buffer height, buffer
width, and other combinations of man-made and natural features. The
buffer shall be designed, planted, graded, landscaped and developed
with the general guideline that the closer a use or activity is to a
property line, or the more intense the activity is to a property line, or
the more intense the use, then the more effective the buffer area must
be in obscuring light and vision and reducing noise beyond the edges of
the lot. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
C. All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with either grass or
ground cover together with a screen of live shrubs or scattered
plantings of live trees, shrubs, or other plant material meeting the
following standards:
(1) The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an integral
part of all site plans and may be calculated as part of the buffer
area, provided that the growth is of a density and the area has
sufficient width to serve the purpose of a buffer. Where additional
plantings are necessary to establish an appropriate tone for an
effective buffer, the plantings shall conform to the Subsection A
herein;
(2) Plant material used in screen planting shall be at least three feet in
height when planted and be of such density as will obscure,
throughout the full course of the year, the glare of vehicle
headlights emitted from the premises;
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be
closer than three feet from any street or property line;
(4) Trees shall be at least eight feet in height and 14 inches in caliper
when planted, free of disease and insect pests, and approved stock
as required by the City Shade Tree Commission;
(5) Any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within one
year or one growing season; and
(6) Screen plantings and landscaping shall be broken at points of
vehicle and pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clear sight
triangle at all street and driveway intersections.
§ 30-155 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-155
1:428
§ 30-156. Concrete structures.
D. Constructed screening shall consist of a masonry wall or barrier or a
uniformly painted fence of one material highly resistant to weather
conditions or decay and at least six feet in height, no more than eight
feet above finished grade at the point of construction. Such wall, barrier
or fence may be opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50%
of its area is open.
E. Required minimum buffer widths. The minimum buffer widths shall be
determined through the application of the existing and proposed land
uses as indicated in the Required Minimum Buffer Widths Table.60
Buffers shall not be required for uses in the B-3 District; however, walls
or fences may be required in accordance with Subsection D at the
discretion of the Board of Jurisdiction to meet the purposes of this
section. [Added 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
F. Relationship of buffers to pervious coverage and open space. Buffers
shall be considered pervious coverage in the determination of lot
coverage. Buffers shall count towards any required open space
percentage, provided they otherwise meet the dimensional standards
for such open space. [Added 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
G. Reverse frontage buffer for residential uses. Reverse frontage
screening shall be required where residential units or lots back onto
any arterial or major collector street, as indicated on the Circulation
Plan of the City. The following landscape treatments shall be provided
in order to screen private residential spaces from the roadway. [Added
1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
(1) A landscape buffer of 25 feet in width shall be provided. Such
landscaped buffer width shall be in addition to the required rear
yard depth.
(2) The preservation of existing trees in excess of eight inches is
encouraged. Where existing understory screening does not block at
least 60% of the view from the street, supplemental shade-tolerant
plantings of shrubs, evergreen and ornamental trees shall be
installed to complete screening of residences. Sidewalks shall be
designed to avoid mature plantings even if a public access
easement outside of the right-of-way is necessary.
A. Concrete structures shall conform to the American Society for Testing
Materials, cement designations C-150, Type 1 for standard portland
cement; C-150, Type 3 for high early strength portland cement; and
C-175, Type 1-A for air-entraining portland cement. Vinsol resin or
Darex A.E.A. shall be used as the air-entraining agent, and both fine and
coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements therefor of the
60.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-156
1:429
New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, as
amended and supplemented.
B. The following standards shall be met unless modified by the City
Engineer:
(1) Unless otherwise specified, all concrete shall be air entrained,
having 4% to 7% entrained air.
(2) Concrete shall be Class A, B, C or D (see Chart 1).
(3) Required reinforcing steel shall be intermediate grade deformed
bars conforming to American Society for Testing Materials,
designation A-15 and A-305, as amended and supplemented.
(4) Required joint filler shall be a cellular compression material
conforming to the requirements therefor of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, as
amended and supplemented.
(5) In the construction of required concrete structures, the City
Engineer will determine the slump range within which the
contractor may work. Transit mix concrete may be used if obtained
from sources approved by the City Engineer. On-site mixing and
proportioning equipment will also be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
(6) Forms shall conform to lines, dimensions and grades shown on
plans and may only be omitted when soil conditions and
workmanship permit accurate excavation to specifications. Forms
shall be firmly braced, tight and capable of resisting movement,
bulging or mortar leakage. Forms shall be smooth and clear and
shall be completely removed.
(7) Soil base for concrete work shall be properly finished to prescribed
lines, grades and dimensions and shall be approved by the City
Engineer or his representative before concrete is placed. All areas
to receive concrete shall be free of frost, foreign matter and
excessive water, except that soil surface and forms shall be
uniformly damp when concrete is placed. All concrete shall be
handled and placed so as to avoid segregation. Concrete that has
begun to set or has been contaminated with foreign materials or
that has too much water shall not be used. Pouring shall be done in
a continuous process until an individual section is completed. All
concrete shall be thoroughly compacted with vibrator or suitable
equipment. Finished concrete shall have a wood-float finish unless
specified by the City Engineer and shall be kept continuously moist
for a period of three days. Curing shall be accomplished at the
discretion of the City Engineer. Expansion joints shall be provided
as prescribed and shall extend the full thickness of the concrete.
Concrete shall not be poured when the temperature is below 40º F.
or during periods of precipitation unless precautions acceptable to
§ 30-156 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-156
1:430
§ 30-157. Curbs and gutters.
the City Engineer have been taken to prevent damage to the work.
Precautions to avoid freezing of the concrete shall be in accordance
with the current recommendations of the American Concrete
Institute.
A. The standard monolithic concrete curb and gutter will be required
along the pavement edge of streets in conformance with the
improvement standards as defined and shown in Diagrams 1 through 3,
Typical Roadway Sections and Details, and Diagram 4, Standard
Details — Curb and Gutter, which are hereby made a part of this
chapter. At the discretion of the Planning Board upon advice of the City
Engineer, roll-type curb may be permitted along local street in
conformance with the improvement standards defined and shown in the
aforementioned Diagrams 1 through 3, Typical Roadway Sections and
Details, and Diagram 4, Standard Detail — Curb and Gutter, which are
a part of this chapter. Concrete shall be Class B.61
CHART 1
Class Cement Sand
Concrete
Standards
Coarse
Aggregate
Void
Contract
A 1 1.50 3.0 1.35
B 1 1.75 3.5 1.55
C 1 2.00 4.0 1.80
D 1 2.25 4.5 2.00
B. Expansion joints shall be provided at intervals of 20 feet or when new
construction abuts existing construction. The expansion joints shall be
filled with one-half-inch thick cellular material conforming to the
requirements therefor contained in the Standard Specifications of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation, as amended to date, to
within 1/2 inch of the top and face of the curb and to within 1/4 inch of
the top of the gutter. All joints shall extend the full depth of the
structure.
C. Finished curbs and gutters shall be true to applicable grades, lines,
dimensions, and curvatures. Exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a
one-half-inch radius. Completed work shall be protected from traffic
and the elements and shall be kept moist for at least three days.
Damaged, broken or cracked work shall be renewed by the contractor
at his expense.
61.Editor's Note: These diagrams are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 30-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-158
1:431
§ 30-158. Customer service areas.
Any site plan that provides temporary stopping space for vehicles of
customers or patrons seeking service at a roadside business establishment,
such as a roadway grocery or farm market produce stand, gasoline service
station, drive-in bank, fast food take-out window, or similar uses, shall
ensure that the stopping or maneuvering space is at least 10 feet removed
from the right-of-way line of the road.
§ 30-159. Development name.
The proposed name of any development shall not duplicate, or too closely
approximate, the name of any other development or locality in or in close
proximity to the City. The Planning Board shall have final authority to
designate the name of the development which shall be determined at the
preliminary stage of development review.
§ 30-160. Energy conservation.
A. Whenever and wherever feasible, buildings shall be sited so as to make
maximum use of sunlight or winds in connection with energy
generation and/or conservation. All buildings and structures
hereinafter erected or constructed, altered or added onto shall use
renewable energy sources, with the limits of practicability and
feasibility dependent on the proposed use of the structure and its
location. Where an applicant can demonstrate that literal enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter will prevent or substantially impair or
reduce energy conservation methods or technologies, the approval
authority may waive or adjust the standards, including, through
variance procedures as set forth in § 30-94, maximum and minimum
yard dimensions as shown on the Schedules of District Regulations. In
so doing, the approval authority shall determine that the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the adopted Master Plan are met, and that
adjoining properties and/or their environment will not be adversely
affected by the waiver, adjustment or variance.
B. In the case of new developments, the majority of all structures in the
development shall have their long axis located within 30º of true South.
C. Wherever plantings are proposed or required as provided under the
provisions of this chapter, no plantings of trees, shrubs or any object
shall be permitted which will result in shading or interfering with solar
access to the south wall of any proposed or existing building. When
reviewing proposed landscaping for any proposed development, the
approving authority shall not require or permit, where reasonably able
to do so, any planting or the placement of an object or structure which
will substantially interfere with solar access to adjacent buildings or
existing solar devices or structures.
§ 30-158 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-161
1:432
§ 30-161. Fire protection.
In order to provide fire protection to new developments the following
standards shall apply:
§ 30-162. Frontage.
§ 30-163. Handicapped access.
All uses and/or structures intended for use by the public or to which public
access will be permitted shall comply with all state and federal regulations
concerning access by and provisions for facilities for the handicapped
including provisions of sufficient handicapped parking areas in close
proximity to the use(s) they are intended to serve.
§ 30-164. Homeowners' association.
A homeowners' association may, or in some cases, be required to be
established for the purpose of owning and assuming maintenance
responsibilities for the common open space and common lands or property
designed within a development, provided that the Planning Board is
satisfied that the organization will have a sufficient number of members to
reasonably expect a perpetuation of the organization in a manner enabling
it to meet its obligations and responsibilities in owning and maintaining
A. All dead-end roads will terminate in an area adequate to provide
ingress and egress for fire-fighting equipment.
B. The rights-of-way of all roads will be maintained so that they provide an
effective fire break.
C. All proposed developments of 25 units or more will have two
accessways to public rights-of-way and the accessways shall be of such
width and surface composition sufficient to accommodate and support
fire-fighting equipment.
D. Wherever a central water supply system will serve a development,
provision shall be made for fire hydrants along the streets, driveways
and/or on the walls of nonresidential structures as approved by the City
Fire Department or other appropriate fire official, the City Engineer
and in accordance with fire insurance rating organization standards.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot having frontage on a
public street, either improved to City specifications and standards, or
for which the improvements have been ensured by the posting of a
performance guaranty as provided in this chapter.
B. Where a building or lot has frontage upon a street which is shown on an
adopted Master Plan or Official Map of the City and which street is
proposed for right-of-way widening, the required front yard area shall
be measured from such proposed right-of-way line(s).
§ 30-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-164
1:433
any property for the benefit of owners or residents of the development. If
established, the organization shall incorporate the following provisions:
A. Membership by all property owners, condominium owners,
stockholders under a cooperative development and other owners of
property or interests in the project shall be mandatory. Required
membership and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in
writing between the organization and each member in the form of a
convenant with each agreeing to liability for his/her pro rata share of
the organization's costs.
B. The organization shall be responsible for liability insurance, taxes,
maintenance and any other obligations assumed by the organization,
and shall hold the municipality harmless from any liability. The
organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space or property by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space or
property for the benefit of such development, and thereafter such
organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space or
property without first offering to dedicate the same to the municipality
or municipalities wherein the land is located.
C. The assessment levied by the organization upon each member may
become a lien on each member's property. The organization shall be
allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs.
D. The organization shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, including a copy of the covenant,
model deeds and Articles of Incorporation of the organization and the
fact that every tenant and property owner shall have the right to use all
common properties. These shall be set forth as a condition of approval
and shall be submitted prior to the granting of final approval by the
Planning Board.
E. The Articles of Incorporation, covenants, bylaws, model deeds, and
other legal instruments shall ensure that control of the organization
shall be transferred to the members based on a percentage of the
dwelling units sold and/or occupied and shall clearly indicate that in the
event such organization shall fail to maintain the common open space
or common property or lands in reasonable order and condition, the
City may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
owners of the development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the common open space or common
property or lands in reasonable condition, and the notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 15 days
thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which
shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing, the
designated municipal body or officer, as the case may be, may modify
the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a
reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 65 days within which they
shall be cured.
§ 30-164 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-164
1:434
§ 30-165. Landscaping and shade trees.
F. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification
thereof shall not be cured within 15 days, or any permitted extension
thereof, the City, in order to preserve the common open space and
common property or land and maintain the same for a period of one
year, may enter upon and maintain such land. The entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common
open space and common property and land, except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration
of the year, the City shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common open space and common property of land, call a public hearing
upon 15 days written notice to such organization and to the owners of
the development, to be held by the City at which hearing such
organization and the owners of the development shall show cause why
such maintenance by the municipality shall not, at the election of the
City, continue for a succeeding year.
G. If the municipality shall determine that such organization is ready and
able to maintain the open space and property or land in reasonable
condition, the municipality shall cease to maintain the open space and
property or lands at the end of the year. If the City shall determine such
organization is not ready and able to maintain the open space and
property or land in reasonable condition, the City may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain the open space and property or land during the
next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination in
each year thereafter. The decision of the City in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
H. The cost of such maintenance by the City shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and property of land in
accordance with assessed values at the time of imposition of the lien,
and shall be a lien and tax on the properties and be added to and be part
of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and
collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as
other taxes.
A. All shade trees shall have a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches
measured three feet above the ground and shall be of a species
approved by the approval authority or City Shade Tree Commission.
Trees shall be planted 40 feet to 60 feet apart and parallel to but not
more than 20 feet from the curbline and shall be balled and burlapped,
nursery grown, free from insects and disease and true to species and
variety. Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall
not be permitted unless it can be shown that grading requirements
necessitate removal of trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted
with trees to reestablish the tone of the area to conform with adjacent
§ 30-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-165
1:435
lots. Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the developer during the
next recommended planting season.
B. Off-street parking areas located in commercial or industrial zones
which comprise parking for 25 or more vehicles shall be provided with
living shade trees of a type or types as approved by the City Shade Tree
Commission or Planning Board. The shade trees shall be located in a
carefully planned manner within the parking lot area and in quantity
equal to not less than one shade tree for every eight parking spaces,
and they shall be so spaced and planted as to ensure their proper
maintenance and full protection for health and continued growth.
C. At least 20% of the land area within the perimeter of the parking
surface in commercial or industrial zones where 100 or more parking
spaces are provided shall be developed as a landscaped divider strip.
All such areas shall be planted with grass, shrubs, bushes and shade
trees in order to alleviate an otherwise barren expanse of open area and
unsightly appearance and as an aid to stormwater disposal. Adequate
provisions shall be made to ensure that such landscaping shall be
maintained in good condition.
D. Where parking islands or dividers are to be planted, they shall be a
minimum of 7 1/2 feet wide when planted between rows of parking
spaces. Where parking islands at the ends of parking bays are to be
planted and landscaped, said islands shall be a minimum of 15 feet
wide, and such planting shall be maintained at all times so that proper
sight distances are maintained for the safe movement of traffic. All such
parking islands shall be protected from intrusion and injury which could
result from the movement of vehicles by the use of curbs or other
equally effective means as approved by the City Engineer.
E. Planting strips shall be provided between adjoining parking lots in
commercial zones to achieve safety and better control of vehicular
movement from one parking lot to another. In such instances, no
parking shall be allowed within five feet of the property line, on either
side, thereby providing a total strip or island 10 feet wide sufficient for
landscaping and/or screening, consistent with all applicable safety
standards as approved by the City Engineer as set forth in this chapter.
F. Open space adjacent to buildings not surfaced, such as walkways,
driveways, parking areas, utility areas or other required improvements
in any apartment or multifamily dwelling project, shall be graded and
seeded to provide a thick strand of grass or other ground cover
material. Two suitable specimen trees and four evergreen shrubs,
exclusive of those used in connection with parking or other open areas,
shall be provided and properly planted for each building. All such
landscaping shall be subject to the approval of any City Shade Tree
Commission or, in the absence of a Commission, the Planning Board.
G. In connection with the demolition or removal of a structure from a site,
any hole or excavation remaining or resulting from such demolition or
§ 30-165 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-165
1:436
§ 30-166. Lots.
In accordance with good design practice, extreme deviations from
rectangular lots shapes and straight lot lines shall not be allowed unless
made necessary by special topographical conditions or other special
conditions acceptable to the approving authority. All lots shall conform to
the following requirements:
removal shall be filled only with clean fill dirt. The dumping of masonry,
concrete, wood, debris or rock shall be prohibited. The site of such
demolition or removal shall have a layer of topsoil provided for the
entire site in sufficient depth and quality to permit the planting, healthy
growth and maintenance of a thick strand of grass which shall be
planted by the person or firm responsible for the said demolition or
removal. The City Engineer shall determine the suitability of the topsoil
and seeding to be provided.
H. Where deemed appropriate and necessary to maintain the character of
the street or neighborhood, the planting of shade trees shall be
required. Such trees shall be approved by the City Shade Tree
Commission or the Planning Board.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
minimum and maximum standards set forth on the Schedules of District
Regulations which are a part of this chapter.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or
radial to street lines.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved, paved street.
D. Through lots with frontage on two streets will be permitted only under
the following conditions:
(1) Where the length of the lots between both streets is such that
future division of the lot into two lots is improbable; and
(2) Access shall be to the street with the lower traffic function, and the
portion of the lot abutting the other street shall be clearly labeled
on the plat, and in any deed, that street access is prohibited.
E. Where extra width has either been dedicated or anticipated for
widening of existing streets, zoning consideration shall begin at such
new street line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
F. Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the City by the owner
of a lot in order to meet the minimum street width requirement or to
implement the Official Map or Master Plan, which lot existed at the
effective date of this chapter, the Construction Official shall not
withhold a building and/or occupancy permit when the lot depth and/or
area was rendered substandard due to such dedication and where the
owner has no adjacent lands to meet the minimum requirements.
§ 30-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-167
1:437
§ 30-167. Manholes, inlets and catch basins.
Whenever manholes, inlets or catch basins are proposed and/or required
to be constructed, all materials used in said construction shall meet the
latest testing standards for the materials involved and shall be subject to
the approval of the City Engineer. All such structures shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the approval of the City Engineer.
§ 30-168. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.12 of
the Map Filing Law, as amended, and shall be placed in accordance with
said statute and indicated on the final plat. All lot corners shall be marked
with a metal alloy pin of permanent character.
§ 30-169. Natural features.
In connection with the clearing of any site for a proposed development or
in the construction of any proposed development, natural features of the
site, such as trees (particularly those trees with a diameter of eight inches
at breast height), brooks, streams, wetlands, hilltops and scenic vista or
views, shall be preserved whenever possible. On individual lots, care shall
be taken to preserve individual trees, to enhance soil stability and landscape
treatment of the area.
§ 30-170. Off-site and off-tract improvements.
As a condition of preliminary approval and prior to any construction or the
filing of an application for final approval of a subdivision or a site plan, the
applicant shall have made case payments, or, with the consent of the City,
installed, in the manner provided below with respect to the immediate and
ultimate installation of any required off-site and/or off-tract improvements.
A. Allocations of costs, criteria in determining allocation. The allocation of
costs for off-site and/or off-tract improvements as between the
applicant, other property owners and the City, or any one or more of the
foregoing, shall be determined by the Planning Board, with the
assistance of the appropriate City agencies, on the basis of the total
cost of the off-site or off-tract improvements, the increase in market
value of the property affected and any other benefits conferred. The
needs created by the application, population and land use projections
for the general area of the applicant's property and other areas to be
served by the off-site or off-tract improvement, the estimated time of
construction of the off-site or off-tract improvements and the condition
and periods of usefulness, which periods may be based upon the criteria
of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22. Requirements for off-site or off-tract improvements
shall be consistent with Section 30 of P.L. 1975, Chapter 291. In
addition, the following criteria may also be considered, as well as any
other reasonable criteria the Planning Board feels is necessary to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the City.
§ 30-167 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-170
1:438
(1) Street, curb, sidewalk, shade trees, streetlights, street signs and
traffic light improvements may also be based upon the anticipated
increase of traffic generated by the application. In determining
such traffic increase, the Planning Board may consider traffic
counts, existing and projected traffic patterns, quality of roads and
sidewalks in the area and other factors related to the need created
by the application and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(2) Drainage facilities may also be based upon or be determined by the
drainage created by or affected by a particular land use,
considering:
(a) The percentage relationship between the acreage of the
application and the acreage of the total drainage basin;
(b) The use of a particular site and the amount of area to be
covered by impervious surfaces on the site itself;
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining area in the
drainage basin.
(3) Water supply and distribution facilities may be also based upon the
added facilities required by the total anticipated water use
requirements of the property of the applicant and other properties
in the general area benefiting therefrom.
(4) Sewerage facilities may be based upon the proportion that the total
anticipated volume of sewage effluent of the applicant's property
and other properties connected to the new facility bears to the
existing capacity of existing sewerage facilities, including but not
limited to, lines and other appurtenances leading to and servicing
the applicant's property. Consideration may also be given to the
types of effluent and particular problems requiring special
equipment or added costs for treatment. In the event the
applicant's property shall be permitted to be connected to existing
sewer facilities, the applicant shall pay a charge or be assessed in
accordance with the law.
B. Determination of cost of improvements. The cost of installation of the
required off-site and/or off-tract improvements shall be determined by
the Planning Board with the advice of the Planning Board and/or City
Engineer and appropriate City agencies.
C. Manner of construction. When those estimates are received, the City
Commission shall then decide whether the off-tract improvement(s) is
to be constructed:
(1) By the City as a general improvement, or
(2) By the City as a local improvement, or
§ 30-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-170
1:439
(3) By the applicant under a formula providing for partial
reimbursements by the City for benefits to properties other than
the subdivision or site plan subject property.
D. Amount of contribution. When the manner of construction has been
determined, the applicant may be required to provide a cash deposit to
the City of one of the following amounts:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the City as a general
improvement, an amount equal to the difference between the
estimated cost of the improvement and the estimated total amount,
if less, by which all properties to be serviced thereby, including the
subject property, will be specifically benefited by the off-tract
improvement;
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the City as a local
improvement, then in addition to the amount referred to in
Subsection D(1) above, the estimated amount by which the subject
property will be specifically benefited by the off-tract improvement;
or
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement,
less an offset for benefits to properties other than the subject
property.
E. Payment of allocated cost.
(1) The estimated costs of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
applicant if deposited in case shall be paid by the applicant to the
City Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository therefor,
and such funds shall be used only for the off-tract improvements for
which they are deposited or improvements serving the same
purpose, unless such improvements are not initiated by the City
within a period of 10 years from the date of payment, after which
time the funds so deposited shall be returned together with
accumulated interest or other income thereof, if any.
(2) In the event the payment by the applicant to the City Treasurer
provided for herein is less than its share of the actual cost of the offtract
improvements then it shall be required to pay its appropriate
share of the cost thereof.
(3) In the event the payment by the applicant to the City Treasurer
provided for above is more than its appropriate share of the actual
cost of installation of the off-tract improvements, it or its
successors or assigns shall be repaid an amount equal to the
difference between the deposit and its share of the actual cost.
(4) If the applicant shall deem that any of the amounts so estimated by
the Planning Board are unreasonable, it may challenge them and
§ 30-170 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-170
1:440
seek to have them revised in appropriate proceedings brought to
compel subdivision or site plan approval.
(5) If the applicant and the Planning Board cannot agree with respect
to the applicant's appropriate share of the actual cost of the off-site
improvement, or the determination made by the officer or Board
charged with the duty of making assessments as to specific
benefits, if the off-tract improvement is to be constructed as a local
improvement, no approval shall be granted; provided, however,
that the applicant may challenge such determination and seek to
have it revised in appropriate judicial proceedings in order to
compel subdivision or site plan approval.
F. Assessment of properties. Upon receipt from the applicant of its
allocated share of the costs of the off-tract improvements, the City may
adopt a local improvements assessment ordinance for the purpose of
construction and installation of the off-tract improvements based upon
the actual cost thereof. Any portion of the cost of the improvements not
defrayed by a deposit by the applicant may be assessed against
benefiting property owners by the City. Any assessment for benefits
conferred made against the applicant or his successors in interest shall
be first offset by a pro rata share credit of the allocated costs previously
deposited with the City Treasurer pertaining thereto. The applicant or
his successors in interest shall not be liable for any part of an
assessment for such improvements unless the assessment exceeds the
pro rata share credit for the deposit, and then only to the extent of the
deficiency.
G. Credit for work performed. In the event the applicant, with the City's
consent, decides to install and construct the off-tract improvement, or
any portion thereof, the certified cost shall be treated as a credit
against any future assessment for that particular off-tract improvement,
or portion thereof, constructed by the City in the same manner as if the
developer had deposited its apportioned cost with the City Treasurer, as
provided herein.
H. Installation of improvement by applicant.
(1) At the discretion and option of the City and with the consent of the
applicant, the City may enter into a contract with the applicant,
providing for the installation and construction of off-tract
improvements by the applicant upon contribution by the City of the
remaining unallocated portion of the cost of the off-tract
improvement.
(2) In the event the City so elects to contribute to the cost and expense
of installation of the off-site improvements by the applicant, the
portion contributed by the City shall be subject to the possible
certification and assessment as a local improvement against
benefiting property owners in the manner provided by law, if
applicable.
§ 30-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-170
1:441
§ 30-171. Off-street loading and parking facilities design.
The following standards shall apply to all off-street loading and parking
facilities required as per §§ 30-136 and 30-137 of this chapter:
I. Compliance to design criteria. Should the applicant and the City enter
into a contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract
improvements to be done by the applicant, it shall observe all
requirements and principals or policies of this chapter in the design of
such improvements.
A. There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley, as well
as sufficient area to permit on-site maneuvering and docking.
B. The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles in parking facilities shall
be as follows:
(1) Parking space width shall be at least nine feet.
(2) Parking space depth shall be at least 18 feet, with the dimensions
measured on the angle for all angle parking.
(3) Minimum width of aisles providing access to parking spaces for
one-way traffic only, varying with the angle of the parking, shall be:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle
Width (feet)
Parallel 12
30 12
45 14
60 18
90 24
(4) Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way
traffic shall be 25 feet.
(5) Up to 25% of the required parking spaces may be designated for
use by compact vehicles with minimum dimensions of eight feet in
width and 16 feet in length. Compact parking spaces must be
identified with proper signage. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
C. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring
the moving of any other vehicle.
D. The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A minimum of 12 feet for one-way use only.
(2) A minimum of 20 feet for two-way use.
§ 30-170 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-171
1:442
(3) A maximum of 35 feet at the street line and 54 feet at the curbline.
E. The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at
the street lot line shall be 35 feet, and the minimum width shall be 20
feet for loading facilities.
F. Parking and loading areas shall be paved with asphalt, bituminous or
concrete material to minimize nuisance from dust. Pervious pavement
also shall be permitted as long as it complies with the following:
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(1) Pervious pavement shall be located only on soils having a rapid
permeability.
(2) Pervious pavement shall not be located in soils with a high water
table or depth to bedrock of less than 10 feet.
(3) Pervious pavement shall not be located on any slope exceeding 10%
over 20 feet.
G. For the purpose of servicing any property held under single and
separate ownership, entrance and exit drives crossing the street line
shall be limited to two along the frontage of any single street, and their
center lines shall be spaced at least 80 feet apart in the case of loading
facilities and 30 feet apart for parking areas. On all corner properties,
there shall be spaced a minimum of 60 feet, measured at the curbline,
between the center line of any entrance or exit drive and the street line
of the street parallel to said access drive.
H. All loading spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from any
side or rear lot line.
I. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any loading space or spaces
shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall
upon any neighboring property.
J. The arrangement of the off-street loading spaces shall be such that no
vehicle would have occasion to back out onto the street.
K. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and used in a manner as to
at no time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
L. The screening requirements of § 30-155 shall be applicable to all
loading areas, including access and maneuvering areas, abutting
residential or commercial districts, and in the case of off-street parking
areas of greater than 10 spaces, from all lots in an abutting R
Residential District, including side lots situated across a street.
M. Parking and loading areas shall be properly graded and drained in
order to dispose of all surface water and shall be maintained free of
weeds, dust, trash and debris. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
§ 30-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-171
1:443
§ 30-172. Orientation and siting.
§ 30-173. Paving of streets.
All on-site streets shall be paved in conformance with the improvement
standards as defined in Diagrams 1 through 3, Typical Roadway Sections
and Details,62 which are a part of this chapter, and the standards set forth
herein:
N. Wheel guards, bumper guards or continuous curbing shall be utilized so
that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the property line of
the parking area. One wheel stop shall be placed at the end of each
parking space. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
A. In reviewing site plans for freestanding buildings and structures and
depending on individual site characteristics, consideration shall be
given by the approving authority in its review thereof, to positioning
that provides a desirable visual composition, avoids blocking natural
scenic vistas or views, provides a desirable space enclosure, does not
unnecessarily alter existing topography and natural features and
otherwise respects established natural conditions and the character of
surrounding buildings and structures, in particular those structures of
historic significance as determined by a local, county, state or federal
listing of such significance.
B. The approving authority shall also give consideration to the positioning
of buildings and structures on the site with respect to energy
conservation and the avoidance of prevailing winter winds and the
maximizing of solar access and gain, both for the proposed structure(s)
and any existing ones on adjoining properties.
A. Gravel base course shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of Article 3.1 of the Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation as
currently amended. Gravel base course materials shall be soil
aggregate, Type 2, Class B.
B. Bituminous-stabilized base course materials shall conform to
requirements specified in Article 3.2A of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, as currently amended, for bituminous-stabilized base
course stone mix. Before construction of the bituminous-stabilized base
course, the gravel base course shall be in a properly finished condition
conforming to the proper line and grade and free of soft spots or other
deficiencies. Within 24 hours prior to the commencement of paving, the
gravel base course shall be tested by running a roller of a weight as
great or greater than that to be used in the paving operation over the
entire pavement area. When, in the opinion of the City Engineer or his
representative, such testing results in excess deformation, the
62.Editor's Note: The diagrams are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 30-171 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-173
1:444
§ 30-174. Principal and accessory building and structure design.
In reviewing site plans, consideration shall be given to building materials,
use of color and/or texture, massing, fenestration and advertising features
as they relate to site conditions and harmonize with similar elements in
surrounding buildings and structures.
§ 30-175. Sanitary sewers.
developer will be required to stabilize the gravel base course in a
manner satisfactory to the City Engineer.
C. The method of construction of the bituminous-stabilized base course
shall conform to the same State of New Jersey specifications referred to
above for base course material. Upon completion, uniformly selected
core samples intact for full thickness of base course shall be provided,
at the rate of one sample for every 1,000 square yards of base course, at
the expense of the developer.
D. Where deficiencies in required thickness are noted, at least two
additional cores will be required to determine the extent of the
deficiency.
E. The average thickness of the bituminous-stabilized base course as
determined from the core samples shall be not less than the thickness
specified in Diagrams 1 through 3, Typical Roadway Sections and
Details, which are a part of this chapter. When the thickness of the
pavement as indicated by any core sample shall show a deficiency of 1/4
inch or more from the required thickness, the City Engineer, at his
option, may direct the developer to:
(1) Remove and replace the bituminous-stabilized base course to the
correct thickness; or
(2) Construct an overlay of bituminous concrete suitable to the
Engineer to correct the thickness deficiencies.
F. Materials for the surface course, as shown on Diagrams 1 through 3,
Typical Roadway Sections and Details, which are part of this chapter,
shall be FABC-1, No. 5, as specified in Article 3.10 of the
aforementioned New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications, which shall be placed over a properly installed and,
where needed, repaired base course, a track coat as specified in
Section 3.10 of the aforementioned New Jersey Department of
Transportation's Standard Specifications shall be applied.
A. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided and installed in accordance
with the specifications as set forth in this section and as required by the
City Engineer. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be designed and installed
for either immediate or future connection with a public or on-site
community sanitary sewer system approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and the City Commission of
§ 30-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-175
1:445
the City of Millville. In areas where a public sanitary sewer system does
not exist or is not expected to be provided within a reasonable period
of time in the opinion of the Planning Board, the Board may waive the
requirement that sanitary sewer facilities be installed and connected to
public sewer systems.
B. In those cases where a public sanitary sewer system is not presently
available and the site of the proposed development is unsuitable for
individual on-site septic systems as determined by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or other county or local
agency, an on-site community sanitary sewer system approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the City
Commission shall be installed. On-site septic systems shall be provided
in addition to the required installation of sanitary sewer systems
(collection lines and other related facilities) for those areas expected to
be provided with public sanitary sewers within a reasonable period of
time. All individual on-site septic systems shall be installed within the
front yard of the lots or in any area approved by the Construction
Official in order to facilitate the eventual connection of the system to
public facilities.
C. The approval authority may also as a condition of preliminary approval
require the installation of sanitary sewer facilities necessary to permit
connection to a public sanitary sewer system as provided for in
connection with § 30-170.
D. All sanitary sewer systems shall comply with the rules and regulations
established by the Department of Health, State of New Jersey, as
amended. Sanitary sewer pipe shall be sized for full flow from the tract.
The City may require larger pipe sizes to accommodate future
extensions. Minimum grades for sanitary sewer lines shall be 4/10 of
1% for asbestos-cement pipe and 5/10 of 1% for vitrified clay pipe.
E. Cast-iron pipe, when used for sanitary sewers, shall be centrifugally
cast and shall be provided with mechanical joints, with both pipe and
joints conforming to applicable American Standards Association
specifications. Cast-iron pipe shall be thickness Class 22 for pipe
diameters of 12 inches or less and thickness Class 21 for pipe diameters
of 14 inches or more. All cast-iron fittings, including Y-branches, shall
conform to the requirements of the current American Waterworks
Association's specifications therefor and shall be provided with joints
suitable for use with adjoining pipe. Cast-iron fittings shall be Class D
for fitting diameters of 12 inches or less and Class B for diameters of 14
inches or more. Cast-iron saddles shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
F. Asbestos-cement pipe and fittings shall conform to applicable
requirements of the American Society for Testing Materials
specifications, as amended. Except where required for special
conditions, asbestos-cement type pipe fittings shall be nonpressure
Class 1500 for pipe diameters of 12 inches or less and Class 2400 for
§ 30-175 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-175
1:446
§ 30-176. Shoulder paving.
In each land development requiring project approval, the area between the
edge of the existing pavement and the proposed or existing curbing along
pipe diameters of 14 inches or more. All asbestos-cement pipe and
fittings shall be furnished with sleeve-and-gasket-type couplings
designed for use with the size and class of pipe specified.
G. Vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall conform to the applicable
requirements of the American Society for Testing and Materials
specifications, as amended. Except where required for special
conditions, such as excessive depth, vitrified clay pipe fittings shall be
standard strength. All vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall have factoryfabricated
gasket-type couplings which conform to the American
Society for Testing and Materials specifications therefor.
H. Excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements set forth for
subsurface structure excavations. Applicable requirements for
protecting excavations from cave-ins and water accumulations set forth
under § 30-179, Stormwater management, shall apply. Pipes shall be
laid in straight lines between manholes except where otherwise
specifically provided by the City Engineer. When deviation from a
straight line is permitted, the deflection of each joint shall not exceed
the manufacturer's recommended maximum for the type, joint and size
of pipe being installed. All pipes shall be laid to uniform grades between
manholes. Each section of pipe shall be solidly bedded in the trench
bottom and shall be supported for its full length except where
excavation has been made for joints. Before making each joint, the ends
of the pipes and all joint members shall be thoroughly cleaned. All
jointing shall be done in strict accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and the directions of the City Engineer. All visible
leakage of any description and no matter where located shall be
corrected by the contractor in a manner satisfactory to the City
Engineer, whether or not the total leakage into the sewer is within the
allowable maximum as determined by infiltration tests. Such infiltration
tests shall be made when and as directed by the City Engineer, and no
connections to flowing lines shall be made until the testing is complete
and satisfactory results have been obtained. The contractor shall
furnish all labor, material and equipment necessary for the infiltration
tests. No section of sanitary sewer between adjacent manholes will be
considered satisfactory or acceptable when the rate of infiltration
exceeds 1/2 of the above-specified rate. Leakage in excess of the above
shall be located and corrected by the contractor. Y-branch and service
laterals which are not to be immediately connected to flowing lines
shall be securely plugged so as to provide a permanently watertight
seal, and the contractor shall accurately record the station and
direction of each such stub. These shall also be located on the
contractor's copy of the plans and permanently marked with a crosscut
on the curb or a hub stake driven at the curbline.
§ 30-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-176
1:447
the entire property frontage of the road shall be paved in accordance with
the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter and by the City
Engineer.
§ 30-177. Solid waste disposal.
All multifamily, commercial, industrial, recreational and public uses shall
provide for centralized collection of solid wastes. Such solid waste disposal
areas and facilities shall be sufficient in size to handle anticipated waste
generation of the site and use, and be at convenient locations, screened
from view. All such areas and facilities, including provisions for source
separation and resource recovery, shall conform to any adopted solid waste
disposal plan or ordinance applicable to the area involved.
§ 30-178. Streetlighting.
Streetlighting standards and fixtures of a type and number approved by the
Planning Board and City Engineer shall be installed at street intersections
and elsewhere as deemed necessary by the approving authority to provide
light for public safety and welfare along public streets. The developer shall
provide for the installation of connection of streetlighting standards and
fixtures wherever underground utility service is provided.
§ 30-179. Stormwater management.
A. Surface drainage systems adequately designed to accommodate all
surface runoff coming to or accumulating on the tract shall be
constructed. The determination of pipe sizes and box culverts shall be
based on hydraulic computations using the rational method in which
the actual watershed area tributary to the structure is measured and a
minimum runoff coefficient is used which is based on Table 1 shown
below. In cases where dense residential and business development is
anticipated by the Planning Board, this coefficient should be increased
as conditions require, to be determined by the City Engineer.
TABLE 1
Runoff Coefficients for Drainage Design
Classification Runoff Factor C
Parklands, golf courses, etc. 0.15 to 0.30
Open residential 0.30 to 0.50
Dense residential and business 0.50 to 0.70
Commercial and industrial 0.70 to 0.90
B. In general, it will be the objective of these standards to encourage the
retention and disposal of all surface runoff on-site to the greatest extent
practical given existing site conditions and the ability of downstream
facilities to handle additional runoff to be generated by the site.
§ 30-176 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-179
1:448
C. In general, where pipe sizes would be four feet in diameter or larger,
open channels will be permitted. Such channels shall be properly
cleared and graded, with side slopes not to exceed three feet
horizontally to one foot vertically. Maximum design velocities for
channels in feet per second shall not exceed three for fine sand to firm
loam, five for stiff clay to hardpan and 15 for concrete-lined ditch.
Velocity shall be controlled by the use of check dams or ditch banks,
which shall be protected by the use of sod, riprap or paving, as design
velocity dictates.
D. No storm drainage pipes of less than 12 inches in diameter or, if the run
exceeds 50 feet, of less than 15 inches in diameter, shall be installed.
Inlets shall be spaced so that the run of water in gutters does not
exceed 1,000 feet or one block, whichever is less. Manholes or inlets
shall be located where a change in grade or alignment or a storm drain
occurs, but in any case not more than 500 feet apart. Where pipe sizes
are increased, the invert of the larger pipe shall be dropped so the tops
of the pipes will be at the same elevation. Outlet pipes shall extend to
the edge of existing streams and must be provided with concrete
headwalls or suitable end sections. Underdrains with minimum pipe
size of six inches must be constructed where groundwater interferes
with the stability of the road base or with development construction.
E. Where pipe drains a low point from which there can be no surface
runoff without flooding curbs and sidewalk areas, the design shall be
based on the municipal standard rainfall curves shown in Figure 1 and
shall be based on a ten-year storm. In other cases, the pipe size may be
based on a two-year storm. Box culverts shall be designed on the basis
of a fifteen-year storm. Pipe grades shall be so designed that a minimum
velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second will be obtained when the pipe is
flowing 1/4 full. All drainage calculations must be preliminary reviewed
and approved by the City Engineer.
F. Subsurface structure excavations shall be carried out by the contractor
and, only where considered necessary by the City Engineer, shall be
carried below the required facility installation level to remove and
replace unstable soils with thoroughly tamped gravel, crushed stone or
crushed slag. Adequate bracing, shoring and sheeting shall be installed
to protect workmen, members of the public, public and private property
and the work underway. Where deemed necessary by the City Engineer,
the contractor shall provide, install and operate an adequate well-point
system for dewatering to stabilize excavation bottoms and banks.
G. Unless otherwise specified in specific situations by the City Engineer,
reinforced concrete pipe, when used, shall be Class III, Wall B. All
reinforced concrete pipe shall have flexible rubber-type gasket joints,
with both pipe and gasket conforming to the American Society for
Testing and Materials specifications therefor, as amended and revised
to date. When used, corrugated metal pipe and pipe arch shall conform
to the requirements of the American Association of State Highway
Officials (AASHO) specifications therefor, as amended and revised to
§ 30-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-179
1:449
date. All corrugated metal pipe and pipe arch shall be fully bituminous
coated in accordance with current New Jersey Department of
Transportation specifications therefor.
H. When used, corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch shall conform to
the requirements of AASHO designation M-196-62 or AASHO
designation M-211-65. The aluminum alloy sheets shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM B209 Alloy Alclad 3004-H34.
I. Where used, cast-iron pipe, together with mechanical joints, shall
conform to the American Standards Association specifications therefor,
and unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer, cast-iron pipe shall
be Class 22 for pipe diameter of 12 inches or less and thickness Class
21 for a pipe diameter of 14 inches or more.
J. All drainage pipe shall be laid in straight lines between drainage
structures except when otherwise specifically provided. When deviation
from a straight line is permitted, the deflection of each joint shall not
exceed the manufacturer's recommended maximum for the pipe, joint
and size of pipe being installed. All pipe shall conform to specified lines,
grades and dimensions.
K. No deflective or leaking pipes, joints, connections, manholes, inlets or
other parts of the work will be acceptable. All visible leakage of any
description, no matter where located, shall be corrected by the
contractor in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer.
L. All developments may incorporate on-site stormwater detention or
impoundment facilities as indicated earlier, in the following manner:
(1) Swales may be constructed in which there need be no outlet
facilities and which will impound water draining only from other
landscaped areas. The water impounded in these areas will be left
to evaporate and percolate, the swales shall otherwise be seeded
and maintained in lawn area.
(2) Impoundment/detention basins along any stream that maintains a
steady flow of water throughout the year may be constructed,
provided that any improvements designed to provide such
impoundment/detention facilities shall meet the standards of, and if
required have the approval of, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, and shall have the proper amount of
sustained water flow downstream, proper depth of water to control
vegetation, and proper design to prevent water stagnation in any
part of the pond.
(3) Detention of stormwater on roof surfaces may be designed by
means of essentially flat but slightly pitched roofs to the edges.
Facilities for control of the water runoff from the roof shall be
provided in the form of vertical leaders with detention rings around
the intake to provide the control of water flow. The spacing and
capacity of the vertical leaders and the detention rings shall be
§ 30-179 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-179
1:450
§ 30-180. Top soil conservation.
Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as
to provide at least three inches of cover to all areas of the development not
covered and shall be stabilized by seeding, planting or sodding. In the event
that the site does not contain sufficient amounts of topsoil to provide three
inches of topsoil to all uncovered areas of the development, the developer
shall supply sufficient amounts to meet this requirement. Unless specifically
permitted by the Planning Board, no topsoil shall be removed from the site.
§ 30-181. Traffic and circulation.
The following standards shall apply in connection with all developments
in connection with the design and construction of driveways, bikeways,
sidewalks or pedestrianways, streets and similar items concerned with
traffic and circulation:
approved by the City Engineer and Construction Official,
depending on the areas to be drained, the pitch of the roof, the
capacity of the impoundment/detention facilities to which the water
will eventually drain and the structural strength of the roof. It is
recommended that the intakes be protected by a device that will
accept the full amount of water passed on to it from the detention
rings, but which will act as a strainer for any foreign matter such
as leaves, twigs and seedlings. The leader from a roof with water
detention design shall direct the stormwater into a detention basin
constructed in a manner as outlined above.
M. If the drainage characteristics of the soils permit, vegetation can be
used as an effective way to reduce stormwater runoff. Bioretention of
stormwater integrated into landscaped infiltration areas, swales, or
rain gardens can provide temporary storage of runoff as well as on-site
infiltration. Such design will be permitted if soil tests indicate a
capacity for this design and if drainage calculations demonstrate the
capacity of such facilities to accommodate the anticipated stormwater
runoff. Indigenous species must be utilized for bioretention strategies.
A maintenance plan must also be provided to ensure irrigation and
weeding of site. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
A. Access.
(1) Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a parking area
providing 200 or more parking spaces and/or the abutting road has
a peak-hour traffic volume exceeding 1,000 vehicles per hour, an
acceleration lane shall be provided in accordance with "A Policy of
Geometric Design of Urban Highways," published by the American
Association of State Highway Officials.
(2) Where a driveway serves as an entrance to a development
providing 50 or more parking spaces, a deceleration lane shall be
provided for traffic turning right into the driveway from any
§ 30-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-181
1:451
collector or arterial road. The deceleration lane is to be at least
200 feet long and at least 13 feet wide, measured from the abutting
road curbline. A minimum forty-foot curb return radius will be used
from the deceleration lane into the driveway.
B. Driveways. Any driveway providing access from a public street or way
to any permitted use or structure shall comply with the following
regulations:
(1) Driveways shall enter the street or road right-of-way at an angle
between 75º and 105º.
(2) The portion of the roadway lying between the right-of-way of the
street and the driveway shall be surfaced as a driveway extension.
(3) Any curb opening shall be properly reconstructed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer. Where curbing does not exist and
conditions warrant, an adequate drain pipe shall be installed as
determined by the City Engineer.
(4) Driveway grades shall not exceed 8% by a distance of 40 feet from
any street or road right-of-way line, unless otherwise approved by
the City Engineer.
(5) Driveway widths at the street right-of-way lines shall be a minimum
of 10 feet and a maximum of 20 feet in connection with singlefamily
residential uses. All other uses shall conform to the driveway
regulations contained herein or as required by the City Engineer.
(6) The number of driveways provided from a site directly to any road
shall be as follows:
Use
Length of Site
Frontage
(feet)
Number of
Driveways
Residential 200 or less 1
Commercial 200 or less 1
Commercial or
arterial or collector
road
200 to 500 2
All other uses Over 800 To be determined by
the Planning Board
upon receipt of
advice from the City
Engineer.
(7) All entrance and exit driveways to a road shall be located to afford
maximum safety to traffic on the road.
§ 30-181 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-181
1:452
(8) Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in profile
and grading and shall be so located as to permit the following
maximum sight distance measured in each direction along any
abutting road; the measurement shall be from the driver's seat of a
vehicle standing on the portion of the exit driveway that is
immediately outside the edge of the road traveled or shoulder:
Allowable Speed on Road
(mph)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
(9) Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit may be located within a minimum of 30
feet of tangent of the existing or proposed curb radius of that site.
(10)No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on the following
portions of any collector or arterial road: on a traffic circle, on a
ramp of an interchange, within 30 feet of the beginning of any ramp
or other portion of an interchange, nor on any portion of such road
where the grade has been changed to incorporate an interchange.
(11) Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one road,
a minimum clear distance of 100 feet measured along the right-ofway
line shall separate the closest edges of any two such
driveways.
(12) Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect any collector
or arterial road at an angle as near 90º as site conditions will
permit and in no case less than 60º.
(13) Driveways used by vehicles in one direction of travel (right turn
only) shall not form an angle smaller than 60º with a collector or
arterial road unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are
provided.
(14) The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately
accommodate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to
be attracted daily onto the land development for which the site plan
is prepared. The required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways are indicated on the accompanying table. Driveways
serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic over 25% of which is
truck traffic shall be permitted to use low-to-minimum dimensions.
(See Table 2.)
§ 30-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-181
1:453
(15) The surface of any driveway subject to City site plan approval shall
be constructed with a permanent pavement of a type specified by
standards set by the City Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to
the paved traveled way or pave shoulder of the road; required
driveway dimensions specified in Table 2.
TABLE 2
Type of Development
Type of
Development
One-Way
Curbline
Opening
(feet)
Operation
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Two-Way
Curbline
Opening
(feet)
Operation
Driveway
Width
(feet)
5 to 10 family
resident
12-15 10-13 12-30 10-26
10 family or
more
12-30 10-26 24-36 20-30
Commercial
or industry
24-50 24-34 24-50 24-46
Service
station
15-36 12-34 24-36 20-34
(16) Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to prevent the
dragging of any vehicle undercarriage. Any driveway profiles and
grades shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer.
Should a sidewalk be so located with respect to the curb at a
depressed-curb driveway that is likely to cause undercarriage drag,
the sidewalk should be appropriately lowered to provide a suitable
ramp gradient.
C. Bikeways.
(1) Bikeways shall be required when in the Planning Board's opinion,
depending on the probable volume of bicycle traffic, the
development's location in relation to other populated areas, or its
location with respect to any overall bikeway route or trail adopted
by the Planning Board or other applicable agency, provision of the
bikeway(s) would be needed and used. Bicycle traffic shall be
separated from motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic as much as
possible.
(2) Bikeways shall generally not exceed a grade of 3%, except for short
distances, and they should be a minimum of five feet wide for oneway
and eight feet wide for two-way travel. Bikeways shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications and
standards of the City Engineer.
D. Sidewalks.
§ 30-181 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-181
1:454
(1) Sidewalks shall be required along all streets. In reviewing a
request for a waiver of this requirement, the Planning Board shall
be guided by the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the street
classification in instances where streets are involved, school bus
stops, the development's location in relation to other populated
areas or pedestrian traffic generators, and the general type of
improvement intended. The Planning Board shall further only grant
waivers which are in accordance with the provisions of the Master
Plan.
(2) When required and unless reduced or altered by the Planning
Board, all sidewalks shall conform to the following standards:
(a) Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and located as
approved by the Planning Board. Sidewalks shall be at least
four inches thick, except at the point of vehicular crossing
where they shall be at least six inches thick, of Class C
concrete, having a twenty-eight-day compression strength of
4,000 psi, and shall be air-entrained.
(b) Finished sidewalks shall be true to specified lines, grades, and
curvatures. Completed work shall be adequately protected
from traffic and the elements.
E. Sight triangles.
(1) Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an
intersection of streets, and streets and driveways. The area within
sight triangles shall be either dedicated as part of the street rightof-
way or maintained as part of the lot adjoining the street and set
aside on any subdivision or site plan as a sight triangle easement.
Within a sight triangle, no grading, planting or structure shall be
erected or maintained more than 30 inches above the street center
line or lower then eight feet above the street center line except for
street name signs and official traffic regulation signs. Where any
street or driveway intersection involves earth banks or vegetation,
including trees, the developer shall trim such vegetation and trees
as well as establish proper excavation and grading to provide the
sight triangle.
(2) The sight triangle is that area bounded by the intersection of street
lines and a straight line which connects "sight" points located on
each of two intersecting street lines the following distances away
from the intersection of street lines: arterial streets at 130 feet;
collector streets at 60 feet; and local streets at 35 feet. Where the
intersecting streets are both arterial, both collectors, or one
arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall be
required formed by connecting the sight points noted above with a
sight point 35 feet on the intersecting street. Any proposed
development requiring site plan approval shall provide sight
triangle easements at each driveway with the driveway classified as
§ 30-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-181
1:455
a local street for purposes of establishing distances. The
classification of existing and proposed streets shall be those as
defined in the adopted Master Plan or as designated by the
Planning Board at the time of the application for approval of the
new street, not included in the Master Plan. Portions of a lot set
aside for the sight triangle may be calculated in determining the
lot area and may be included in establishing the minimum setback
required by the zoning provisions.
F. Streets.
(1) All development shall be served by improved streets with an allweather
base and pavement with an adequate crown. The
arrangement of streets now shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets, conform with the topography as far as practical,
and allow for continued extension into adjoining undeveloped
tracts.
(2) When a development adjoins land capable of being developed or
subdivided further, suitable provision shall be made for optimum
access from the adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
(3) Local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
(4) To conserve energy and permit the greatest potential for buildings
to have a southern exposure, all new streets shall have an east/west
orientation whenever possible considering topographic features
and existing land use patterns.
(5) Development bounded by arterial or collector streets.
(a) In all residential districts, development bounded by an arterial
or collector street shall control access to streets by having all
driveways intersect minor streets. Where the size, shape,
location, or some other unique circumstance may dictate no
other alternative than to have a driveway enter an arterial or
collector street, the lot shall provide on-site turnaround
facilities so it is not necessary to back any vehicle onto an
arterial or collector road and abutting lots may be required to
use abutting driveways with one curb cut. All lots requiring
reverse frontage shall have an additional 25 feet of depth to
allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined below unless
such buffers are established in a reserve strip controlled by the
City or county.
(b) That portion of the development abutting an arterial or
collector street right-of-way shall either be planted with
nursery grown trees to a depth of not more than 25 feet as a
buffer strip along the right-of-way line and for the full length of
the development so that in a reasonable period of time a buffer
area will exist between the development and the highway, or,
§ 30-181 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-181
1:456
where topography permits, earthen berms may be created at a
sufficient height to establish a buffer between the development
and the highway. Berms shall not be less than five feet in
height; they shall be planted with evergreens and deciduous
trees according to a landscaping plan so as to be designed to
have no adverse effect on nearby properties. All trees shall be
of nursery stock having a caliper of not less than 2 1/2 inches
measured three feet above ground level and be of an approved
species as determined by the City Shade Tree Commission or
Planning Board. They shall be of symmetrical growth, free of
insect pests and disease, suitable for street use, and durable
under the maintenance contemplated.
(6) In all developments the minimum street right-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with
Diagrams 1 through 3, Typical Roadway Sections and Details,
which is part of this chapter; but in no case shall a new street that
is a continuation of an existing street be continued at a width less
than the existing street although a greater width may be required
in accordance with the diagram details above referenced. Where an
arterial or collector street intersects another arterial or collector
street, the right-of-way and cartway requirements shall be
increased by 10 feet on the right side of the street(s) approaching
intersection of the center lines.
(7) No development showing reserve strips controlling access to
streets or another area, either developed or undeveloped, shall be
approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been given to the City Commission under conditions
imposed by the Planning Board.
(8) In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing City
streets that do not conform to widths as shown on the City Master
Plan or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
chapter, additional land along both sides of the street sufficient to
conform to the right-of-way requirements shall be anticipated in
the subdivision design of creating over-sized lots to accommodate
the widening at some future date. The additional widening may be
offered to the City for the location, installation, repair and
maintenance of streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other
facilities customarily located on street right-of-way and shall be
expressed on the plat or plan as follows: "Street right-of-way
easement granted to the City of Millville permitting the City to
enter upon these lands for the purposes provided for and expressed
in the Development Regulations Chapter of the City of Millville."
This statement on an approved plat or plan shall in no way reduce
the developer's responsibility to provide, install, repair or maintain
any facilities installed in this area dedicated by ordinance or as
shown on the plat or plan, or as provided for by any maintenance or
§ 30-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-181
1:457
performance guaranty. If a development is along one side only, 1/2
of the required extra width shall be anticipated.
(9) The actual design and construction of all streets or roads within the
City shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any adopted Master
Plan or Official Map and any other applicable ordinances of the City
of Millville or acceptable engineering standards.
(10) Where dead-end (cul-de-sac) streets are utilized, they shall
conform to the following standards:
(a) Dead-end streets of a permanent nature (where provisions for
future extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining
property is impractical or impossible) or of a temporary nature
(where provision is made for the future extension of the street
to the boundary line of adjoining property) shall provide a
turnaround at the end with a right-of-way radius sufficient to
permit the maneuvering and turning of emergency vehicles
including fire trucks.
(b) If a dead-end street is of temporary nature, provisions shall be
made for removal of the turnaround and reversion of excess
right-of-way to the adjoining properties as off-tract
responsibility of the developer creating the street extension
when the street is extended.
(c) A dead-end street shall serve no more than 14 lots.
(11)No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate in spelling or phonetic sound the names of existing
streets so as to be confusing therewith. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name. The names of new streets
must be approved by the Planning Board. This subsection shall
apply to any street within the City of Millville or surrounding
municipalities.
(12) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards as
shown on Diagrams 1 through 3, Typical Roadway Sections and
Details, which are a part of this chapter and the standards
contained in this section.
(13) Longitudinal grades on all local streets shall not exceed 10%, nor
4% on arterial or collector streets. No street shall have a
longitudinal grade of less than 1/2 of 1%. Maximum grades within
intersections shall be 4% percent. The cross section of the cartway
from the center line to the curbline or edge of the paving shall be
parabolic and shall not exceed a slope of 2%. Where the cartway on
a collector or arterial street is banked to facilitate a curve in the
street alignment, the slope toward the curbline or shoulder shall
conform to accepted engineering practice.
§ 30-181 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-181
1:458
(14) Local streets should not be part of a four-way intersection.
Intersecting street center lines shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible, and in no case shall they be less than 75º at the point of
the intersection. The curblines shall be parallel to the center line.
Approaches to all intersections shall follow a straight line for at
least 100 feet measured from the curbline of the intersecting street
to the beginning of the curve. No more than two street center lines
shall meet or intersect another point. Collector and arterial streets
intersecting another street from opposite sides shall not be offset
unless, measuring from the point of intersection of the street
center line, the two intersections shall be spaced a sufficient
distance to permit a minimum two lot depths between two street
rights-of-way, but not less than 250 feet between rights-of-way. Any
development abutting an existing street which is classified as an
arterial or collector street shall be permitted not more than one
new street every 800 feet on the same side of the street within the
boundaries of the tract being subdivided. In the spacing of streets,
consideration will be given to the location of existing intersections
on both sides of the development. Intersections shall be rounded on
the curbline, with the street having the highest radius requirement
as outlined below determining the minimum standard for all street
lines:
(a) Arterial street at 40 feet.
(b) Collector street at 30 feet.
(c) Local street at 20 feet.
(15) The right-of-way for internal roads and alleys in commercial and
industrial development shall be determined on an individual basis
by the Planning Board and shall in all cases be sufficient in width
and design to safely accommodate parking and loading needs of
adjoining uses.
(16) A tangent at least 200 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. When connecting
street lines deflect in any direction they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius conforming to standard engineering practice so
that the minimum sight distance within the curbline shall be 160
feet for a local street, 300 feet for a collector street, and 500 feet
for an arterial street.
(17) All changes in grade where the difference in grade is 1% or greater
shall be connected by a vertical curve having a length of at least 50
feet for each 2% difference in grade, or portion thereof, and
providing minimum sight distances of 160 feet for a local street,
300 feet for a collector street and 500 feet for an arterial street.
Intersections shall be designed with as flat a grade as practical
with the advice of the City Engineer.
§ 30-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-181
1:459
§ 30-182. Traffic and directional signs.
Each development requiring off-street loading or parking areas, or where
roadways are not dedicated and accepted by the City, shall install and
maintain all appropriate traffic and directional signs, markers or pavement
markings as approved by the appropriate approval authority. In the case of
parking and loading facilities, parking stalls and loading areas, traffic flow
directions and areas where is for limited period of time or prohibited shall
be clearly marked. In the case of developments where access is provided by
driveways or streets not dedicated and accepted by the City, county or state,
all traffic signs, directional signs and similar markings shall be installed
and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate
approval authority.
§ 30-183. Utilities.
New utility distribution lines and telephone or other communication facility
lines to locations not presently served by such utilities shall be placed
underground, except in those cases where the Planning Board finds that
such placement underground would be detrimental to existing land uses
such as, but not limited to, active agricultural operations.
(18) In the case of local streets within a development where the City
Commission determines that the length of the street and the nature
of adjacent uses warrant such reduction in the width of the paved
surface, the width required in Subsection F(6) of this section may
be reduced, but in no case shall the paved width of a local street be
less than 26 feet.
(19) Street signs shall be installed by the developer in a manner and of a
material and design to be approved by the Planning Board as
recommended by the City Engineer. All such signs shall be installed
so as not to create any visual obstruction and to be free of visual
obstruction.
(20) The developer of any subdivision or development shall provide for
the installation of the underground service for all poles and fixtures
for streetlighting. Streetlighting standards of a type and number
approved by the Planning Board and the City Engineer shall be
installed by all street intersections and elsewhere as deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
(21) Whenever a development abuts or crosses municipal boundaries,
access to those lots within the City shall be from within the City as
the general rule. Wherever access to a development is required
across land in an adjoining municipality as the exception, the
Planning Board may require documentation that such access is
legally established, and that the access road is adequately
improved.
§ 30-181 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-184
1:460
§ 30-184. Vegetation.
No development, site clearing or demolition activity shall be carried out
unless it is designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of
existing vegetation. The removal of vegetation shall be permitted when such
removal is necessary to accommodate the development or maintenance
of a permitted structure or to otherwise conduct a permitted use of the
property; to eliminate a pedestrian or vehicular safety hazard to a structure;
specimen trees will not be cleared or removed; and the area cleared shall
be landscaped in accordance with § 30-165 of this article.
§ 30-185. Visual obstruction.
In any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, or allowed to grow in such
a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet and
10 feet above the center line grade of an abutting street or streets within 30
feet of an intersection of street lines involving a state or county road, within
20 feet of an intersection of street lines involving two municipal streets or
within 15 feet of an intersection involving boundary lines of a driveway and
a street.
§ 30-186. Water supply.
A. Where water is accessible from a servicing utility, the developer shall
arrange for the construction of water mains in such a manner as to
make adequate water service available to each lot, dwelling unit or use
within the development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the City, county
and/or state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to its
approval. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
sustained pressure for present and probable future development.
Minimum City specifications shall be as follows:
(1) Water supply facilities and systems shall be provided and installed
in accordance with the specifications of this section and as required
by the City Engineer. Water supply facilities and systems shall be
designed and installed for either immediate or future connection
with a public or on-site community water supply facility or system
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and the City Commission of the City of Millville. In areas
where public water supply does not exist or is not expected to be
provided within a reasonable period of time in the opinion of the
Planning Board, the Board may waive the requirement that water
supply facilities be installed to connect with public water supply
facilities or systems.
(2) In those cases where the public water supply facility or system is
not presently available and the site of the proposed development is
unsuitable and unsafe in terms of public health for individual onsite
water supply facilities as determined by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or Health, or other
§ 30-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-186
1:461
appropriate local agency, an on-site community water supply
system approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and the City Commission of the City of Millville shall be
installed. On-site water supply system shall be provided in addition
to the required installation of water supply facilities for those
areas expected to be provided with public water supply facilities or
systems within a reasonable period of time.
(3) All water supply and treatment facilities shall comply with the rules
and regulations established by the New Jersey Department of
Health, as amended and supplemented. Water mains shall be sized
for adequate delivery of pressure and volume. In general, the size
of water mains shall conform to the following: Lines whose primary
function is and will be to serve adjacent property shall be six
inches, and lines that serve as feeder lines to several other streets
in addition to the one in which they are located shall be eight
inches and shall be laid out to provide loops with other lines eight
inches or larger which enclose areas of not more than 1/4 square
mile. Lines that provide the main feed from present or larger lines
shall be laid out so as to form loops with other similar lines which
enclose not more than one square mile. The system shall be
designed so that not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting
off any one section, so that hydrants are located within 600 feet
along street lines of any property development, so that not more
than four valves are necessary to shut off any one section and so
that the number of dwelling units affected by shutting off any one
section shall be limited to approximately 25.
(4) Cast-iron pipe and fittings shall conform to applicable
requirements of the American Standards Association's
specifications, as amended. Cast-iron pipe shall be thickness Class
22, and flanges shall be Class 125. Mechanical joints conforming to
the American Standards Association (ASA) Specifications A-21.11,
as amended, or gasket-type joints of Tyton or approved equal, shall
be used. Other fittings shall conform to the requirements of the
American Standards Association Specifications A-21.10, as
amended, and all cast-iron pipe or fittings shall be cement-lined in
accordance with ASA A-21.4, as amended. Valves shall conform to
the current American Waterworks Association standard for ironbody-
disk gate valves with parallel seats. Unless otherwise
specified by the City Engineer, valves shall be operated by a twoinch-
square operating nut of cast-iron and shall open in a
counterclockwise direction. The direction of opening shall be
marked by an arrow and the word, "open." All cast-iron surfaces of
valves and valve boxes shall be complete with covers, and both
valve box and cover shall be of ample strength and dimension to
fully sustain the shocks of vehicular traffic and to maintain the
upper section and cover to proper grade under heavy traffic
conditions. Fire hydrants shall be as required by City
specifications. Operating cap nuts shall be one-and-one-half-inch
§ 30-186 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-186
1:462
pentagons. They shall be equipped with two hose nozzles and one
steamer nozzle, size and treads to be in accordance with local fire
company requirements. They shall have a provision for a six-inch
connection to the main. Valve opening for the hydrant shall be four
inches. Valves shall be installed between all fire hydrants and the
supply main.
(5) Excavations and backfill shall conform to the requirements for
subsurface structure excavations. Requirements relating to
protection of the work from cave-ins and accumulation of water
shall be as specified under § 30-179, Stormwater management.
(6) Water mains shall be laid in straight lines except when otherwise
specifically directed by the City Engineer. When deviation from a
straight line is permitted, the deflection of each joint shall not
exceed the manufacturer's recommended maximum for the type of
joint and size of pipe being installed. Water pipes shall be laid with
at least 3 1/2 feet of cover over the top of the pipe to the existing or
proposed finished grade or to the future finished grade when such
is lower. Special care shall be exercised to removal all earth, stones
and other materials from each pipe as it is laid and to prevent any
such materials from entering the pipelines. The contractor is
responsible for the lines being maintained in an absolutely clean
condition on the inside and for seeing that all valves and hydrants
are clean and in good working order when installed. Open pipe
ends shall at all times be adequately protected and shall be
securely sealed with dirt-proof plugs whenever work is stopped for
any reason. After removing a plug, the interior of the pipeline shall
be inspected before resuming pipe laying operations.
(7) All fittings and valves shall be set accurately, true to and square
with pipelines. Valve stems shall be accurately plumbed. Fittings
and valves shall be supported by approved blocking so as to ensure
their remaining accurately in position during jointly and in such a
manner that their weight will not place undue strain on connection
pipe or joints. Pipelines shall be thrust-blocked at all bends greater
than 10º and at all T's, plugs, valves and hydrants so as to prevent
movement of the lines under pressure.
(8) Before new waterlines are put into service, the contractor shall
provide necessary equipment for and shall perform a two-hour
pressure test, during which time pressure will be maintained at 125
pounds per square inch, and the amount of water that must be
added to maintain this pressure will be measured. The maximum
leakage which will be permitted for sections of the system up to
and including 500 linear feet will be 0.01 gallon per inch of
diameter per 24 hours per foot of pipe. Where the length of pipe to
be tested exceeds 500 lineal feet, the total amount of leakage
allowed for any such section of pipe shall be the amount which
would be allowed for 500 feet. In general, every section of pipe
which can be isolated by existing or proposed valves shall be
§ 30-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-186
1:463
§ 30-187. Waivers or adjustments.
§ 30-188. Inspection and approval.
All improvements to be installed as set forth in this article, when required
of a developer, shall be subject to inspection by the approval authority
engineer or the City Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least
seven days prior to the start of construction. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved by the appropriate engineer.
individually pressure-tested except where such sections are less
than 200 feet in length, in which case they may be tested as part of
another section.
(9) Before a new waterline is put into service or when any section of a
pipeline is drained or emptied of water at any time, it shall be
completely sterilized with chlorine according to the directions of
the City Engineer.
B. Where public water is not available, potable water supply shall be
provided to each lot on an individual well basis. Such wells shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the
City and/or state agency having jurisdiction thereof.
A. Where, due to natural features or special conditions, a literal
enforcement or the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary
hardship or be detrimental to the stated goals and objectives of the
City's development policy as expressed in the adopted City Master Plan,
the Planning Board may, by resolution, grant such waiver from or
adjustment to the requirements thereof as will not be contrary to the
public interest and will not subvert the objectives of the City Master
Plan and this chapter. Financial hardship or disadvantage shall not be
sufficient cause or proof of hardship.
B. All requests for waivers or adjustments to the design standards
contained herein shall be submitted in writing to the approval authority
and shall clearly set forth the reason why literal enforcement would
cause hardship or be contrary to stated planning objectives or goals.
C. In reviewing such requests, the approving authority shall give
consideration to the development size, anticipated or recognizable
adverse impacts to be created or increased by it, natural and existing
conditions at the development or adjacent thereto, the purpose or
reason of the development, and reasonable feasibility of design
standards to the development proposed.
§ 30-186 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-188
1:464
ARTICLE XVII
Residential Site Improvement Standards
§ 30-189. State standards incorporated by reference.
The State of New Jersey adopted residential site improvement standards.
The legislature found and declared that it was in the public interest to
avoid unnecessary costs in the construction process and that uniform site
improvement standards for residential development would be cost effective
and predictable for developers. These site improvement standards adopted
in N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. are incorporated herein as if the same were set
forth with particularity.
§ 30-190. State standards supersede existing local standards.
The standards set forth in the state regulations for residential development
shall supersede any residential site improvement standards established
within this chapter.
§ 30-191. Municipal zoning powers not limited by state standards.
Nothing contained in the state regulations adopting the residential site
improvement standards shall be interpreted to limit the zoning power of the
City.
§ 30-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-191
1:465

ARTICLE XVIII
Special Use Design and Performance Standards
§ 30-192. (Reserved)63
§ 30-193. Agricultural employee housing.
Agricultural employee housing may be constructed only in connection with
an ongoing agricultural operation or agricultural purpose use or activity
wherein or whereby the residents of the housing will be employed on a
seasonal basis. Such housing shall be designed, constructed and utilized
for habitation during the period of April 30 to October 15 and shall not be
occupied or utilized on a year-round basis. All such housing shall conform
to the following provisions:
§ 30-194. Apartments.
The Planning Board may permit apartment projects as provided herein
where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that
a need for the proposed project exists, the project will not be detrimental to
the environment, and will be consistent with the goals and objectives of the
City's adopted Master Plan as well as to sound planning principles.
A. All agricultural employee housing shall be located on land not classified
as prime agricultural soils or other areas considered environmentally
sensitive by the United States Soil Conservation Service or the City
Master Plan.
B. Such housing shall have direct access to a public roadway, and the
access road shall be so constructed and maintained in a safe, adequate
manner to enable vehicles, including emergency vehicles such as
ambulances and fire trucks, to reach the housing. Areas shall be
provided in close proximity to such housing for the parking of vehicles
driven by the residents thereof.
A. Garden apartments. Garden apartment projects may be developed as
provided in the Schedules of District Regulations. Gross dwelling unit
density for the tract shall not exceed 10 units per acre. The following
regulations shall be applicable to any garden apartment project:
(1) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities and shall have a minimum habitable
floor area consistent with the following:
(a) One-bedroom unit: 600 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 700 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 900 square feet.
63.Editor's Note: Former § 30-192, Affordable Housing, as well as §§ 30-192.1 through 192.11,
pertaining to affordable housing, were amended and relocated to Article XXV, Affordable
Housing, 8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 23-2007.
§ 30-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-194
1:467
(2) In addition to the required habitable floor area, there shall be a
minimum storage area in each building for bicycles, carriages,
furniture and similar incidental equipment or items, equal to 70
square feet in area by a minimum of seven feet in height per unit.
(3) A maximum of 10% of the total number of units in a completed
development may be three-bedroom units; up to 50% of the total
units in a completed development may be two-bedroom
apartments; and the remainder shall be one-bedroom apartments.
In the event that a development is to be completed in sections, the
above-stated proportions of three- , two- and one-bedroom units
shall be substantially maintained as construction of the
development progresses.
(4) A minimum of 25% of the total area of the apartment development,
exclusive of normal dwelling dooryards, buffer strips, parking
areas, and street rights-of-way, shall be designed for common open
space and recreational area. No one recreational area shall be less
than 10,000 square feet in area nor 100 feet at its narrowest
dimension. Each recreational area shall be conveniently accessible
to the development inhabitants. Common open space and
recreational areas shall be either made available for conveyance to
the City with a deed restriction applying that it will be permanently
devoted to playground or park use or held in private ownership, but
only when a deed reversion clause is arranged in favor of the City in
the event that use of the land for common open space and
recreational purposes ceases to exist for period of one year.
(5) All recreational areas and/or parks shall be improved by the
developer, including equipment, walkways, and landscaping. The
Planning Board, in reviewing the plans, shall determine that the
recreational areas are suited to their intended use in terms of the
environment and will meet the needs of the development's
inhabitants. Not more than 50% of the development's areas shall be
in one of the following: a floodplain, areas with a slope greater than
10%, a watercourse, or other areas unsuitable for recreational
purposes due to environmental considerations.
(6) Open space adjacent to buildings not surfaced as walkways,
driveways, parking areas, utility areas or other required
improvements shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick strand
of grass or other ground cover. All such landscaping and the
provision of trees and shrubs shall comply with the standards set
forth in § 30-165F of this chapter. The Planning Board, in reviewing
plans, shall determine that the landscaping plan is designed to
optimize solar access and protect buildings from prevailing winter
winds.
(7) Maintenance of open space and recreational areas of garden
apartment developments shall be responsibility of the developer.
§ 30-194 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-194
1:468
(8) Each garden apartment building or structure shall be equipped
with at least one washer and one dryer for use by apartment units
which are not provided with laundry facilities or facility hookups.
No less than one garbage pickup area shall be established with
suitable receptacle in close proximity to each eight apartment
units. Their detrimental effects on the aesthetic character of the
development shall be minimized where necessary through the use
of enclosures or screens composed of suitable fencing, masonry
walls, or shrubbery at least six feet in height, around the perimeter
of the areas used for garbage pickup or other utility areas. Fencing
and walls shall not be more than 50% opaque on the vertical
surface.
(9) Every building shall have a minimum setback of 40 feet from any
public street or road and 15 feet from any private interior road,
driveway or parking area.
(10) Driveways, parking areas and all pedestrianways shall be provided
at all times with adequate illumination so shielded as to avoid
deleterious glare to adjacent or nearby residential units.
(11) Parking areas, screening, signs and driveways shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
(12) All on-site electricity, utility, and cable television services shall be
installed below ground.
(13)No garden apartment development shall be constructed in any area
where public sewerage facilities and water supply are not available
or cannot be made available by the developer. For purposes of this
subsection, "public sewerage facilities and water supply" shall
mean those operated by the City of Millville or other public or
quasi-public agency or company approved and authorized to so
provide such services by the City of Millville.
(14) All streets and roads created by an apartment development shall be
oriented in an east-west direction to permit the buildings
constructed thereon to maximum solar gain, within the limits of
practicality and feasibility.
(15) All garden apartment developments shall incorporate energy
conservation techniques and alternative sources of energy
utilization, including passive and active solar power and wind
turbines, into the design of the proposed structures, to the
maximum extent practical. The applicant shall detail the
techniques to be utilized to conserve energy use in the
development in an Energy Conservation Analysis and Report
hereby required to be submitted with the application for approval.
(16) There shall be no dwelling unit below the ground floor level not
above the second story of any structure.
§ 30-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-194
1:469
(17) There shall be not more than 16 dwelling units in each building or
structure. The facade of any building or structure shall not exceed
60 feet in length unless each increment of 60 feet is interrupted by
an angle of at least 45º or by an offset of at least five feet.
(18) Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the wings of a single
building or by walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum
width between any two walls of at least two feet for each one foot of
height of the tallest adjacent building or wall.
(19)No garden apartment dwelling structures shall be located within
25 feet of another dwelling structure. The maximum building
height of a principal building shall be 35 feet and 15 feet for an
accessory building. The minimum lot frontage along the improved
road shall be not less than 1/2 of the lot depth. The minimum lot
depth shall be 150 feet. Yard setback requirements shall be as
follows:
Principal Building Accessory Building
Front yard 25 feet
Side yard (each) 25 feet 10 feet
Rear yard 35 feet 10 feet
(20) There shall be a buffer along the entire perimeter of the property,
except for the front yard, of no less than 20 feet in width measured
from the property line, and suitably landscaped with grass and/or
ground cover, shrubs and trees, subject to the approval of the
Shade Tree Commission. No buildings, including garages, other
accessory structures, interior streets and driveways, parking areas,
drying yards, or play areas, shall be located within the buffer area.
(21) Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted in the front yard
area, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit
parking areas in the front yard. Required parking areas shall be
permitted within the required yard areas, except the front yard,
providing that it shall be no closer than 20 feet to any property line.
B. Mid-rise apartments. Mid-rise apartments may be permitted in R-5
Districts in those areas in the City that are located within close
proximity to employment sources, community amenities and shopping
and transportation facilities. All mid-rise apartment developments shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) No mid-rise apartment structure shall be closer than 100 feet to
another mid-rise apartment structure.
(2) Gross density shall not exceed 20 dwelling units per acre. However,
the developer may qualify for a density bonus not to exceed 20% of
the allowable gross density as stated herein above when an
appropriate amount of affordable housing is provided for senior
citizens and the handicapped, as determined by the Planning
§ 30-194 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-194
1:470
Board. Appropriate agreements shall ensure that the housing is
limited to eligible households and that the unit remains affordable.
(3) The maximum building height of a principal building shall be five
stories and the minimum height shall be three stories, exclusive of
elevator towers.
(4) The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet along a major street
and be located within 500 feet of an arterial or major collector
street or road as classified by the City Master Plan.
(5) Provisions shall be made in any mid-rise apartment structure to
provide access for the handicapped.
(6) All mid-rise apartment buildings shall include at least one elevator.
(7) All mid-rise apartment dwelling units shall have minimum
habitable floor areas according to the following:
(a) One-bedroom units: 600 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom units: 700 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom units: 900 square feet.
There shall be a maximum of six dwelling units on each floor
of the mid-rise apartment structure.
(8) Parking may be permitted on the ground floor or below ground,
provided it shall not be more than two levels below ground, and
provided that, except for necessary driveways, no accessory
parking garage or area shall be visible from any public street or
road.
(9) Every mid-rise apartment development shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection A(20) and (21) of this section.
(10)Washing and drying facilities shall be provided within the principal
structure in an amount equal to or greater than one washer and
one dryer for each floor contained therein. All such facilities shall
be placed in convenient locations for the use of the occupants.
(11) Open space adjacent to the structure shall be graded and seeded to
provide a thick strand of grass or other ground cover material. All
such landscaping and the provision of trees and shrubs shall
comply with the standards set forth in § 30-164F of this chapter.
The Planning Board, in reviewing plans, shall determine that the
landscaping plan is designed to optimize solar access and protect
buildings from prevailing winter winds.
(12) The siting of the building upon the tract shall be determined to
afford maximum solar gain and minimum effects from prevailing
winter winds and to assure that the siting does not result in the
excessive blockage of solar access for adjoining properties and
§ 30-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-194
1:471
structures. In no case shall the minimum side or rear yard be
less than 50 feet. The required front and side yard setbacks of
the mid-rise apartment building shall be increased 10 feet for
each additional story above three. No mid-rise apartment dwelling
structure shall be located within 100 feet of another mid-rise
dwelling structure.
(13) All mid-rise apartment structures shall incorporate energy
conservation techniques and the utilization of alternative sources
of energy to the maximum extent practical. The applicant shall
submit an Energy Conservation Analysis and Report to the
Planning Board for its review at the time of submitting the original
application.
(14) All installations of utilities shall be underground and all mid-rise
apartment developments shall have public sewerage facilities and
water supply available prior to development or made available by
the developer. "Public sewage facilities and water systems" shall be
as defined in Subsection A(13) above.
(15) All trash and garbage disposal facilities shall be properly screened
through the use of enclosures or buffering composed of suitable
fencing, masonry walls or shrubbery at least six feet in height
around the perimeter of the facilities. Fencing and walls shall not
be more than 50% opaque on the vertical surfaces.
(16) All mid-rise apartment buildings shall be equipped with security
systems designed to prevent unwanted or unauthorized intrusion of
the building, unless 24 hours doorman services is to be provided.
The security system shall permit two way communication between
each apartment unit and the entrance area so as to provide
residents with a means of identifying persons wishing to gain
admittance.
(17) Any mid-rise apartment development shall provide some
recreational facilities for residents and the maintenance of any
open space or recreational facilities or areas shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
(18) In addition to the required habitable floor area, there shall be a
minimum storage area in each building for bicycles, carriages,
furniture, and similar incidental equipment of items, equal to 70
square feet in area by a minimum of seven feet in height per unit.
(19) A minimum of 40% of the total number of units in a completed midrise
development shall be one-bedroom units. The remainder may
be two- and three-bedroom units. In the event that a development
is to be completed in stages, the above-stated proportion of onebedroom
apartments shall be substantially maintained as
construction of the development progresses.
§ 30-194 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-194
1:472
(20) A maximum 40% of the total area of a mid-rise apartment complex
may be covered by structures, paving, and/or any impervious
surfaces.
(21) Parking areas, screening, signs, and driveways shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(22) Every mid-rise apartment development shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection A(20) and (21) of this section.
C. High-rise apartments. The Planning Board may permit high-rise
apartment developments in R-5 Districts in areas located adjacent to
employment sources, community amenities and shopping areas and
transportation facilities. All high-rise apartment developments shall
comply with all requirements set forth below:
(1) The gross density of a high-rise apartment project shall not exceed
a maximum gross density of 30 units per acre of total lot area of the
proposed development.
(2) The maximum building height of a principal building shall be eight
stories or 90 feet and the minimum height shall be six stories,
exclusive of elevator towers.
(3) The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet along a major street
and be located within 500 feet of an arterial or major collector
street or road as classified by the City Master Plan.
(4) Yard setback requirements.
(a) Yard setback requirements shall be as follows:
Principal
Building
Accessory
Building
Front yard 50 feet
Side yard (each) 50 feet 20 feet
Rear yard 50 feet 30 feet
(b) The required front and side yard setbacks of the high-rise
apartment building shall be increased 10 feet for each
additional story above three. No high-rise apartment dwelling
structure shall be located within 250 feet of another high-rise
dwelling structure.
(5) The siting of a high-rise apartment building on a property shall be
determined to minimize blockage of solar access for any structure
on an adjacent property; shall minimize the effect of two prevailing
winter winds and maximize the solar gain for the high-rise
apartment building, and prevent blockage of solar access to any
adjacent residential lot by any more than 30% thereof.
§ 30-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-194
1:473
(6) All high-rise apartment dwelling units shall have minimum
habitable floor areas according to the following:
(a) One-bedroom units: 600 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom units: 700 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom units: 900 square feet.
There shall be a maximum of 18 units on each floor of the
high-rise apartment structure.
(7) Provisions shall be made in any high-rise apartment structure to
provide access for the handicapped.
(8) All high-rise apartment buildings shall include at least one elevator.
(9) Every high-rise apartment development shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection A(20) and (21) of this section.
(10)Washing and drying facilities shall be provided within the principal
structure in an amount equal to or greater than one washer and
one dryer for each floor contained therein. For every floor where
more than 10 apartment units are located one additional washer
and one additional dryer must be provided. All such facilities shall
be placed in convenient locations for the use of the occupants.
(11) Open space adjacent to the structure shall be graded and sealed to
provide a thick strand of grass or other ground cover material. All
such landscaping and the provision of trees and shrubs shall
comply with the standards set forth in § 30-165F of this chapter.
The Planning Board, in reviewing plans, shall determine that the
landscaping plan is designed to optimize solar access and protect
buildings from prevailing winter winds.
(12) In addition to the required habitable floor area, there shall be a
minimum storage area in each building for bicycles, carriages,
furniture, and similar incidental equipment or items, equal to 70
square feet in area by a minimum of seven feet in height per unit.
(13) A minimum of 40% of the total number of units in a completed highrise
development shall be one-bedroom units. The remainder may
be two- and three-bedroom units. In the event that a development
is to be completed in stages, the above-stated proportion of onebedroom
apartments shall be substantially maintained as
construction as the development progresses.
(14) A maximum of 50% of the total area of a high-rise apartment
complex may be covered by structures, paving, and/or any
impervious surface.
(15) All high-rise apartment structures shall incorporate energy
conservation techniques and the utilization of alternative sources
§ 30-194 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-194
1:474
§ 30-195. Amusement arcades.
of energy to the maximum extent practical. The applicant shall
submit an Energy Conservation Analysis and Report to the
Planning Board for its review at the time of submitting the original
application.
(16) All installations of utilities shall be underground and all high-rise
apartment developments shall have public sewerage facilities and
water supply available prior to development or made available by
the developer. "Public sewerage facilities and water system" shall
be as defined in Subsection A(13)
(17) All trash and garbage disposal facilities shall be properly screened
through the use of enclosures or buffering composed of suitable
fencing, masonry walls or shrubbery at least six feet in height
around the perimeter of the facilities. Fencing and walls shall not
be more than 50% opaque on the vertical surfaces.
(18) All high-rise apartment buildings shall be equipped with security
systems designed to prevent unwanted or unauthorized intrusion of
the building, unless twenty-four-hour doorman service is to be
provided. The security system shall permit two-way communication
between each apartment unit and the entrance area so as to
provide residents with a means of identifying persons wishing to
gain admittance.
(19) Any high-rise apartment development shall provide some
recreational facilities for residents and the maintenance of any
open space or recreational facilities or areas shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
(20) Parking areas, screening, signs and driveways shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
(21) Parking may be permitted on the ground floor or below ground,
provided that it shall not be more than two levels below ground,
and provided that, except for necessary driveways, no accessory
parking garage or area shall be usable from any public street or
road.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit, regulate
and control the establishment of amusement arcades in designated
commercial zoning districts, so as to prevent public disorder, nuisance,
loitering, and other acts detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
residents.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An establishment, room or place, open to
the public, that contains more than four coin- or token-operated games,
§ 30-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-195
1:475
rides, shows, and/or similar entertainment facilities and devices. An
amusement arcade does not include any business location in which the
floor area devoted to such games is not in excess of 10% of the total
floor area occupied by such business and where games are not operated
in a separate room from the principal business use.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any coin-operated or token-operated
machine or device that, whether mechanical, electrical, or electronic,
shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin and may be operated by
the public for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, the object
of which is to achieve either a high or low score, by comparison to the
score of other players.
C. Eligibility criteria.
(1) Amusement arcades shall be located within B-1 and B-4 Business
Districts.
(2) All amusement machines must be licensed pursuant to Article IV of
Chapter 33, Licenses and Permits, of the Code of the City of
Millville.
(3) No person shall operate an amusement arcade within the City
without first obtaining a conditional use permit, in addition to all
other licenses and permits required by the Municipal Code.
D. Conditions. The Planning Board may grant a conditional use so as to
permit within the B-1 and B-4 Zoning Districts amusement arcade
operations, if, after a public hearing pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law and submission of all required site plan documents, it finds
that an application complies with the following conditions:
(1) All licensing requirements pursuant to Article IV of Chapter 33,
Licenses and Permits, are met and the building and premises
comply with all other laws and ordinances of the City.
(2) The conditional use, if granted, will not have any substantial
adverse effect upon the neighborhood and it will promote the
general purpose and intent of the Municipal Master Plan and
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Provision of one off-street parking space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for every two full time employees.
(4) Game machines shall be located no closer than 12 inches from any
wall assembly separating the amusement arcade from any adjacent
building or portion of a building.
(5) There shall be at least one supervisory employee in attendance 18
years or older during operating hours. Arcades with 15 or more
machines must provide an additional attendant or uniformed
security guard.
§ 30-195 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-195
1:476
§ 30-196. Camps and campgrounds.
Camps or campgrounds for educational, sporting, recreational or religious
purposes may be establishment as provided in the Schedules of District
Regulations and the following provisions:
(6) An amusement arcade must have a minimum 750 square feet of
floor space for the operation of said arcade.
(7) The sale of tobacco products and the consumption, use or sale of
alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted on said premises.
(8) The Planning Board may impose a limit on the hours of operation
upon a finding that such limit is necessary to the conditions set
forth in this section.
(9) The Planning Board may impose any additional conditions upon the
granting of any conditional use permit, which it determines are
necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes set forth in this
section.
E. Submission requirements. An applicant for a conditional use for an
amusement arcade must include the following information:
(1) Site plan details as specified in § 30-45.
(2) A floor plan showing the number and location of machines.
(3) Where parking facilities and/or open space are shared by more
than one business establishment, as in a shopping center, the
owner/operator of the arcade shall submit a plan for keeping the
parking area free of litter, food residue, or other materials that
could be a health hazard or nuisance.
F. Terms and duration of conditional use permit.
(1) A conditional use permit for an amusement arcade shall be granted
for a period of three years.
(2) The application for renewal of the permit must be filed at least 90
days prior to the expiration of the permit period.
A. Campgrounds and camps may be established on parcel(s) which:
(1) Are not less than 25% wooded, or
(2) Are adjacent and have direct access to a body of water,
watercourse or natural stream, and
(3) Not more than 25% of the parcel(s) involved are considered to be
environmentally sensitive such as floodplain, recognized historic or
archaeological site or structure, natural habitat of endangered or
threatened species, areas with a slope of greater than 10% or other
similar conditions.
§ 30-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-196
1:477
B. Any proposed campground shall comply with the following conditions
and requirements:
(1) The gross density of any campground shall not exceed 10 campsites
per acre.
(2) Individual campsites intended for use by travel trailers, vans, or
other recreational vehicles shall not be less than 65 feet in depth or
35 feet in width. Campsites restricted in use to tents may be of
lesser size to be determined by the approving authority.
(3) At least 40% of the parcel(s) involved shall be maintained in
permanent open space or recreational areas. Recreational facilities
shall be provided and may include, but are not limited to, hiking or
biking trails, beaches, ball fields, tennis, basketball or volleyball
courts, picnic areas, swimming pools, playgrounds or tot lots and
similar uses. Of areas set aside as permanent open space, at least
50% shall be in tracts of reasonable size in depth and shape to
provide meaningful open space area.
(4) Campgrounds shall be restricted in occupancy to travel trailers,
recreational vehicles or tents. Mobile homes or residential trailers
or vehicles intended, capable or marketed for year-round
residential occupancy shall be prohibited.
(5) All campgrounds shall be provided with permanent buffer areas
intended to reduce or eliminate noise and glare or other nuisances
to adjacent properties or uses and to assure the privacy of campers.
The Planning Board may increase or decrease the buffer required
according to site conditions and may require landscaping,
screening or fencing in order to assure adequate buffer to achieve
the intent of this section. The minimum buffer area as measured
from the property line shall be:
(a) From properties used or zoned for residential purposes
without dense woods and shrub coverage: 300 feet.
(b) From properties used or zoned for residential purposes with
dense woods and shrub coverage: 200 feet.
(c) From properties not zoned or used for residential purposes
without dense woods and shrub coverage: 200 feet.
(d) From properties not zoned or used for residential purposes
with dense woods and shrub coverage: 100 feet.
(e) From property lines adjacent to lakes, watercourses or uses
not closer than 100 feet to the property line: 50 feet.
(6) All campgrounds shall conform to all health regulations, including
the New Jersey Campground Code. The Planning Board, as a
condition of its approval, may require the provision of specific
facilities potable water, sanitary sewer and other health related
§ 30-196 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-196
1:478
facilities, utilities or other amenities designed and intended to
protect the health and safety of the residents of the campground.
Facilities shall be provided throughout a campground or camp for
deposit of solid waste, and scheduled collection of solid waste and
its removal from the campground shall be required to be submitted
as a condition of approval.
(7) Permanent year-round residence in a travel trailer, recreational
vehicle, tent or cabin at a campground or camp shall not be
permitted. Residential occupancy of a campground or camp shall
be prohibited except during the "season" and for any residence of
the owner of the facility. For purposes of this subsection,
"residential occupancy" is hereby defined as that established for
permanent year-round occupancy other than seasonal and
incidental to recreational, educational, religious or sporting
purposes including recreational area use. The "season" shall be
defined as April 1 to December 20 of any year. Between January 1
and March 15 all travel trailers, vans, recreational vehicles or tents
shall be removed from campsites and disconnected from all
utilities. The travel trailer or recreational vehicle may be stored on
a separate site or location within the campground as long as it is
not occupied.
(8) No permanent foundation, patio, structure, porch, shed or other
building shall be erected, constructed, connected or otherwise
attached to any travel trailer or recreational vehicle or tent.
(9) Driveway surfaces shall be designed to minimize or eliminate dust.
Bicycle and pedestrian ways shall be provided and, wherever
reasonable, separated from motor vehicle traffic. The Planning
Board, in reviewing the site plan of any proposed campground,
shall respect any applicant's attempt to maintain a natural setting
or feature and limit specific requirements for the installation of
facilities and other improvements to those reasonably required to
eliminate or minimize situations hazardous to the campground
occupants or the public at-large.
(10) In those cases where full development of a campground is intended
or proposed over a period of time, the Planning Board may approve
sections of the campground, provided that the overall plan for the
ultimate development of the campground has been conditionally
approved. Approval of any section of a campground shall be
withheld whenever it is determined that the developer has failed to
maintain existing campground section(s) as approved in the
original site plan or problems arise requiring changes for the
health and safety of the public.
(11) As accessory uses to a campground, one residence for the use of
the owner, manager or operator of the campground will be
permitted and a "general store" designed, sized and intended
primarily for use of the campground or camp residence.
§ 30-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-196
1:479
C. Any proposed camp shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Subsection B, except Subsection B(1), and the following additional
requirements:
(1) The gross density of a camp wherein campsites are not utilized
shall be 30 persons per acre.
(2) Temporary shelters or dormitories, meeting or dining halls and
similar structures used or intended for human habitation or
occupancy shall be made of durable materials and shall conform to
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.
(3) If individual campsites are not utilized, the vehicular traffic shall be
confined to delivery of persons and materials to specific sites within
the campground, and parking area shall be provided at one
centralized place separate and isolated from camp structures.
(4) When camps are intended for the primary use and enjoyment of
children and young persons under the age of 18 years, the Planning
Board may require such additional improvements or conditions as
deemed reasonable and necessary to assure the safety and welfare
of the camp's occupants.
D. All camps and campgrounds shall provide the following:
(1) Sanitary facilities shall be provided on the basis of not less than one
water closet, one wash basin and one shower stall for each sex for
each 20 tents and trailer sites. All such facilities shall be under a
permanent roof, and water closets shall be individually enclosed.
Water supply and sewage disposal facilities shall be available and
approved by local health authorities. Holding tanks for sewage
from campers or trailers shall be properly installed, maintained and
pumped on a regular basis.
(2) A permanent structure shall be on the premises, which is capable of
containing all of the persons who can reasonably be anticipated to
be at the camp or campground at any one time, including the
owner/operator, employees and guests of campers. The purpose of
such structure is to provide emergency shelter in the event of
extreme weather or other circumstances making such shelter
desirable or necessary. No occupancy controls shall be applied to
such shelter other than providing at least five square feet of area
for each person. The dwelling of the owner/operator or the
structure containing sanitary facilities, except for individual water
closet enclosures, may qualify in meeting this requirement.
(3) Interior and entrance roads may be dirt roads, but shall be of such
gravel or sand, or be so treated to reduce dust. All roads shall
remain private roads and be at least 20 feet in width and shall not
intersect a public street closer than 100 feet to a property line.
Interior roads shall be designed and laid out to provide adequate
flow and movement of vehicles towing camper trailers.
§ 30-196 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-196
1:480
§ 30-197. Child-care centers.
The City of Millville, through its development regulations, intends to
encourage and promote the establishment of licensed child-care facilities
in safe and convenient locations throughout the City to accommodate the
demand for child care in the community.
(4) No two permanent structures within the camp shall be closer to
each other than 35 feet, and no permanent structure shall be closer
to an interior roadway than 20 feet.
E. An application for a conditional use permit in connection with a camp or
campground shall be accompanied by a site plan which, in addition to
the details required to be shown thereon in accordance with § 30-193
shall also include and/or show:
(1) A layout of the campground with a site plan of a typical campsite;
(2) A schedule of development for all proposed facilities and campsite
development; and
(3) An environmental impact statement as required in § 30-45C(21)
when required by the Planning Board.
F. In addition to any other requirements or standards to be met by any
applicant, Planning Board approval of a site plan and the granting of a
conditional use permit for a camp or campground shall not alleviate or
anyway indicate approval or the recommendation for approval of a
camp or campground license which may be required by the City of
Millville.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHILD DAY CARE — Provision of supplemental parental care and
supervision for a nonrelated child or children on a regular basis for
less than 24 hours a day under license by the State of New Jersey
Department of Youth and Family Services for a prearranged
compensation.
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY — A building or structure wherein an
agency, person or persons regularly provides care for a group of
children for less than 24 hours a day. Child day-care facilities include
family day-care homes, child mini day-care centers and child day-care
centers.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A licensed family dwelling of a person
or persons who regularly provide direct care to six or fewer children,
including the licensee's own children, for less than 24 hours a day. A
family day-care home may provide care for up to 12 children if it meets
the requirements of Subsection B of this section.
CHILD MINI DAY-CARE CENTER — A licensed family day-care home
or an agency that regularly provides for the care of seven through 12
§ 30-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-197
1:481
children, including the licensee's own children, in the family dwelling of
the licensee or in an approved structure either on the same building lot
occupied by said dwelling or a lot located in a zoning district permitting
such a use.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A licensed agency that provides for the
care of 13 or more children in an approved structure other than a
residential dwelling and on a lot not occupied by a dwelling. Exception:
Child day-care centers located within a multifamily dwelling complex
for the purpose of providing day care exclusively for the children of the
residents of said complex.
B. Family day-care home. Family day-care homes shall be permitted as a
conditional use in all zoning districts that permit single-family
residences by right, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) All New Jersey state licensing requirements are met including but
not limited to those pertaining to building, fire safety and health
codes.
(2) A license is obtained from the State of New Jersey.
(3) All requirements of the Schedule of District Regulation for the
zoning district of the parcel are met.
(4) A conditional use permit application in accordance with § 30-53 is
submitted and approved by the City of Millville Planning Board.
(5) The facility is registered with the City of Millville.
(6) No family day-care home shall care for more than two children
under the age of two years.
(7) A family day-care home may provide for more than six children,
provided that:
(a) None of the additional children are in child care for more than
four hours.
(b) At no time may the total number of children exceed 12.
(c) Whenever there are more than six children on the premises the
licensee/provider shall be assisted by a person at least 16 years
of age.
C. Child mini day-care centers. Child mini day-care centers shall be
permitted as a conditional use in all zoning districts that permit singlefamily
dwellings by right. Child mini day-care centers shall also be
permitted as conditional uses in all business districts, provided that:
(1) All conditions set forth in Subsection B of this section are met.
D. Child day-care centers. Child day-care centers shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the following zoning districts:
§ 30-197 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-197
1:482
§ 30-198. Churches.
Churches, places of worship, parish houses, convents, and related uses shall
meet the following standards:
§ 30-199. (Reserved)
§ 30-200. Duplex and semidetached dwellings.
The Planning Board may permit the construction of semidetached
(commonly referred to as "half doubles") and duplex dwellings in R-5
Districts in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) R-5, R-10, R-15, R-20, LC and AC, provided that no child day-care
center shall be permitted in a residential structure or on the same
lot as a residential structure.
(2) All business zones including B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and B-5.
A. All off-street parking within 30 feet of any property lines shall be
adequately screened from adjacent properties.
B. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall be no more
than 24 feet wide at any point. Driveways must be at least 10 feet from
any side lot line and 25 feet from the intersection of any street lines. No
more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 200 feet of street
frontage or fraction thereof.
C. When determining parking requirements, consideration shall be given
to all uses carried on at the site.
A. All dwelling units shall have direct access to a local public street or
road.
B. No semidetached dwelling shall have more than one driveway per unit,
and only garages that are attached to the dwelling unit shall be
permitted, unless one garage is shared by two or more units or there is
access to the lot whereon the semidetached dwelling is located from a
rear or side alley. Duplex dwellings shall not have more than one
driveway of a minimum width of 24 feet, unless sufficient on-site
turnaround area is provided. Not more than one accessory use or
structure shall be permitted for any one duplex structure. Accessory
use or structure includes garages, sheds or swimming pools and
communication facilities.
C. All semidetached or duplex dwellings shall only be allowed where
public sanitary sewer and water are available for use by such dwellings.
D. Architectural drawings of the front facade(s) of a semidetached or
duplex dwelling shall be submitted for review and approval of the
structure's uniformity and compatibility of design, materials, color
scheme, treatment and appearance. Deed restrictions shall be required
§ 30-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-200
1:483
§ 30-201. Flea markets, auctions and outdoor sales.
Any auction, sale or flea market activity or use conducted entirely within an
enclosed structure shall be considered a retail sales use and shall comply
with all regulations applicable as set forth in this chapter and any other
ordinance of the City of Millville. Any flea market, auction or sale carried
out in part or total outside of an enclosed permanent structure shall comply
with the provisions of this section. For purposes of this section, an enclosed,
permanent structure shall not include a tent, trailer, motor vehicle, pole
barn or shed, lean-to or other similar structures.
in a manner approved by the Planning Board, provided that attached
units maintain, within reason, a compatibility and conformity of
aesthetic appearance to the entire structure when viewed as a whole.
A. Flea markets shall be permitted as provided in the Schedules of District
Regulations when carried out in accordance with the following
conditions:
(1) All open-air flea markets shall be surrounded by a fence of a nature
and design sufficient to prevent direct pedestrian access to sales
areas except through specified gates or openings. No sales area
shall be directly accessible to pedestrians or vehicles from
adjoining streets.
(2) No use other than retail sales shall be permitted in conjunction
with a flea market. Residential occupancy of any tent, trailer, van,
or other structure or vehicle shall be prohibited except during
normal business hours.
(3) No open-air flea market shall be located closer than 100 feet from
any residential use or zoning district.
(4) No open-air flea market shall operate or permit sales after sunset.
(5) All flea markets shall provide adequate parking facilities for
vendors and the public in convenient location to sales areas.
Designated loading spaces or areas shall be provided and
maintained.
(6) All flea markets shall provide for trash collection and disposal and
shall have available lavatory facilities for use by the public.
(7) In the case of open-air flea markets, one structure or mobile home
may be used as an office and/or night watchman's facility.
(8) All flea markets shall be subject to site plan review.
B. Auctions or outdoor sales may be held in accordance with the following
conditions:
(1) Temporary auctions or sales of household belongings or business
possessions and inventory in connection with the liquidation of an
§ 30-200 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-201
1:484
estate settlement or a court ordered cessation of a given use are
permitted in all zoning districts, provided that such auctions or
sales shall not continue for more than seven consecutive days
or for more than three weekends within any six-month period.
Such activities shall not be subject to site plan review, provided
that no structures are altered, erected, constructed or installed
in connection therewith. Such activities may be subject to other
regulations or licensing requirements of the City of Millville.
(2) Any auction or sale carried out as a continuous business operation
or in connection with the sale of goods or services as a promotional
campaign of any existing business or industry shall be considered
to be a retail use and subject to site plan review. Temporary sales or
auctions held or sponsored by bona fide nonprofit organizations
such as churches, schools, volunteer fire or safety organizations,
social or civic clubs or organizations and political parties shall not
be subject to site plan review.
(3) The provisions of Subsection B(2) hereinabove shall also apply to
the temporary sale of flowers, produce and other merchandise or
products from vehicles, trailers, tents and structures, either
temporary or permanent. Such retail sales shall be subject to site
plan review and if carried out on property not owned by the
applicant, approval of such activity and authorization for site plan
review application shall be received from the owner of the subject
property. Such activities shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) No such activity shall be located closer than 10 feet to a street
right-of-way line or within 25 feet of the intersection of two or
more streets.
(b) Such activity shall only be permitted whenever or however
possible so as to prevent traffic hazards and in a manner
deemed reasonable to assure safety to customers in connection
with traffic considerations.
(c) No signs or lighting shall be erected or maintained in a fashion
or manner which might be dangerous to the safety of traffic on
adjoining roadways.
(4) All such auctions, sales or outdoor merchandising shall be subject
to:
(a) Site plan review; and
(b) The provisions of Article IX of this Chapter and the Schedules
of District Regulations.
§ 30-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-202
1:485
§ 30-202. Gasoline service stations, automotive repair garages and
carwashes
Gasoline service stations and automotive repair garages, which include
facilities or structures for the painting of motor vehicles, trailers or boats,
may be established when they meet the following conditions:
A. In addition to site plan details required by § 30-45, the site plan
submitted in connection with an application for a gasoline service
station or repair garage shall also include:
(1) The location of all fuel tanks and pumps;
(2) The dimensions and capacity of each tank;
(3) The depth the tanks will be buried below ground level;
(4) The location and use of all structures, principal and accessory, to be
constructed; and
(5) The location and maximum number of automobiles or motor
vehicles in need of service which are to be garaged or parked on
the premises at any one time.
B. No motor vehicle gasoline or service station or repair garage shall be
located within 200 feet of the entrance of a school, recreational area or
facility, library or hospital. Such distances shall be measured in a
straight line from the property line of the referenced structures, areas
or facilities to the station or garage lot line nearest the structure, areas
or facilities along the street line.
C. It is intended that gasoline or service stations and repair garages be
designed compatibly with other permitted commercial and industrial
uses in the zone district in which they are proposed to be located, that
they not be stripped along the available highway frontage or on more
than two quadrants of any intersection and that they be included within
shopping centers and in industrial parks as an integral part of the
overall design. Ingress and egress shall be designed to recognize
turning movements generated. These access points shall be
coordinated with the access points required for adjacent or nearby uses
and the frequency of intersecting side streets.
D. Any part of a property or site to be used for the repair of vehicles,
dispensing or changing fluids, prolonged motor vehicle idling or the
painting of vehicles shall not be located in any floodplain or within 100
feet thereof or of a residence, church, school, library, eating
establishment or health-care facility unless undertaken entirely within
an enclosed, ventilated, soundproof structure.
E. Any fuel pumps shall be located at least 35 feet from any property line.
All fuel tanks shall be installed underground and shall be located at
least 30 feet from any property line. A minimum space of 25 feet shall
§ 30-202 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-202
1:486
exist between any two pumping islands and between any islands and
any structures.
F. All storage areas shall be suitably screened, and no vehicles shall be
stored on-site which are not awaiting repair work within a reasonable
period of time. Facilities for trash disposal shall be provided and, where
necessary, screened. No junked automobiles or parts thereof and no
unregistered motor vehicles shall be permitted outside an enclosed
building. In the case of repair garages which are part of or established
in conjunction with the sale of motor vehicles and the sale or repair of
farm equipment or machinery, recreational vehicles or boats,
unregistered vehicles or boats may be stored outside a structure on
designated sales or display area.
G. As a minimum, screening as required in § 30-155 shall be required
along any property line adjoining a residentially used or zoned property.
The Planning Board may require additional buffering, and other
protective measures as necessary to protect surrounding properties
from the effects of light, noise, air pollution or other nuisances
generated on site.
H. Any part of the site proposed for a gasoline or service station or repair
garage subject to access by motor vehicles shall be paved or provided
with a dustless, hard surface. The areas used for the dispensing of
gasoline or other fuels shall be provided with a hard surface and
sufficient drainage to contain any spills of the liquids should they occur.
I. Except in the case of farm equipment machinery, recreational vehicles
or boats, all work on vehicles or boats involving body or hull repairs,
removal of engines or transmission or painting shall be performed in an
enclosed, ventilated building.
J. Driveways shall not be more than 24 feet at property lines and curblines
and shall be located at least 10 feet from the intersection of street rightof-
way lines. Driveway entrances shall be paved with portland cement
or asphaltic concrete.
K. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed in the building and on the
pump island(s). All other exterior displays and parking of equipment for
rent or sale shall be permitted, provided that the area is devoted to the
purpose, is in addition to the minimum lot size required for a gasoline or
service station or repair garage, the area devoted to this purpose does
not exceed 20% of the total area of the entire site, the maximum sign
area for the station or garage is not exceeded and the location of the
equipment being rented or offered for sale does not interfere with the
required off-street parking requirements for the service station or
repair garage, and does not interfere with the on-site traffic circulation
indicated on the approved site plan.
L. All gasoline stations and/or repair garages shall be provided with
adequate facilities, equipment and structures and shall be designed to
ensure against degradation of or adverse effects to the environment
§ 30-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-202
1:487
§ 30-203. Home animal agriculture.
and adjacent land uses within 500 feet of the property involved. Such
facilities and the equipment include storage tanks for used motor oil
and petroleum products, emission control and air quality devices and
separate disposal systems designed to properly handle wastewater
used in connection with such uses, including motor vehicle or boat
cleaning.
M. The storage of vehicles not in operating condition as permitted in this
section shall be stored only if all fuel tanks in such vehicles are drained.
N. In addition to complying with all the requirements listed in Subsections
A through K of this section, carwashes shall also meet the following
standards:
(1) Sufficient on-site area shall be provided to permit cars or other
vehicles waiting for service. Such waiting areas shall be suitably
screened from adjoining properties.
(2) All wastewater generated from such uses shall be disposed of in a
public wastewater system or an approved on-site system designed
to handle such flows. No wastewater will be allowed to leave the
site through surface runoff or underground piping.
A. Home agriculture, including home animal agriculture, may be
permitted in those zones and districts specifically permitting customary
agricultural uses and as permitted by other City ordinances, as long as
animal numbers, as well as care and management, reasonably conform
to current recommended management practices established in
"Recommended Guidelines for Home Animal Agriculture in Residential
Areas" published and revised by the New Jersey Cooperative Extension
Service, New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station.
B. The provisions outlined in this section are based on the animal unit and
bird unit concepts. Large, mature, domesticated animals are a unit of
one, while smaller or immature animal numbers may be considered in a
proportionate ratio. Animal units for specific categories are listed in the
tables contained in this section by animal type.
§ 30-202 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-203
1:488
Table 1
Animal Units for Specific Livestock Categories or Type
Units
Per
Animal
Animals
Per
Unit
Remarks
Livestock
Cattle Dairy 1 yr. or
older
1 1 Or cow with
nursing calf
Under 1
year
1/2
Beef 1 yr. or
older
1
Or cow with
nursing calf
Under 1
year
1/2 2
Steer 1 yr. or
older
1 1
(dairy or
beef)
Under 1
year
1/2 2
Bulls 1 yr. or
older
1 1
(dairy or
beef)
Under 1
year
1/2 2
Horses All breeds
and sexes
6 mos.
or older
1 1 Includes ponies,
mules, burros,
donkeys. Mares
with foal until
weaned or up to 1
yr.
All breeds Under 6
mos.
1/2 2 (See above
remarks.)
Sheep All breeds
and sexes
1 yr. or
older
1/5 5 Ewe with nursing
lamb up to 3 mos.
1/5 unit
Lambs Over 3
mos. and
up to 1
yr.
1/10 10
Goats All breeds
and sexes
Same as sheep
(See above.)
§ 30-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-203
1:489
Table 1
Animal Units for Specific Livestock Categories or Type
Units
Per
Animal
Animals
Per
Unit
Remarks
Livestock
Swine All breeds Over 1
yr.
1/2 2 Sow with suckling
pigs under 3 mos.
1/2 unit
All sexes 3 mos. to
1 year
1/4 4
NOTES:
32 bird units = 1 animal unit. (See Table 2.)
Combination of different livestock and fowl are acceptable so long as
total densities are not exceeded for acreage available.
Example: 1 swine and 16 chickens would be acceptable on 1 acre.
However, 1 horse and 16 chickens would not.
Table 2
Poultry Bird Units for Use with Home Animal Agriculture
Lot Size
(acres)
Maximum Number
Bird Units
1 32
2 64
3 96
4 128
5 160
Type of Bird Bird Unit Factor
Chickens (mature) 1
Broilers and fryers 1/3
Ducks 2
Turkeys 4
Geese 4
NOTES:
The maximum number of bird units (regardless of species) should not
exceed those specified for chickens.
32 bird units equal 1 animal unit.
§ 30-203 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-203
1:490
C. Animal standards.
(1) Livestock.
(a) Animal units by livestock category are listed in Table 1. The
minimum lot size to be considered, including the dwelling unit
site, shall be one acre. No more than one (1)(a) animal unit
should be kept on the first acre and no more than one (1)(a)
animal unit for each acre up to a total lot size of three acres. On
lots exceeding three acres, animal numbers should be
determined on a site-specific basis but not to exceed 1 1/2
animal units per acre.
(b) Outside living areas shall be fenced in a manner safe to
animals and man and located in a manner so that livestock will
not cause damage to neighboring property. Fences should be
made of woven wire or wooden materials and be 48 feet high
with posts not more than 10 feet apart.
(c) Minimum areas for outside lots for livestock and medium
domesticated animals are as follows:
[1] Horses: 1,000 square feet.
[2] Cattle: 300 square feet.
[3] Sheep and goats: 300 square feet.
[4] Swine: 100 square feet.
(d) A confined domesticated animal must have shelter readily
accessible. A minimum of 100 square feet of interior floor
space per animal unit shall be provided. The minimum distance
from a property line for a building housing livestock shall be 50
feet unless there are reasonable conditions to modify this
setback.
(2) Poultry.
(a) Not more than 32 bird units are permitted on any one acre lot
and no more than 32 bird units for each additional acre up to
three acres, a total of 96 bird units.
(b) When confined to cages, a minimum of 60 square inches of
cage floor space per bird should be provided. If a conventional
floor system is used, birds should be provided with a minimum
of two square feet of floor space per chicken. Bantams may be
allotted 1/2 of the floor space recommended for standard size
breeds.
(c) Outdoor poultry yards must be a minimum of 15 square feet of
yard space per bird unit. The yard shall be fenced with wire
sufficiently strong and high to detract predators and keep any
§ 30-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-203
1:491
debris from being blown off site. The yard shall be kept free of
debris, weeds, and standing water and suitably screened with
shrubbery or other appropriate plantings. The yard shall not
be placed any closer than 25 feet to neighboring property lines
and shall be to the rear of the dwelling.
(d) Acceptable methods of poultry waste management must be
employed to eliminate a nuisance to surrounding property
owners and any health or public safety problem.
(e) Surface runoff shall be retained on-site.
(3) Pigeons.
(a) Pigeons are to be confined to a loft with an interior roosting
area;
(b) Pigeons will be counted as 3/10 of a bird unit and shall be
permitted in the following quantities based on lot size:
Lot Size
(in acres)
Number of Pigeons
1/4 - 1/2 50
1/2 - 1 100
1 - 3 150
3 or more 200
(4) Rabbits.
(a) Rabbits are to be confined in cages or hutches with wire
bottom floors. Cages or hutches are to be set back a minimum
of 25 feet from any property line.
(b) Rabbits are to be counted as 6/10 of a bird unit and shall be
permitted in the following quantifies based on lot size:
Lot Size
(in acres)
Number of Rabbits
1/4 - 1/2 25
1/2 - 1 50
1 - 3 75
(c) Animal waste must be cleaned at a minimum of every three to
five days.
(5) Apiaries. An apiary may be permitted on a lot of at least two acres
in size, provided that bees kept for the production of honey shall be
housed no less than 100 feet from the nearest dwelling (excluding
§ 30-203 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-203
1:492
§ 30-204. Hospitals, clinics, convalescent and nursing homes,
sanatoria, philanthropic institutions and first aid, rescue and
ambulance squad facilities.
Hospitals, clinics, convalescent and nursing homes, sanatoria, philanthropic
institutions and first aid, rescue and ambulance squad facilities shall be
permitted as set forth in the Schedules of District Regulations. In addition
to all other requirements of site plan review, the applicant shall file with
the Planning Board a statement setting forth the full particulars on the
operation of the structure or use. All such uses shall comply with the
following:
§ 30-205. Junkyards and automotive wrecking and disassembly
plants.
Junkyards and automotive wrecking and disassembly plants shall be
permitted as provided in the Schedules of District Regulations and in
compliance with the following conditions:
the owner's) and bees kept for other purposes be housed no less
than 200 feet from the nearest dwelling (excluding the owner's).
(6) Kennels and small animal grooming shops or animal hospitals are
permitted as provided in the Schedules of District Regulations on
parcels of at least five acres in size, except when the use is
contained in a fully enclosed, soundproof building, where area,
yard, and building requirements of the zone shall apply. Wherever
permitted, the following requirements shall apply:
(a) Animal runs and any other outdoor animal areas shall be no
less than 50 feet from adjacent property lines.
(b) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises
in such quantity as shall be determined by the Planning Board.
(c) Adequate screening shall be provided.
(d) Any such use shall be free of noise, odor or other objectionable
nuisances, and, in granting approval, conditions may be
imposed upon an applicant to eliminate or reduce any such
nuisances.
(e) Pet shops and animal obedience and training schools are
considered commercial uses, and are not covered by this
section.
A. The maximum building area permitted for all buildings shall not exceed
30% of the lot area.
B. All parking areas and areas used for the storage of equipment or
exposed equipment, constructed, installed, or permanent, shall be
suitably screened as per § 30-155.
§ 30-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-205
1:493
§ 30-206. Marinas.
Marinas and boatyards shall be permitted as provided in the Schedules of
District Regulations and in compliance with the following conditions:
A. Any enlargement or extension of any existing junkyard or automotive
wrecking or disassembly use shall require a conditional use permit as if
it were a new establishment.
B. All such uses shall be completely surrounded by a conventional opaque
fencing material not less than six feet in height. The required fencing
may be located on the property line except that the fencing along the
street frontage shall be set back 100 feet from the street right-of-way
line.
C. All structures located on the site shall conform to the minimum and
maximum building requirements as set forth in the Schedule of District
Regulations.
D. Adequate on-site drainage facilities shall be provided to collect surface
water runoff and to trap any motor fuels or other chemicals which may
be washed off of vehicles and stored parts.
E. No such use shall be established within 500 feet of a residentially used
or zoned property.
A. The dispensing of fuels and installation of fueling facilities may be
undertaken provided that all fuel storage tanks are located
underground. All fuel storage tanks shall not be located closer than 30
feet to any property line. Proper equipment and facilities shall be
provided so as to prevent spills or excessive fumes in connection with
fuel dispensation.
B. Marinas may provide for the sale of boats, boating equipment,
accessories and parts and may also provide for storage of boats. No
boats shall be stored out-of-doors closer than 20 feet to any adjoining
property.
C. Boat repairs of a minor and emergency nature and normal maintenance
work may be performed.
D. Locker space may be provided for the storage of equipment belonging
to boat owners using the marina.
E. The sale of food as an accessory use shall be permitted provided that it
is in conformance with all the provisions of this chapter.
F. Parking facilities shall be conveniently located and traffic movement onsite
shall be designed and maintained so as to permit ease of movement
for vehicles pulling boat trailers.
§ 30-205 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-207
1:494
§ 30-207. Mobile home parks and trailer camps.
Mobile home parks and trailer courts shall be permitted in accordance with
the provisions of the Schedules of District Regulations and the following:
A. Any enlargement or extension of any existing trailer court or mobile
home park at the time of adoption of this chapter shall require a
conditional use permit as if it were a new establishment.
B. All driveways, streets, accessways, parking areas shall be paved with a
hard surface material.
C. All areas not used for access, parking, circulation, buildings and
services, shall be completely and permanently landscaped and the
entire site maintained in good condition.
D. Any site plan for a trailer court or mobile home park shall show in
addition to all details and information set forth in § 30-45, the following:
(1) A layout of individual lots or trailer parking spaces and the
sequence for their development including a schedule of
development if staging is proposed.
(2) A typical lot layout for any trailer site.
(3) An open space and recreational area plan showing where such
facilities shall be developed and the scheduling of such
development.
E. All trailer courts or mobile home parks shall conform to the maximum
and minimum lot standards set forth for single-family, detached housing
in an R-5 Residential Zoning District as shown on the Schedule of
District Regulations.
F. No more than 100 trailer spaces or sites shall be permitted in any one
trailer court or mobile home park, except that the Planning Board may,
for good cause shown, grant a conditional use permit to allow an
extension of a trailer court to a maximum of 250 trailer spaces or lots,
provided that any application for a permit under this section shall be
subject to the provisions of site plan review and provided further that
the extended portion of the trailer court or mobile home park complies
with the provisions of Chapter IX, Mobile Home Parks, of the New
Jersey Sanitary Code.
G. Trailer courts or mobile home parks shall only be permitted where the
availability of public sanitary sewer and potable water exist or can be
made available by the applicant for approval of such uses.
H. Sufficient open space and recreational areas shall be established in
connection with any mobile home park or trailer court and shall equal
not less than 20% of the total area of the park or court. The area shall
be permanently maintained through a homeowners' association or by
the owners of the park or court. Not less than 50% of the open space or
§ 30-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-207
1:495
§ 30-208. Hotels, motels, residence inns and bed-and-breakfast
inns. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
The City of Millville has designated areas as appropriate locations for
providing for the needs of tourists, travelers and transient occupants.
Hotels, motels and any other facilities offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public shall be permitted as provided for in
the Schedules of District Regulations64 and shall comply with the following
conditions.
recreational area shall be developed with active recreational facilities
such as swimming pools, picnic areas, ball fields and courts or other
facilities. Such areas shall be of a suitable size and shape to provide
meaningful recreational areas for their proposed use.
I. Mobile home parks and trailer courts shall be provided with pedestrian
walkways and shall have areas provided for the regular collection of
solid waste.
J. Lease or deed restrictions shall be required to insure that individual
mobile home occupants maintain their trailer or mobile homes and the
lots or spaces upon which they are located. Such maintenance shall
include landscaping, yard care and maintenance, refuse and trash
collection and proper disposal, installation and maintenance of skirting
around the mobile home or trailer, and the overall maintenance of the
exterior of any mobile home and trailer. Lease agreements or deeds for
use and or purchase of trailer spaces or lots shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Board as to sufficiency in this regard.
K. No mobile home or trailer installed or parked in a trailer court or
mobile home park shall be less than 14 feet by 60 feet or have a
minimum habitable floor area of less than 840 square feet.
L. All streets, parking areas and public areas within a mobile home park or
trailer court shall be provided with adequate lighting.
M. There shall be a minimum of a thirty-foot buffer maintained around any
mobile home park. This area may be used for individual trailer space lot
yard area, provided that no structure is placed within it.
A. In addition to sleeping units, any hotel or related facility may contain as
an accessory use: restaurants, lounges and private clubs, meeting
rooms, swimming pools, playgrounds, health clubs, art galleries,
cabanas and personal service and retail shops. With the exception of
swimming pools, all such accessory uses shall be within the principal
building and shall be primarily designed for the convenience of guests.
B. The tract of land on which the hotel is situated shall have direct
frontage on and take primary access from a nonresidential road.
64.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-207 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-208
1:496
C. All hotel developments shall be serviced by municipal sanitary sewer
and water facilities.
D. No building or structure shall exceed five stories.
E. Each unit available for rental within a hotel shall have a minimum gross
floor area of 300 square feet and at least one full bedroom and
bathroom.
F. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
G. All principal and accessory buildings and structures shall cover a total
of not more than 50% of the total site.
H. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to a permitted or accessory use located on the same
premises and provided that the storage area is part of an approved site
plan and does not exceed a height greater than that of any enclosing
wall, fence or building.
I. All hotel facilities shall comply with the following special design
requirements:
(1) Mechanical equipment, trash areas, pool equipment and laundry
and utility areas shall be screened from public view using the same
materials used for the building walls or material which is visually
compatible with the building.
(2) Buffering as required by § 30-155. In addition, a buffer strip of a
minimum of 10 feet, free of any improvements other than access
driveways, plantings and landscaping and permitted signs, shall be
maintained along all property lines except the front.
(3) All hotel developments shall submit a landscaping plan which
clearly demonstrates the size and location of all landscaped areas
and plantings within the site. All pedestrian walks are to be
provided with shade trees of an appropriate size and species. All
open space adjacent to the buildings and walls between buildings
and any border strips along the side of the pedestrian walks shall
be graded and seeded for grass or other plant materials. All
entrances shall be landscaped and maintained with irrigation
systems. Front yard landscaping shall interface with the
streetscape and sidewalk conditions.
(4) Driveways shall not be less than 20 feet, nor more than 35 feet, in
width as measured at the property line. Driveways must be at least
10 feet from any side lot line.
(5) Interior roadways, parking areas and pedestrian walkways shall be
provided with illumination to minimize hazards. Such areas shall be
shielded to avoid disturbance to occupants of the buildings or
adjoining properties. Lighting shall be arranged to reflect away
from adjoining properties.
§ 30-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-208
1:497
§ 30-209. Multifamily dwelling complexes.
In any R-5 Residential Districts, multifamily dwelling units are permitted
when the proposed development is determined to meet an existing housing
need, will not have a detrimental effect on the environment or have an
adverse effect on the community in general as determined by the City's
adopted Master Plan, and complies with the provisions of this section. Gross
dwelling unit density for any multifamily dwelling development shall not
exceed 10 units per acre. The following standards shall be met by any
multifamily dwelling development or complex:
(6) Parking shall be provided as required in § 30-137; in order to
reduce stormwater runoff, a minimum amount of pervious surface
parking construction (such as interlocking grass pavers) is
encouraged for all surface parking lots. Additional parking spots
over the required number may be surfaced with pervious material.
(7) A covered portico, alcove or extended roof adjacent to the building
entrance shall be permitted to provide an area of temporary
parking for guests checking in and out.
(8) Hotel developers are strongly encouraged to incorporate green
building technology and LEED certified building practices into the
design and construction of all buildings.
(9) Parking lots shall have exterior lighting in all publicly accessible
areas. Light intensity should average one-footcandle power and
shall be controlled by a photo cell or seasonally adjusted timer. All
pedestrian walkways shall have appropriate lighting. All lighting
shall illuminate only those areas for which the lighting is designed
and shall be designed to reduce glare and not impact adjacent uses.
J. Bed-and-breakfast inns shall be subject to the following:
(1) Primary residence: The principal building shall be the primary and
permanent legal residence of the bed-and-breakfast inn operator.
Meals or other services provided on the premises shall be only
available to residents, employees and overnight guests of the
establishment.
(2) Guests: There shall be a maximum of 10 rooms for lodging at any
given time. Guests may stay no longer than 30 consecutive days,
and 60 days in any one calendar year.
(3) Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of one
parking space per room and shall be outside of any required front
yard.
(4) Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided between adjacent
residences and parking areas.
§ 30-208 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-209
1:498
A. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area of 750
square feet and shall be provided with a private yard area of not less
than 500 square feet which shall be screened by fencing, walls or
shrubbery to a height of not less than six feet. Such fencing or
screening requirements may be waived when decks, balconies or other
suitable private, outdoor areas are provided.
B. Whenever the tract size is less then 10 acres, gross density shall not
exceed eight units per acre in any R-5 Residential District or four units
per acre in any R-10 Residential District. The reduction, when found
reasonable based upon facts submitted, shall not be considered to
subvert the intent of this section or the City Master Plan. Such
development is recommended for areas where vacant land exists as a
result of the destruction of dwellings or other structures and infill
development is required.
C. Common recreational and open space areas.
(1) A minimum of 25% of the total area of a multifamily dwelling unit
complex, exclusive of normal dwelling dooryards, buffer strips,
parking areas, and street rights-of-way, shall be designed for
common recreational or open space purposes. A multifamily
dwelling complex containing 10 or less units wherein land
adjoining the units is owned in common ownership, either by the
developer or a homeowners' association, shall be exempt from
providing 25% of the project area in common recreational or open
space areas.
(2) When required, however, no one recreational or open space area
shall be less than 10,000 square feet, nor less than 100 feet in
width at its narrowest dimension. Each recreational or open space
area shall be located conveniently to the development dwelling
units. The developer shall provide for an organization for
ownership and maintenance of any common recreational or open
space area.
(3) Not more than 50% of any recreational or open space area shall be
in one or more of the following: a floodplain, an area with a slope of
greater than 10%, watercourse or other area unsuitable for
recreational purposes due to environmental considerations. The
Planning Board, in reviewing the plans, shall determine that the
recreational or open space area is suited to its intended use in
terms of the environment and will meet the needs of the
development occupants.
D. The developer shall be responsible for improving common recreational
areas. The improvements shall include equipment facilities, walkways,
lighting and landscaping. Open space adjacent to buildings, not
surfaced as walkways, shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick
strand of grass or other ground cover. Two suitable specimen trees and
four evergreen shrubs, exclusive of those used in connection with
§ 30-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-209
1:499
parking or other areas, shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The
Planning Board, in reviewing the plans, shall determine that the
landscaping plan is designed to optimize solar access, minimize the
extent of site clearing and protect buildings from prevailing winter
winds.
E. All multifamily dwelling complexes shall have frontage on a collector or
arterial street or road as designated by the City Master Plan.
F. There shall be a buffer area of no less than 20 feet in width measured
from the property line and suitably landscaped to screen adjacent
properties not used or zoned for residential purposes. Utility
installations, refuse collection facilities and parking area shall also be
suitably screened to avoid visual or other nuisances.
G. No multifamily dwelling unit complex shall be located within 35 feet of
another dwelling structure. The maximum building height of a principal
building shall be 35 feet. Each structure shall be set back at least 20
feet from any public street or road. Yard setbacks shall be as follows:
Yard Principal Building
Front 25 feet
Side (each) 35 feet
H. Variations in the facades of blocks or groupings of multifamily dwelling
units shall be required unless horizontal or vertical shifts or offsets are
provided.
I. All on-site utilities services shall be installed underground. Public
sewerage facilities and water supply shall be available prior to
development and utilized or else the developer shall make necessary
connections in order to so utilize such facilities.
J. All buildings shall be oriented in such a manner as to maximize solar
access within the limits of practicability and feasibility. The developer
shall incorporate energy conservation techniques and provide for
utilization of alternative energy sources to the maximum extent
practical.
K. Any multifamily complex shall comply with all provisions of this chapter
concerning signing, parking, driveways and roads.
L. A maximum of 50% of the total area of a multifamily dwelling unit
complex may be covered by structures, paving, and/or any impervious
surfaces.
M. Open space adjacent to a building not surfaced as walkways, driveways,
parking areas, utility areas or other required improvements shall be
graded and seeded to provide a thick strand of grass or other ground
material. All such landscaping and the provision of trees and shrubs
shall comply with the standards set forth in § 30-165F of this chapter.
The Planning Board, in reviewing plans, shall determine that the
§ 30-209 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-209
1:500
§ 30-210. Open space and recreation standards. [Amended 3-7-2006
by Ord. No. 8-2006]
landscaping plan is designed to optimize solar access and protect
buildings from prevailing winter winds.
N. In addition to the required habitable floor area, there shall be a
minimum storage area in such building for bicycles, carriages, furniture
and similar incidental equipment of items, equal to 70 square feet in
area by a minimum of seven feet in height per unit.
A. Conformance required. All planned development as defined by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-6, excepting planned industrial development or planned
commercial development that is entirely nonresidential, shall provide
adequate common or public open space in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Provisions made within any development for
open space and recreational areas shall be reviewed, found adequate
and approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be. In its review, the Board with
jurisdiction shall investigate the size of the parcels devoted to open
space and recreational areas, their location within the project, the
topography, the uses contemplated upon such open spaces and
recreational areas, configurations of the parcels under consideration,
facilities and improvements to be provided, the provisions made for
maintenance and access to the parcels, traffic circulation around
parcels, the ecological functions of natural systems, the staging or
timing of the development of the open space and recreational areas,
and the proportionate amount and development of such land. Such
material to be reviewed shall be included in an environmental impact
statement in accordance with § 30-46E, or a separate document
describing the open space plan in narrative and plan form.
B. Open space design guidelines. The design of parks and active
recreation areas shall achieve the following objectives:
(1) Meet the needs of the target residents;
(2) Achieve a balance and compatibility between active and passive
recreational uses;
(3) Provide visual appeal;
(4) Adapt the land to the features of the terrain rather than altering the
land to suit the use;
(5) Design with regard for solar orientation and prevailing winds;
(6) Ensure protection of environmentally sensitive areas; and
(7) Enhance recreational opportunities.
C. Open space standards. Open space may include any of the several
different types of open space listed in Subsections C(1) through C(5)
§ 30-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-210
1:501
below. The calculation of open space area shall conform to the
requirements in this subsection.
(1) Active recreation, including golf courses.
(2) Passive recreation, including trails, trailheads and paths.
(3) Conservation.
(4) Agriculture. Existing farmsteads retained within open space used
for agricultural purposes shall be permitted as an additional
principal use. In the event that the farmstead and agricultural use
are located on an undivided parcel, a presumptive one acre shall be
subtracted from the open space land area to account for the
farmstead use in the calculation of required open space. The
farmstead shall conform to the bulk regulations for the underlying
zoning district and shall count as one housing unit in the
calculation of overall tract density.
(5) Stormwater management facilities consisting of the following types
as defined by the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, latest edition:
(a) Constructed stormwater wetlands; pond wetlands; and
(b) Wet ponds.
(c) Dry ponds, provided they are calculated to be part of the 50%
of the open space lands listed in Subsections C(6)(a) through
C(6)(f).
(6) No more than 50% of the land area of required open space shall
consist in total of the following types of land:
(a) One-hundred-year floodplain identified as Zones A and AE on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance
rate maps;
(b) Freshwater and tidal wetlands;
(c) State open waters;
(d) Areas with slope in excess of 15%;
(e) Critical nesting sites of endangered and threatened species;
(f) Other areas unsuitable for open space purposes identified
during the approving authority's review of the environmental
impact statement.
(7) Open space shall not include any of the following uses or
conditions:
(a) Vehicular or railroad rights-of-way.
§ 30-210 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-210
1:502
(b) Land deed restricted from such use.
(c) Contaminated land that is not cleaned to a residential standard
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:10B-1 et seq., as it may be amended or
superseded.
(8) The amount of common open space proposed shall adhere to the
applicable requirements of the zoning district, planned
development standards or conditional use provisions as otherwise
required within this chapter.
(9) Minimum land area. The minimum land area for each type of open
space shall be as follows:
(a) Park with no active recreation: 1/2 acre.
(b) Park with active recreation: one acre.
(c) Conservation: two acres.
(d) Open space with Subsection C(5) uses: two acres.
(e) Agricultural use: five acres.
(f) Regardless of these minimum land area requirements, the area
of each parcel of open space shall be usable for its intended
purpose.
(10) Minimum dimension. The minimum dimension of any open space
shall be 100 feet in any direction for planned unit developments
and 25 feet in any direction for all other development projects.
(11) Undeveloped open space intended for conservation purposes
should be left in its natural state, except for appropriately designed
trails, underground piping, endwalls and energy dissipaters
necessary for stormwater management. The board with jurisdiction
may require a developer to make improvements, including but not
limited to the removal of dead or diseased trees, nonnative invasive
plants, and landscaping [see Subsection D(1) below]. In all areas
where critical habitat for endangered or threatened species
restricts development, the open space plan should be designed to
eliminate or severely restrict human activity in those areas. Other
environmentally sensitive land in conservation areas should be
designed for limited human use in accordance with state and
federal regulations.
(12) Active recreation areas shall be fully operational upon the issuance
of 25% of the certificates of occupancy in any one phase of the
development as approved by the board with jurisdiction.
(13) Active recreation requirements. In all planned developments with a
residential component of 25 dwelling units or more, active
recreation facilities consisting of playgrounds, playfields, parks or
§ 30-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-210
1:503
other recreation suitable to the development shall be provided as
part of the developed common open space. Such facilities shall be
conveniently located and accessible to all dwelling units. Active
recreation shall be provided at a minimum rate of 10 acres per
1,000 people projected to live in the development, with a minimum
of two acres regardless of the projected population. For planned
developments of fewer than 25 dwelling units, the applicant shall
have the right to pay a fee in lieu of providing active recreation in
the amount of $2,500 per dwelling, payable prior to the issuance of
the initial certificate of occupancy for each dwelling.
D. Open space landscaping. Common or public open space provided as a
part of any part of any planned development shall be landscaped in one
of the following ways, depending upon the intent of the use for the open
space:
(1) Conservation and passive recreation use. Conservation areas are
appropriate in areas adjacent to and inclusive of natural features to
be preserved, including wooded areas, water bodies, streams,
wetlands, and steep slopes. The following conservation use design
guidelines shall apply:
(a) Natural features shall be encompassed in open space areas
rather than moved or destroyed in the development process.
(b) Cleared areas shall be revegetated to a naturalistic
appearance where appropriate.
(c) Revegetated areas may be seeded with a wildflower and/or
meadow grass mix.
(2) Active recreation. The following landscape standards shall apply
for active recreational uses:
(a) Grading and plantings of the recreation area shall remain
consistent with the overall landscape design. The landscape
design shall consist of massed deciduous and evergreen trees
and berms to create spaces and views and ornamental trees
and shrub masses for visual variety, interest and detail.
(b) In general, plants shall be provided at the rate of 15 large
deciduous trees, five evergreen trees, three flowering shrubs
and 20 other deciduous and evergreen shrubs per area in
locations not intended for active sports fields.
(c) These quantities are exclusive of plants that may be required
for landscape buffers installed between residential and active
recreation uses.
(3) Adjacent dwelling units shall be buffered from active play areas in
accordance with § 30-155.
§ 30-210 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-210
1:504
(4) In the area where a recreation facility fronts onto a public or
private street, fencing may be required to provide controlled
access. The adjacent street tree planting shall be continued along
this area, and any reverse frontage buffer planting shall be
integrated with open space plantings.
E. (Reserved)
F. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns must be adequately designed
to provide proper access to, in, around, and from the proposed uses.
G. Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate
covenants and deed restrictions to ensure:
(1) Open space will not be further subdivided.
(2) The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the
purpose specified.
(3) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the open
spaces.
H. The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Type of ownership
may include the City, subject to acceptance by the City Commission;
other public agencies; quasi-public organizations; homeowners' or
cooperative associations; shared, undivided interest by all property
owners in the subdivision. Proposed ownership of all common open
space areas shall be identified by the developer at the preliminary
application stage.
I. Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the City shall be
conveyed to the City by deed at the time of final approval. Should the
subdivision consist of development stages, the Planning Board may
require that acreage proportionate in size to the stage being considered
for final approval be donated to the City simultaneously with the
granting of final subdivision approval for that particular stage, even
though these lands may be located in a different section of the overall
development.
J. If the open space is owned and maintained by a homeowner or
condominium association, the developer shall file a declaration of
covenants and restrictions that will govern the association, to be
submitted with the application for final approval.
K. In the event that a nonmunicipal organization with the responsibility for
the open space fails to maintain it in reasonable order and condition,
the City of Millville may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the owners of the development setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be remedied within 35 days thereof, and shall state the
§ 30-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-210
1:505
§ 30-211. Parochial and private schools.
Parochial and private schools shall be permitted as provided in the
Schedules of District Regulations in accordance with the following
conditions:
§ 30-212. Planned business centers.
Planned business centers may be established in accordance with the
provisions contained in the Schedules of District Regulations and the
following conditions:
date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days
of the notice.
A. Such schools shall be recognized by the New Jersey Department of
Education and have their curriculum approved by it.
B. The minimum lot area of any such school shall be increased by one
additional acre for every 100 pupils or fraction thereof the school is
designed to serve. The minimum lot area for an intermediate school,
high school or institution of higher learning shall be 10 acres, plus one
acre for each 100 pupils or fraction thereof to be served.
C. The minimum street frontage for an elementary school shall be 500 feet
and the minimum frontage for all other schools shall be 700 feet.
D. No parking or play area shall be permitted within 50 feet of any street
or property line.
E. Off-street parking requirements may be increased if, in the considered
judgment of the Planning Board, such considerations as the
unavailability of bus services, the distances from centers of population,
or a relatively high percentage of pupils drive their cars, make such
increased requirements desirable.
F. No driveways shall open onto a public street or road within 150 feet of
an intersection of such street or road with another public street or road.
In determining the suitability of proposed or existing driveways upon
the site, the Planning Board shall consider such factors as grade and
site clearance, the number and pattern of driveways, the number,
location and design of ingress and egress points, the volume of traffic
which may be anticipated on the site and upon adjoining roads and the
condition and width of the pavement of adjoining roads.
G. Illumination for night athletic activities, parking areas, driveways or
other areas shall be shielded from view from adjoining streets and
residential areas.
H. Suitable recreational areas shall be provided for use of students of the
school if the school is intended for high school level or less.
§ 30-210 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-212
1:506
A. Any such center shall encourage the concentrated use of limited
commercial areas for the convenient shopping of persons living in
neighboring residential areas and for general uses and activities of a
retail land personal service character and discourage the use of
highway frontage for continuous strip development and its inherent
traffic hazards by the provision of this zone as an alternative. Only those
uses are permitted which are necessary to satisfy the local needs which
occur with sufficient frequency to require commercial facilities in
proximity to residential neighborhoods.
B. The permitted uses in a planned business center are as stated below
and any use not complying is thereby prohibited unless such use is
found to be compatible by the Planning Board.
(1) Stores and shops for retail purposes are as follows:
(a) Groceries and foodstuffs.
(b) Drugs and pharmaceuticals.
(c) Confectioneries.
(d) Stationery.
(e) Tobacco products.
(f) Hardware.
(g) Baked goods.
(h) Periodicals and newspapers.
(i) Photography supplies.
(j) Garden and floral products.
(k) Clothing and apparel.
(2) Personal service activities as follows:
(a) Barber and beauty shops.
(b) Tailoring.
(c) Dry cleaning.
(d) Shoe repairing.
(e) Health/fitness center.
(3) Professional offices.
(4) Banks.
(5) Media offices (telephone, television, newspaper, etc.).
§ 30-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-212
1:507
(6) Libraries.
(7) Government offices.
C. Off-street parking requirement per § 30-137.
D. Signs per Article XXIII.
E. Provision and requirements.
(1) The proposed development for a planned business center shall be
constructed in accordance with an overall plan for the entire area.
(2) The area shall be designed as a single architectural and landscape
theme, with continuity of areas and uses, regardless of phase of
construction. The first phase of site development shall include
either a minimum of 5,000 square feet of ground floor area or a
minimum of five principal permitted uses.
(3) The proposed business center shall be served by public sewer and
water.
(4) Permits issued pursuant to this section shall expire one year from
the date of issuance, unless the approved project is under advanced
construction, or unless the Planning Board extends the permit for
successive terms, not exceeding one year each, subject to the
safeguards as it may prescribe in the public interest.
F. Special design requirements.
(1) Wherever the property line of a use in this zone abuts the side or
rear yard of a residential zone, an area of not less than 20 feet in
width along each boundary shall be set aside as a buffer area and
not used for any other purpose. Said buffer area shall be planted
with a screen of evergreen trees and shrubs, not less than five feet
in height, or by other methods approved by the Planning Board.
The method must be sufficient to preclude any adverse effect of the
use upon adjacent existing or future residential properties.
(2) In addition to each buffer planting the owner of the commercial
property shall erect on the buffer area, a fence of at least six feet
and not exceeding eight feet in height for the purpose of protecting
the residential property from litter, debris, and light glare and
other such nuisances that would disturb peaceful occupancy. Such
fence shall contain no more than 15% open space. The
responsibility of maintenance of the commercial property referred
to herein shall be borne by the owner of the property or any other
tenants who are in possession thereof. Such fencing referred to
above shall be located only as shown on the site plan approved by
the Planning Board.
(3) Parking areas may be located in any yard for uses permitted in the
Planned Business Center Zone, provided that they are located no
§ 30-212 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-212
1:508
§ 30-213. Golf courses, country clubs, lodges and social buildings.
[Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
Golf courses, country clubs, lodge and social buildings shall be permitted
as set forth in the Schedules of District Regulations and in accordance with
the following conditions:
closer than 20 feet to any street right-of-way, nor closer than 20
feet to any boundary line of a residential zone.
(4) Parking areas shall be designated to provide for a convenient flow
of circulation within the center; dividing aisles shall be provided
with one tree for each 20 vehicle spaces of a type to be approved by
the Planning Board. The parking area shall be illuminated by
nonglare lighting standards, focused downward, of a height not to
exceed 10 feet. Such lighting shall be shielded from any adjacent
residential uses or zones.
(5) Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient
amount to permit the transfer of goods and materials on the
premises rather than on a public street or customer off-street
parking area on the premises; a solid wall or solid fence of not less
than six feet in height shall be required where off-street loading
and unloading areas abut residential uses, so that such operations
shall be shielded from view from such residences.
(6) Access to any street or highway shall be controlled in the interest of
public safety. Each group of attached buildings, or grouping of uses
which together form a planned business center, as noted in this
chapter, shall have not more than one access point per each
continuous 250 feet frontage to any street or highway. Accessways
onto any highway or street within the City shall have the approval
of the City Engineer, County Engineer and/or the New Jersey
Department of Transportation as required, prior to the approval of
the proposal by the Planning Board. In no case, however, shall an
accessway to a public street or highway be closer than 50 feet to
any street intersection as measured from the nearest intersection
or right-of-way lines nor closer than 25 feet to any side lot line.
Accessways shall be no less than 20 feet nor more than 36 feet in
width as measured at the property line. The design and placement
of access ways shall not create a hazardous condition and shall
minimize conflict with the flow of traffic on adjoining streets.
A. In addition to the application procedures set forth in Article XVII, an
applicant for a conditional use permit for a private club, golf course,
lodge or social building shall file with the Planning Board a statement
setting forth full particulars on the operation of the use, and a copy of
the Articles of Incorporation, if a corporation or trade name certificate,
if any, which is required to be filed under Title 56 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes. In addition, the Planning Board may, in any case,
require that names and addresses of all charter members be furnished.
§ 30-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-213
1:509
B. Except for golf courses open to the public, the proposed use shall be a
bona fide nonprofit organization operated solely for recreation and the
enjoyment of the members of the organization and their guests.
C. The proposed use in the proposed location shall not adversely affect the
safe and comfortable enjoyment of properties in the neighborhood; the
design of any structures erected in connection with such use shall be in
keeping with the general character of the neighborhood and area; and
sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs, and lawn or ground
cover shall be provided to serve as a buffer between the use and
adjoining properties and to insure an attractive appearance for the use.
D. All off-street parking within 30 feet of any property line shall be
adequately screened from adjacent properties and all lighting shall be
shielded to prevent glare onto adjoining properties or streets.
E. Standards for golf courses and country clubs:
(1) The minimum tract area for a nine-hole golf course shall be 75
acres, and the minimum tract area for an eighteen-hole golf course
shall be 150 acres.
(2) Country clubs shall only be permitted in conjunction with an
eighteen-hole regulation-length golf course.
(3) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
conjunction with a principal use:
(a) Golf course. Clubhouse, pro shop, bar, snack bar, shelters,
driving ranges and other uses customarily incidental to the
principal use, but not to include country club accessory uses.
(b) Country club. Accessory uses permitted for golf courses, dining
rooms, social rooms, bar, locker rooms, outdoor court facilities
for active recreation, swimming pool, cabanas, and other uses
customarily incidental to the principal use.
(c) The maximum height of any accessory structure or building,
including fencing, shall be 35 feet.
(4) Sufficient horizontal separation shall be maintained between the
golf course and accessory structures, buildings and uses and
adjacent off-site uses as follows:
(a) Minimum separation from any property line, road right-of-way
or accessory structures, buildings and uses associated with the
golf course is as follows:
[1] From golf tee: 75 feet.
[2] From center line of fairway or green and edge of driving
range: 150 feet.
§ 30-213 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-213
1:510
(5) All accessory structures and buildings associated with the golf
course, except shelters, shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any
adjacent property line or road right-of-way.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
following schedule. The total required parking shall be the sum of
the parking required for each of the uses listed below:
(a) Golf course. Two spaces for each three players for the
maximum number of golfers that that may play the course at
any one time.
(b) Dining and social rooms. One space for each three seats.
(c) Bar. One space for each two seats.
(d) Outdoor court facility. Two spaces per court.
(e) Swimming pool. Twenty spaces for 1,000 square feet of water
surface.
(f) Other uses shall be as otherwise required by this chapter.
(7) Exterior lighting of the golf course facility shall be provided only for
the illumination of accessory uses, parking and site circulation,
except that no illumination for driving ranges shall be permitted.
(8) The golf course facility shall be designed to the extent possible to
preserve the contiguity of existing woodlands and woodland
corridors. Clearance of woodlands shall not exceed 30% of the total
wooded acreage of land within the tract, unless specifically waived
by the Board of Jurisdiction.
(9) Golf courses shall be operated using an integrated turf
management plan and an integrated pesticide and pest
management plan specific to the operation and maintenance of the
proposed golf course. These plans shall be prepared in accordance
with guidelines established by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and shall also take into account
guidelines promulgated by the United States Golf Association.
These plans shall include best management practices to prevent or
minimize any adverse impacts of chemical applications on the
groundwater and surface water resources associated with the golf
course. Vegetative buffer areas shall be encouraged between any
turf which is to be chemically treated and any nonintermittent
stream. Such buffer shall be of a sufficient size and design to
provide a neutralizing effect of chemicals carried by stormwater
runoff.
(10) Necessary infrastructure and utilities shall be available from onsite
municipal or private systems including sanitary sewer, potable
water and irrigation water. The provision of infrastructure and
utilities shall not have an unreasonably detrimental effect on
§ 30-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-213
1:511
§ 30-214. Professional office centers.
Professional office centers may be established in accordance with the
provisions of the Schedules of District Regulations and the following
conditions:
groundwater or surface water resources and shall be designed to
minimize any such adverse effects. As part of the application for
approval the applicant shall submit a plan for reduced pumping
of groundwater in the event of declared drought conditions. Such
plan shall be incorporated into a developer's agreement with the
municipality.
(11) Swimming pools shall conform to the requirements of § 30-139.
A. Any such center shall be designed as a whole or complete complex with
all structures or units having a uniformity of design and bearing
architectural and aesthetic relationship to each other when more than
one structure is proposed.
B. Such centers may provide office space to insurance companies, banks,
financial institutions, businesses or industries, professional
corporations, partnerships or individuals including lawyers, doctors,
dentists, architects, land surveyors, engineers, planners or other
recognized professions, brokerage firms, real estate firms, or other
companies, firms or operations requiring office space.
C. In addition to providing office space for such uses as those set forth in
Subsection B above, space may be also provided for such accessory
uses to the offices of the uses as follows: x-ray or medical laboratories
intended to serve the needs of patients of doctors or dentists having
offices within the complex, newsstands, a restaurant or food take-out
service designed primarily to serve the needs of the complex's
occupants and patrons, a drug store, office supply store, reproduction
or copy center, and such other uses as found to be incidental and
customarily accessory to the offices located within the center. The size
and location of such accessory uses shall be determined by the Planning
Board, and such uses shall be designed primarily to serve the needs of
the center's occupants and patrons and not the general public. All such
accessory uses shall however, when permitted, conform to all standards
set forth in this chapter related to the type of use proposed.
D. The parking and loading areas, common grounds or yard area of other
common facilities shall be held in common ownership either by the
owner of the center or by tenants' or owners' association responsible
for its upkeep and maintenance. Such associations' bylaws, articles of
incorporation and other pertinent documents shall be subject to review
and approval by the Planning Board as would a homeowners'
association in the case of a residential development.
§ 30-213 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-214
1:512
§ 30-215. Public utility generating substations or switching
stations.
Within any LC Land Conservation District, public utility generating sub or
switching stations may be established in accordance with the provisions of
the Schedules of District Regulations and the following conditions:
E. No residential use shall be permitted in connection with a professional
office complex.
F. All office complexes or centers having offices on a second floor or
higher shall have at least one elevator.
G. Parking and loading facilities required in connection with a professional
or business center shall be determined by the total number of office
units available and the type of uses the offices will serve.
H. All such centers shall be suitably landscaped and all parking areas and
pedestrian walkways shall be well lighted.
I. In determining whether or not to permit the development of such a
center, the Planning Board shall be guided by the number of existing
offices' spaces available in the area and the cost of the space in order to
determine if a need for such space exists. The developer may be
required to submit a needs survey and report in order to justify such a
center and failure to reasonably so justify shall be cause for rejection of
the application.
J. The centers shall be located only if the site for which they are proposed
has frontage upon an existing collector or arterial street.
K. Not more than 25% of the total floor area of any such professional or
business center shall be occupied by nonoffice uses at any one time, nor
shall more than 50% of the ground floor of any structure within the
center be occupied by nonoffice uses. This requirement is intended to
assure that the center remains a business and/or professional office
center and not a shopping center or retail business complex.
A. Minimum size lot for a public utility generating station shall be 500
acres. In the case of a sub or switching station, the minimum size lot
shall be 50 acres.
B. All such facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any road or
property line and shall have a minimum of 500 feet of frontage on a
public dedicated street or road.
C. The maximum height for principal and accessory buildings for such
uses shall be 110 feet. Cooling towers, transmission towers, storage
tanks, chimneys, and other structures or facilities not used for human
occupancy shall not exceed a height of 200 feet unless required to
exceed such height by state or federal regulations.
§ 30-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-215
1:513
§ 30-216. Roadside stands.
Roadside stands for the sale of farm, truck gardening, nursery, gardening
and greenhouse produce and/or stock may be established subject to the
provisions of the Schedules of District Regulations and the following
conditions:
D. Whenever such a facility is located within 500 feet of an adjoining
property not used or zoned for industrial use, a two-hundred-foot buffer
area shall be provided and suitably planted with specimen trees and
evergreen shrubbery to form a dense screen.
E. Whenever a generating station proposes to produce a residue or waste
material as a result of the generation of energy process and such
residue or waste material is to be deposited, stored or kept on-site, the
application for approval of a site plan shall include detailed plans for
such storage or stockpiling and reclamation of the site so as to prevent
environmental or aesthetic adverse impacts. Such storage or deposit
sites shall be reclaimed so as to permit the growing of trees, shrubs and
grass or other ground cover and the use of the site for recreational or
open space purposes in the event such deposit of residue or material
ceases or the use is abandoned. Care shall be taken to prevent any
adverse environmental impacts from such storage or depositing of
residue and/or waste material. To the greatest extent practical, no such
residue or waste material shall be permitted to leave the site by natural
means, i.e., surface runoff, wind or other natural causes.
F. Access to the site shall be limited and controlled so as to prevent
general access to the facility by the general public.
A. Such uses shall only be permitted when proof is provided the Planning
Board that the proposed use is in connection with a farm and is located
on the property of that farm or that at least 50% of the goods offered for
sale in the roadside stand were grown or raised on the parcel in
question provided the stand is located on an LC Land Conservation
District.
B. No roadside stand shall be permitted on an arterial or major collector
roadway as classified in the City Master Plan unless the stand is located
in compliance with the maximum setback requirements for principal
uses for the zone district in which it is located.
C. There shall be only one entrance and one exit from the roadway upon
which the proposed use fronts.
D. No display of goods shall be permitted closer than 40 feet to a road
right-of-way line or adjoining property line.
E. The sale of live animals or poultry shall be prohibited.
§ 30-215 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-216
1:514
§ 30-217. School bus shelters.
School bus shelters may be located as provided in the Schedules of District
Regulations and according to the following conditions:
§ 30-218. Shopping centers. [Amended 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
36-2017]
Shopping centers shall be permitted in accordance with the Schedules of
District Regulations and the following conditions:
F. No structure or parking areas to be used or required in connection with
such a use shall be located within a required front yard area of the
principal use of the property involved.
A. An applicant may submit, with a single application, a proposal for the
location of more than one location in more than one zone.
B. Proof shall be furnished to the Planning Board, by the applicant, that
the Board of Education has approved the locations and any locations
proposed to be situated within a public right-of-way have been
approved by the City.
C. No shelter may exceed 10 feet in height or 200 square feet in floor area.
D. In residential zones, all signs attached to the structure shall be
designed to read from within the structure, shall not exceed two in
number and shall not exceed a total of 20 square feet in area. In
nonresidential zones such signs shall not exceed four in number and
shall not exceed a total of 40 square feet in area.
E. The Planning Board may reduce or waive all yard area and setback
requirements in granting approval for school bus shelter.
F. The posting of a performance guaranty as per the provisions of § 30-62
may be required to assure the maintenance of a school bus shelter.
A. All shopping centers shall be classified as one of the following:
(1) Neighborhood centers or convenience centers encompassing not
less than three or more than 10 acres and designed to provide for
the sale of convenience goods (food, drugs, sundries) and personal
services (cleaning, photo development, beauty and barber shops,
medical or dental offices).
(2) Community centers involving 10 acres' or more area, including a
variety discount or junior department store.
(3) Regional shopping centers consisting of 20 acres or more and
including regional retail stores, restaurants, and other uses
ordinarily found in a regional shopping center.
B. The following standards shall apply to all shopping centers:
§ 30-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-218
1:515
(1) Any shopping center shall be designed as a unified whole with
harmony of design and architecture.
(2) No more than 30% of the lot area shall be occupied by principal
uses, not more than 5% by permitted accessory uses, except for
parking and loading areas; and if the center consists of more than
one building, they shall be separated by not less than 15 feet.
(3) All shopping centers shall abut and have their principal access onto
a collector or arterial road.
(4) Landscaped and planted areas providing adequate screening shall
occupy a space at least 20 feet in width between parking areas and
adjoining road right-of-way lines or property lines abutting a
residential district or residentially used property, and a space 10
feet in width separating each double-tiered parking bay. Parking
and buffered areas shall be designed and landscaped as provided in
§ 30-137 and Article XVI.
(5) All shopping centers shall provide the following:
(a) Areas and facilities for the collection of solid waste.
(b) Fire zones designed to facilitate easy access to structures for
emergency vehicles. Such zones shall be approved by the
appropriate local fire official.
(c) Structure and property illumination designed to protect
adjoining properties and streets from direct glare.
(d) Screening so as to protect adjoining properties and roadways
from direct glare from vehicles or from blowing debris.
(e) On-site retention of surface drainage whenever possible.
(f) Adequate parking and loading area and pedestrian walkways.
(g) Signs and driveways shall conform to the standards of Article
XIV with the exception that access to and from the property
involved shall be limited to the least number of driveways
sufficient to provide safe and efficient movement of traffic to
and from the site.
(6) The maximum heights permitted, excluding signs, shall be:
(a) Neighborhood center: 35 feet.
(b) Community center: 50 feet.
(c) Regional center: 50 feet.
(7) In neighborhood centers, residential units may be permitted when
approved by the Planning Board, provided that they meet the
following standards:
§ 30-218 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-218
1:516
§ 30-219. Temporary structures.
Within all zoning districts the following temporary structures shall be
permitted according to the following conditions:
(a) Residential units shall be located above commercial uses and
shall be considered accessory uses to them and shall be
occupied by the owner, manager or an employee of the
commercial uses.
(b) Adequate parking facilities shall be provided for the residential
uses in addition to any parking facilities required for
commercial uses.
(c) Residential units are not less than 850 square feet of habitable
floor area.
(d) Not more than one residential use is permitted for each
commercial use permitted, and total residential units shall not
exceed eight.
(e) No commercial sign shall be attached to, overhang, or obstruct
the view from a residential unit or be located in whole or part
on the same level as any residential unit(s).
(8) No neighborhood shopping center shall be permitted adjacent to an
existing neighborhood shopping center.
(9) The Planning Board may require a marketing analysis and needs
survey in order to determine whether any proposed center will
meet an existing need. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to demonstrate the need for the proposed commercial center and
reasonably justify its establishment.
A. Temporary use of one mobile home structure for an office, tool storage
or quarters for watchman as an accessory use to permitted approved
construction projects on the same lot therewith, for a period provided
by a permit to be issued by the Zoning Officer. Said trailer shall be
removed within one month upon completion of the construction project.
B. Temporary use of one mobile home on a lot whereon an existing
residential structure located in an R-15, R-20 or LC District, has been
destroyed by fire, natural disaster, explosion or similar catastrophe and
only when occupied by the owner of the residential structure destroyed
while a new structure is being constructed. The use shall be for six
months, unless extended not more than an additional six months (total
period of time one year) by the Board of Adjustment wherein it can be
reasonably demonstrated that actual construction been delayed by
factors outside the control of the applicant. Temporary use of the trailer
shall cease and the mobile home shall cease to be occupied and
removed from the property involved within one month of the date of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new residential structure.
§ 30-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-219
1:517
§ 30-220. Windmills and communication equipment.
Where permitted as set forth in the Schedules of District Regulations,
privately owned windmills for the generation of power and communication
equipment including dish or disk antennas shall be permitted in accordance
with the following:
C. A zoning permit for such temporary use shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer. No mobile home or trailer utilized in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be placed upon permanent foundations
or shall be in any other way placed, installed, or attached to another
structure which would make the mobile home's or trailer's removal
from the site impossible or otherwise unnecessarily difficult.
D. Travel trailers, including mobile homes used for recreational purposes,
may be stored on the property of their owner and shall be considered as
an accessory use and subject to the standards set forth in the Schedules
of District Regulations for accessory uses in the district in which the
travel trailer or recreational mobile home is to be stored. No travel
trailer or recreational mobile home shall be occupied or used as a
dwelling place or for the conduct of any business.
A. Windmills shall be permitted in connection with any residential,
agricultural, recreational or industrial use when they meet the
following standards:
(1) The proposed windmill will not block, interfere or otherwise impair
a scenic vista or view for an adjoining residential structure.
(2) The primary purpose of a proposed windmill(s) will be to provide
power for the principal use of the property where the windmill(s)
are to be located and shall not be for the generation of power for
commercial purposes, although this provision shall not be
interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from a
windmill designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
(3) The windmill and its location on the property involved shall be
designed to eliminate any nuisances to surrounding properties and
to limit any noise from the windmill from being heard off the
property where the windmill is located. The actual side and rear
yard setbacks for a windmill shall be determined by the Planning
Board and shall be based upon the height of the proposed windmill.
(4) No variance shall be granted in connection with a proposed
windmill to permit a height greater than 300 feet or the placement
of a windmill so close to a property line as to result in any portion of
the windmill at any time, whether erect or in the event the windmill
should fall or be toppled, from overhanging, crossing or otherwise
extending beyond the property line of the property on which it is
located.
(5) No windmill shall be located in any required front yard area.
§ 30-219 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-220
1:518
§ 30-220.1. Formula businesses, restaurants or fast food chains.
[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 34-2007]
(6) The minimum lot size required for the erection, construction or
placement of a windmill on a property shall be five acres.
B. Communications equipment such as dish or disk antennas shall be
permitted in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) No communications equipment shall be located in any required
front yard area.
(2) Communication equipment shall not be attached to the front facade
or roof area of any structure or building.
(3) When any dish or disk antennas is located within 20 feet in an
adjoining property, it shall be screened with plant material to the
extent practical to reduce unsightly appearance without affecting
its performance.
(4) No communication equipment shall be permitted which causes
interference or problems for adjoining properties' communication
equipment or receipt of television, radio or other communication
signals.
(5) Wherever practical or possible communication equipment shall be
so located on a property so as not to be visible from the street.
(6) Construction and erection of communication equipment shall be
subject to the Uniform Construction Code and shall at no time
constitute a threat to public safety or welfare. Zoning permits shall
be required for the erection of communication equipment.
A. Purpose. The continued vitality of the City's Central Business District
and the Glasstown Arts District is dependent upon its uniqueness and
specialty market niche as well as the distinctive architecture and
historic significance of buildings. Preservation of the existing character
and scale of the City's downtown is important to maintain the
distinctive small town charm and character valued by residents and
visitors. The preservation of the existing character and scale of the
City's downtown is also vital to the continuation of the downtown's
attractiveness to visitors and tourism. Development of retail and
commercial establishments that conflict with the character of the City's
historic buildings and arts district and that are out of scale in relation to
the current pattern of development creates a threat to the public
health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics by threatening the
continued economic vitality of the district and the historic relevance of
the buildings.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended. Any words not defined herein shall have the
§ 30-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-220.1
1:519
meaning given in the Municipal Land Use Law or, if not defined therein,
then they shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
FORMULA BUSINESS — A type of retail sales activity or retail sales
restaurant or establishment, including food service, which is required
by contractual or other arrangement to maintain any of the following
in each separate business premises: standardized (formula) array of
services and/or merchandise, trademark, logo, service mark, symbol,
decor, architecture, layout, uniform or similar standardized features.
FORMULA RESTAURANT — A restaurant devoted to the preparation
and offering of food and beverage for sale to the public for consumption
either on or off premises and which is required by contractual or
other arrangement to offer any of the following: standardized menus,
ingredients, food preparation, decor, uniforms, architecture, signage,
facades, layout, trademark, logo, symbol, service mark or similar
standardized features.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS — Public eating places where prepared
food and beverages are available for on- and off-premises consumption
upon a short waiting period, and orders are placed by the customer
at the counter and primarily served in or on disposable wrappers,
containers or plates, and where waiter service is not available.
C. Prohibited uses. Formula retail restaurants, including fast food chains,
are prohibited in the B-3 Central Business District, the Arts District
Overlay Zone, the Downtown Riverfront District and all residential
zones and conservation zones.
D. Permitted uses. A conditional use permit shall be required for any
formula retail establishment or restaurant in the zones in which they
are permitted:
(1) A formula retail establishment may be allowed only in the B-1
Neighborhood Business District, the B-2 Professional Services
District, the B-4 General Business District, and all industrial zones.
(2) The expansion of any existing formula retail establishment shall
require a conditional use permit if the establishment does not
already have such a permit.
(3) The cumulative expansion of a permitted formula retail
establishment by 500 or more square feet or floor area shall
require a conditional use permit.
E. Required findings for approval of conditional use permit:
(1) The design and scale of the formula business shall be compatible
with the existing surrounding uses and the distinctive character
and ambiance of the City.
§ 30-220.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-220.1
1:520
(2) The formula business shall be mutually beneficial to and enhance
the economic health of surrounding uses in the district. The
formula business may be required to provide an economic impact
statement detailing the positive economic impacts to the
community and demonstrating no negative impacts to existing
businesses or fulfilling the impact requirements of § 30-46.
(3) The formula business shall comply with all other ordinance and
design standards contained within City ordinances, including
Article XXIII dealing with signage.
(4) All facades visible from adjoining properties or public streets shall
include pleasing scale features of the building and encourage
community integration by featuring characteristics similar to a
front facade.
(5) Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of the building
along any facade featuring a customer entrance or abutting public
parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least four feet
from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for
foundation landscaping.
(6) Facade colors capable of low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earthtone
colors shall be used. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic
colors or flurorescent colors is prohibited.
(7) Landscaped buffers shall be provided along the front property lines
and along all abutting roadways.
(8) Pole signs are prohibited and ground-mounted signs shall not
exceed 25 square feet.
(9) Areas for outdoor storage or trash collection or compaction shall
not be located within 20 feet of any public street or sidewalk and
shall not be visible from public rights-of-way. Areas for loading,
storage, dumpsters or other service functions shall be incorporated
into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that
the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully
contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public
streets.
(10) A minimum of two public amenities must be provided which may
include: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, outdoor
play area or courtyard, water features, sculpture or other artwork,
green design standards, special signage or connection with the
downtown or tourist attractions.
§ 30-220.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-220.1
1:521

ARTICLE XIX
Planned Unit Development
§ 30-221. Purpose.
Article VI of the Municipal Land Use Law authorizes municipalities to
adopt an ordinance providing for planned developments in the form of
planned unit developments. This form of planned development encourages
and promotes flexibility and economy in layout and design while preserving
substantial open space, including agricultural lands and environmentally
sensitive lands. The general purposes of planned unit development are as
follows:
§ 30-222. Applicability. [Amended 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009]
Planned unit development shall be permitted in various forms in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This form of planned development is
authorized as a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
A. To encourage the assemblage of tracts of land into development units
which can be planned overall for long-term development;
B. To promote flexibility in layout and design through clustering, thereby
waiving strict adherence to individual lot and area zoning
requirements;
C. To require that any common open space resulting from the application
of standards for the intensity of land use be set aside for the benefit and
use of the owners and residents in the development;
D. To encourage the protection of the natural resources on the land and to
provide more usable open space for active and passive recreational
uses;
E. To ensure that the amount, location and purpose of the common open
space is adequate and that the proposed conservation and maintenance
of it is reliable;
F. To promote economy in the layout and design of lots and structures to
reduce site preparation costs and thereby reduce product costs to the
consumer;
G. To require the developer to adequately design the circulation system,
public services system, and the amenities of air, light, recreation and
visual enjoyment for the residents of the entire development;
H. To encourage development of affordable housing for low- and moderateincome
households through the provision of inclusionary housing set
asides; and
I. To provide for a flexible approval process which allows for revisions
that are responsive to changes in the marketplace without rezoning the
property.
§ 30-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-222
1:523
AC Agricultural Conservation District
LC Land Conservation District
LSC Lakeshore Conservation District
R-20 Residential District
RM Riverfront Mixed-Use District
§ 30-223. General criteria for eligibility.
One of the prime objectives of a planned unit development of land is the
availability and quality of open space made possible by deviation from
usual zoning requirements. The following general criteria shall govern the
eligibility of an application for development for this type of planned
development:
A. A minimum land area shall be met for the form of planned unit
development authorized within the specific zoning district in
accordance with the following sections of this article.
B. One person or one legal entity shall own or control by deed, contract,
option or other legal instrument the land area at the time that the
application is filed for a planned unit development.
C. (Reserved)65
D. Municipal sewage shall be available to the project site at the time that
the application is filed or planned to be online at the time of project
occupancy.
E. Municipal water shall be available to the project site at the time that the
application is filed or planned to be online at the time of project
occupancy.
F. Planned unit developments shall comply with all impact evaluation
requirements applicable to conventional developments contained in
this chapter.
G. Except as otherwise provided in this article, planned unit developments
shall comply with the design and performance standards applicable to
conventional developments contained in this chapter.
H. Planned unit developments may be built in stages, provided the
applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board the
following:
(1) The plans submitted for preliminary approval shall delineate each
phase and include an expected construction schedule.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which made certain noncontiguous parcels of land
owned by a single owner eligible for a planned unit development, was repealed 8-3-2010
by Ord. No. 14-2010.
§ 30-222 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-223
1:524
§ 30-224. General design standards.
The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number of
dwelling units, the amount of nonresidential floor space, the residential
density and the nonresidential floor area ratio for the planned development,
in its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of the
various sections of the development. The general development plan and the
site plan shall conform to the following general design standards:
(2) The planned unit development may provide for a greater or lesser
concentration of density within a section than the overall project
density, provided that it is offset by a lesser or greater density in
subsequent stages.
(3) Each stage of development shall be substantially self-functioning
and self-sustaining with regard to traffic circulation and access,
utility services, off-street parking and loading and open space.
(4) Each stage shall be properly related to every other stage of
development and the neighborhood and community as a whole and
to all necessary community services needed in the future to
accommodate the proposed development.
I. All planned unit developments of 200 dwelling units or greater are
responsible for obtaining water allocation for the project from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Such water allocation
must include the addition of source of supply capacity, such as the
addition of one or more new wells, such that it increases the City's firm
source capacity by three times the average daily flow of the entire
project as determined by the Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-5 et seq. and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations, N.J.A.C.
7:10-12 et seq. The applicant also shall obtain an increased monthly
allocation of 1.5 times the average monthly flow for the entire project
and an increased annual flow equal to the average annual flow
projected for the entire project. The City must be the applicant for any
modification in its water allocation permit. The developer for the
project, however, is financially responsible for all aspects of obtaining
additional water allocation, including all application fees and
engineering costs. [Added 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
A. Land use standards.
(1) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
in a manner to preserve the natural landscape of the site, including
the scenic vistas as seen from the public roadways.
(2) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
in a manner to meet the energy conservation standards contained
in this chapter.
§ 30-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-224
1:525
(3) Lots and residential structures shall be arranged to maximize
privacy for residents and neighbors in the surrounding community
and to minimize conflict with abutting uses and exposure to
nuisance factors such as lighting glare and noise.
(4) The safety of the residents shall be considered in project design
particularly with regard to the elements of circulation,
landscaping, lighting and the location of lots and structures.
(5) Residential development shall be evaluated in accordance with the
standards for the type of residential units proposed such as
attached single-family, detached single-family, and multifamily
housing types.
B. Circulation standards.
(1) A traffic impact study shall be submitted with the application for
development as required by this chapter.
(2) Traffic facilities affording general access to and circulation within
the development may be developed as public streets or private
roads. However, access must be perpetually available to residents
and emergency vehicles.
(3) Streets contained within the development shall conform with the
design standards contained in this chapter. The City has the right to
refuse to accept streets proposed as public streets if they do not
meet these standards.
(4) At least one public street or private road access shall be permitted
for each development unless the Planning Board finds that
additional access is required because of the characteristics of the
adjacent streets. In no case shall developments have primary
access through abutting properties unless the property is
completely landlocked. Secondary access may be permitted off
tract only after the affected residents have been notified and a
public hearing has been held.
(5) The Planning Board may require whatever off-tract improvements
are necessary to accommodate projected traffic impacts based on
the development's proportional share of additional traffic to ensure
safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
(6) If a shared access street or road is developed to serve two or more
developments, or a single development with two or more owners,
appropriate dedication or easement documents must be submitted
to ensure perpetual access to each development.
(7) Clear sight triangles shall be required where streets intersect
dedicated public streets. A distance of 300 feet shall be maintained
clear of obstructions measured from the stop sign of the streets
within the development.
§ 30-224 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-224
1:526
(8) Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Merging and
turnout lanes or traffic dividers shall be required where existing or
anticipated heavy traffic flows indicate need. Minor streets shall
not be directly connected with other streets by internal driveways
or roads in such a manner as to encourage the use of minor streets
by substantial amounts of through traffic.
(9) Access for bicyclists and pedestrians entering or leaving the site
shall be made by convenient and safe routes. Such access need not
be adjacent or limited to the vicinity of access points for motor
vehicles. Sidewalks shall be constructed for pedestrian access.
Bicycle and pedestrian paths within the development shall be
encouraged to be separated from motor vehicle traffic to the
greatest extent feasible. Bicycle paths shall be interconnected with
the existing or proposed bicycle circulation system for the City.
(10) Where there are bicycle or pedestrian paths from within the
development to a street at its edge, no material impediment to
visibility shall be created.
(11) Curbing shall be required along all public streets and the streets
within the development in accordance with standards contained in
this chapter.
(12) Concrete sidewalks shall be required along all dedicated public
streets and the streets within the development in accordance with
standards contained in this chapter. Sidewalks shall be required to
connect all residential units to parking areas. Paths intended for
recreational use may be constructed of materials other than
concrete.
(13)Off-street parking lots and spaces exposed to public streets or
adjacent to one- and two-family residential neighborhoods shall be
bermed or screened by walls or other solid materials in addition to
landscaping.
(14) Resident spaces for one- and two-family residential structures may
be provided by driveways allowing a maximum of two stacked cars.
Garages may be counted toward meeting the parking requirements
only if the management organization prohibits their conversion to
living space.
C. Open space standards.
(1) Open space shall include an area of land or water essentially
unimproved and reserved for public or private use or enjoyment;
provided, however, that the land may be improved with those
structures and improvements that are designed to be incidental to
the natural openness of the land.
§ 30-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-224
1:527
(2) Common open space shall include an area of land reserved for the
use or enjoyment of the owners and residents of the development.
Such land may contain complimentary structures and
improvements as are appropriate and necessary for the use or
enjoyment of the owners and residents of the development,
including active and passive recreational uses.
(3) The common open space shall be considered part of the open space
for the purpose of fulfilling the open space requirements contained
in this article.
(4) Wherever feasible, the common open space shall connect to
existing conservation lands, historic sites, parks or recreational
lands, or, as applicable, lands proposed for these uses in the Master
Plan.
D. Local service and utility standards.
(1) The development shall be serviced by the municipal wastewater
collection and treatment system. The developer shall design and
construct a common system on site to tie into the municipal system.
(2) The development shall be serviced by the municipal water system.
The developer shall design and construct a common system on site
to tie into the municipal system.
(3) All electric, telephone, television and other communication
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided by
underground wiring within easements or dedicated public rightsof-
way and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards
and practices of the utility or other companies providing such
services. Overhead lines may be permitted as an exception by the
Planning Board in areas of severe geological conditions. The
placement and alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen
the visual impact of overhead lines.
(4) The developer shall provide adequate and efficient methods for
handling solid waste disposal, including materials that are required
to be recycled pursuant to municipal ordinance.
E. Stormwater management standards.
(1) Stormwater management systems shall emphasize a natural
drainage strategy as opposed to an engineered drainage strategy.
The applicability of a natural drainage strategy depends on such
factors as site storage capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity
and maintenance needs and resources.
(2) Where natural drainage strategies are inadequate to accommodate
stormwater management for the site, detention facilities and other
stormwater facilities shall be designed and engineered according
to the best available technology.
§ 30-224 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-224
1:528
§ 30-225. Waivers and adjustments.
The Planning Board may grant a waiver or an adjustment to a particular
design or performance standard contained in this article if the Board finds
(3) When the site contains or is adjacent to natural lakes, ponds, rivers,
streams or wetlands, the runoff collection system shall be designed
to prevent watershed runoff into these areas to the greatest extent
feasible.
(4) A stormwater management system shall be designed and
engineered to prevent an increase in nonpoint pollution to the
greatest extent feasible.
F. Environmental and visual standards.
(1) An environmental impact study shall be submitted as required by
this chapter. It shall include an inventory and general description of
the natural attributes of the site, including an inventory and
general description of the soils, topography, vegetation, geology
and surface hydrology on the site.
(2) The design and placement of lots and structures shall be made in a
manner to integrate the development attractively and
harmoniously with its surroundings to enhance the natural features
of the site.
(3) Careful attention shall be given to the design and quality of all
structures and site amenities so that they are compatible within the
development and compatible with the natural landscape.
(4) Adequate and functional lighting shall be located so as to provide
maximum aesthetics and safety while minimizing glare and
nuisance.
(5) Special natural features such as lakes, streams, wetlands and
woodlands as well as scenic views shall be preserved to the
greatest extent feasible.
(6) Existing topography and natural drainage patterns shall be
retained to the maximum extent feasible.
(7) Grading and construction plans shall comply with applicable soil
erosion and sediment control regulations.
(8) Fences, walls or hedges shall be utilized at the edges of the site
where buffers or screening are needed to protect the residents
from undesirable views, lighting glare, noise or other off-tract
influences which are undesirable.
(9) Off-street parking areas, service areas and areas for the collection
and storage of garbage and refuse shall be screened by a visual
barrier of at least six feet in height.
§ 30-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-225
1:529
that the use of a more flexible design or performance standard will achieve
or enhance the benefit intended by this chapter. No design or performance
standard contained in this chapter shall be waived where it adversely
affects public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 30-226. Off-tract improvements.
Where improvements outside of the boundaries of the planned unit
development are necessary to insure adequate access or provision of
necessary facilities or utilities such as drainage, street, sewer and water,
plans for such off-tract improvements shall accompany the preliminary plan.
§ 30-227. Planned adult community development.
A. Purpose. Planned adult community development is authorized as an
option for development and land conservation within an LC Land
Conservation Zone in accordance with the standards contained in this
chapter. The purpose of a planned adult community development is to
maintain the natural, rural and scenic qualities of the LC Land
Conservation District by preserving sensitive environmental features
and significant open lands while providing necessary housing
opportunities for an aging population.
B. Eligibility criteria.
(1) An application for development shall be made on lands with a
minimum size of 150 acres which shall be under the control of one
person or one ownership entity and which may include
noncontiguous parcels.
(2) An application for development shall demonstrate that the project
can be serviced by the municipal wastewater collection and
treatment system and the municipal water system.
(3) Any site proposed for development must include sufficient uplands
and developable acres to support a community of at least 150 age
appropriate single-family homes or apartments in independent
living, congregate or assisted facilities.66
C. Land use standards.
(1) Permitted uses shall be as specified in the Schedule of District
Regulations for the LC Land Conservation District. In addition to
those uses, reduced lot size, detached single-family, attached
single-family and multifamily housing types with age restrictions
shall be permitted.
(2) Permitted accessory uses shall include project maintenance
buildings, private attached garages architecturally integrated into
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), which required residential development to provide
affordable housing to be eligible for a planned adult community development, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010.
§ 30-225 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-227
1:530
residential structures, bus shelters, golf courses, swimming pools,
tennis courts and other similar recreational uses.
(3) Permitted ancillary commercial uses shall include neighborhood
shopping centers, office and medical services and other similar
uses that primarily serve the residents of the development,
provided these uses shall not occupy more than 10% of the land
area of the development. Where residential and nonresidential uses
are combined within a single structure, the land area shall be
counted as residential in nature. However, such space shall be
counted in the total square feet provided. This limitation shall not
apply to any community buildings that may include restaurants,
small sundry shops or other fee for service amenities as part of the
overall civic nature of the facility.
D. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
(1) Bulk standards. In order to provide full flexibility in the design and
layout of residential lot and structures and to insure a compatible
relationship between all residential uses and residual land uses, an
application for development shall not be required to meet the
minimum lot size, minimum lot depth and the minimum yard
dimensions within the LC Land Conservation District. However, the
bulk variations allowed shall meet all public health, safety and
general welfare requirements, including the building and fire
codes.
(2) Density. Residential development shall be permitted to a maximum
density of two dwelling units per gross acre of land to be
developed.
(3) Open space and civic uses.
(a) The total area of open space within the development shall be at
least 50% of the gross acreage. A minimum of 30% of the total
land area of the development shall be set aside as conservation
areas.
(b) The common open space shall include a community center with
a minimum interior space of 10 square feet per dwelling unit
located within the development. The center shall include a
swimming pool, tennis courts or similar recreational uses
sufficient to satisfy the active recreational needs of the
residential community.
(c) The active and passive recreational needs of the residents shall
be met through the community center and a network of small
parks or nature trails designed for bicycle and pedestrian
travel.
(d) An application for development may include any vacant parcel
toward the calculation of required open space that is
§ 30-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-227
1:531
contiguous with the subject parcel whether it is located within
the City or outside the City, provided the Planning Board of the
affected jurisdiction approves the plan.
(e) Except for easements for underground utilities, further
subdivision of the residual land or its use for other than
agriculture, conservation, or noncommercial recreation shall
be prohibited. Buildings and structures accessory to these uses
may be erected on the residual land, subject to site plan review
by the Planning Board.
E. Design standards.
(1) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
so they are located on the least environmentally sensitive area of
the site and in a manner which maximizes the preservation area for
long term conservation.
(2) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
to limit the points of access onto the external roadway system in
order to minimize continuous development frontage on highways
while providing sufficient connections for efficient traffic flow.
(3) A buffer zone of at least 150 feet in width shall be required between
residential and environmentally sensitive areas such as floodplains,
natural drainageways, unique vegetation, wetlands and wildlife
habitats.
F. Performance standards.
(1) The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City
reserves the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication.
(2) If the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted
by the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own
and maintain the common open space for the benefit of the
residents of the development. These lands shall be owned by one of
the following legal entities: owned jointly or in common by the
owners of the building lots or owned by a land conservation trust.
The agreement of the management organization shall guarantee
continued ownership and maintenance of all of the common open
space.
(3) All preservation lands shall be owned by one of the legal entities
described above and shall be subject to a permanent deed
restriction or conservation easement.
(4) As part of the agreement of the management organization,
residents shall be informed of the environmental sensitivities of the
area and shall be provided with all guidelines and restrictions that
§ 30-227 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-227
1:532
§ 30-228. Planned village development. [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-2006]
are identified by the Planning Board in its review which are
necessary for the protection of the environmental elements.
(5) The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easements, deeds of
trust and the management agreement which provides for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
A. Purpose. A planned village development (PVD) is authorized as an
option for development and land preservation within the Agricultural
Conservation District in accordance with the standards contained
within this section. The purpose of the PVD option is to allow
landowners the opportunity to develop specific areas of land within the
Agricultural Conservation District and gain additional density and uses
in return for preserving other land in perpetuity for agriculture,
conservation, active recreation and/or passive recreation. The planned
village development option may be exercised for contiguous or
noncontiguous parcels located within the Agricultural Conservation
District.
B. Eligibility criteria. The following eligibility requirements shall be met in
order for an applicant to exercise this option: [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
(1) The development shall meet the requirements for a planned unit
residential development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 and
§ 30-221 and 30-223 of this chapter.
(2) The development shall include all or part of a village node as
depicted on the Land Use Plan of the Master Plan, dated May 9,
2005, as it may be amended or superseded, or any village node
designated by resolution of the Planning Board. The proposed
development shall contain sufficient land suitable for agricultural,
conservation, active recreation and/or passive recreation.
[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007]
(3) An application for development shall be made on lands with a
minimum size of 300 acres exclusive of rights-of-way, railroad
rights-of-way, or utility rights-of-way. The applicant for the PVD
option shall have an equity interest in the property within the
Agricultural Conservation District to be used for the development.
(4) The tract shall not be subject to existing deed restrictions or other
prohibitions on further development or subdivision, or has had its
rights to sewer allocation purchased and/or retired.
(5) The tract shall not be owned by a government, government agency
or other political subdivision.
§ 30-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-228
1:533
(6) An applicant shall demonstrate that the project can be serviced by
the municipal wastewater collection and treatment system and the
municipal water system.
(7) A minimum of 35% of the total number of units shall be agerestricted
housing.
C. Land use standards.
(1) Principal uses. Principal permitted uses shall be as indicated in the
Schedule of Limitations for a Planned Village Development.
Nonresidential uses or buildings with both nonresidential uses and
residential uses shall not exceed 20% of the total land area of the
PVD.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses used in conjunction with a principal
permitted use shall be permitted in the Schedule of Limitations for
planned village development or for specific open space and
agricultural uses as otherwise provided for in the Land Use and
Development Regulations.67
(3) Conditional uses. Conditional uses shall comply with the general
standards of § 30-53 and the specific standards as noted in the
Schedule of District Regulations.
(4) Affordable housing. Development within the planned village
development shall conform to the minimum growth share
requirements for affordable housing for the entirety of the
residential and nonresidential development in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq., as it may be amended or superseded, and
the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan of the City of Millville.
(5) Multifamily housing. The total number of townhouses and
apartments shall not exceed 30% of the total number of dwelling
units. Assisted living facilities and comprehensive personal care
homes, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:36-1.3, and congregate care housing
shall be exempted from the calculation of maximum multifamily
dwellings.
(6) Open space and agriculture. A minimum of 50% of the total land
area shall be utilized for open space and/or agriculture.
(7) Master Plan streets. The public street plan for any planned village
development that encompasses all or part of a new, extended, or
expanded street, as depicted on the Circulation Plan of the Master
Plan, shall be designed to implement the intent and purpose of said
Master Plan street.
D. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
67.Editor's Note: The Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-228 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-228
1:534
(1) Bulk standards. Area yard and lot coverage standards shall be as
required under the planned village development section of the
Schedule of District Limitations. An applicant may propose an
alternate set of area, yard and lot coverage standards pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45a as part of a general development plan
application that may be approved by the board of jurisdiction,
provided that the density and use standards conform to the
requirements of this section.
(2) Density and floor area ratio.
(a) Residential development shall not exceed 0.50 units per gross
acre of contiguous or noncontiguous land within the City of
Millville, except as permitted below. Assisted living facilities,
comprehensive personal care homes, community residences
for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for
victims of domestic violence, community residences for the
terminally ill, community residences for persons with head
injuries and congregate care housing shall be exempted from
the calculation of the number of permitted housing units based
on gross density, provided such uses are located within the
land area devoted to nonresidential or mixed nonresidential
and residential buildings and shall not exceed more than 10%
of the total number of units allowed under the gross density
calculation plus any bonus density.
(b) Bonus density. Additional density may be added to the
underlying base density of the PVD, as provided for in
Subsection D(2)(a) above, but in no event shall exceed two
dwelling units per gross acre of land, by utilizing any of the
following provisions:
[1] Age-restricted. The number of age-restricted dwellings
shall be a minimum of 35% of the total number of dwelling
units. Additional density may be obtained by providing a
higher percentage of age-restricted dwellings in
accordance with the following table:
Minimum Percent of Age-
Restricted Dwellings
Added Density
(units per acre)
40% 0.40
45% 0.80
50% 1.20
Assisted living facilities and comprehensive personal care
homes shall count towards the minimum percent of agerestricted
dwellings at the ratio of one dwelling for each
two beds.
§ 30-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-228
1:535
[2] Open space, agricultural, parks and other public purpose
land use. Additional density may be obtained by providing
a higher percentage of open space and/or agricultural land
in excess of the minimum percentage in § 30-228C(6) in
accordance with the following table:
Open Space/Agriculture Bonus Density
Minimum Percent of
Tract Acreage
Added Density
(units per acre)
52.5% 0.20
55.0% 0.40
57.5% 0.60
60.0% 0.80
Neighborhood Parks One-Quarter Acre and Larger
Number of Parks
Added Density
(units per acre)
2 0.10
4 0.20
6 0.30
8 0.40
10 0.50
Regional Public Park Usable for Active Recreation
Minimum Acreage
Added Density
(units per acre)
10 0.10
15 0.20
20 0.30
25 0.40
30 0.50
Public School Site
School Type
Added Density
(units per acre)
Elementary 0.50
Middle/Junior High School 1.00
Senior High School 1.50
§ 30-228 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-228
1:536
The public school site shall be acceptable to the Millville
Board of Education for its intended purpose.
(3) Open space and civic uses.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) The common open space shall include a community center with
a minimum interior space of 10 square feet per dwelling unit
located within the development. The center shall include a
swimming pool, tennis courts or similar recreational uses
sufficient to satisfy the active recreational needs of the
residential community.
(c) The active and passive recreational needs of the residents shall
be met through the community center and a network of small
parks or nature trails designed for bicycle and pedestrian
travel.
(d) An application for development may include any vacant parcel
of land toward the calculation of the required open space,
provided the land is contiguous with the subject parcel and is
located within the City of Millville. [Amended 10-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 33-2006]
(e) The disposition of land for open space and agricultural use
shall be as required under Subsection F and any other
applicable open space standards.
E. Design standards.
(1) The overall goal of the design for a planned village development is
to have substantial variation in the design of single-family detached
residential dwelling units, while maintaining uniform setbacks
along the building line for each block. The development should
have variation in the exteriors' design and materials, interior basic
dimensions of the floor plans, height, design, and appearance of the
roofs, and size, location and types of windows.
(2) As part of the overall planned unit development review process, the
applicant shall submit a narrative and design guidebook illustrating
the types and variation of architectural design that will be utilized
for both the residential and nonresidential buildings in the project.
A pattern book shall be part of this submission that would illustrate
variety in the type of dwelling units to be constructed. This
submission may be subsequent to a general development plan
approval but precedent to a grant of preliminary subdivision or site
plan approval.
(3) An architectural review board shall be established as part of the
master deed of the planned village development and shall apply to
the entire project as a whole. The architectural review board shall
§ 30-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-228
1:537
be established no later than the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a residential dwelling that represents 75% of the
total number of approved residential units. The architectural
review board shall constitute no less than five members or more
than nine members and shall be an odd number. The master deed
shall establish bylaws for the term, membership, procedures and
actions of the board. Such master deed shall be reviewed and
approved as to form by the City Attorney prior to filing with the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. The architectural
review board shall utilize the pattern book in Subsection E(2) above
in its review of additions and alterations of residential buildings,
except the board shall not review assisted living, congregate care,
and similar facilities.
F. Site planning principles.
(1) Facades shall be parallel to the street lines and exterior building
walls shall typically be either parallel or at right angles to each
other. A lot with multiple buildings should be organized around a
feature such as a courtyard, green, or quadrangle that encourages
pedestrian activity and incidental social interaction among users.
Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency
access.
(2) Civic, institutional, and commercial buildings shall be located to
front toward and relate to public streets, both functionally and
visually. Buildings shall not be oriented to front toward a parking
lot. Buildings shall be oriented to address the geometry of the
abutting street pattern and shall acknowledge prominent design
features in the regular street pattern (i.e., circles, crescents, etc.).
(3) Nonresidential buildings on corner lots shall be considered
significant structures, since they have at least two facades visibly
exposed to the street. Such buildings should be designed with
architectural features to emphasize their location.
(4) Nonresidential buildings located at entrances from collector and
arterial roads into and out of neighborhoods and village parks shall
mark the transition in a distinctive fashion using massing,
additional height, contrasting materials, and/or architectural
detailing to obtain this effect.
(5) Each market-rate dwelling unit shall have a garage. Dwelling units
intended for low- and moderate-income occupancy are exempt from
this requirement but shall have adequate off-street parking.
Garages may be either attached or detached from the principal
dwelling unit. In either case, the garage shall be aligned either
parallel with or perpendicular to the alignment of the principal
building. The architectural design of the garage, including the
proportions, roof pitch, exterior materials, doors, color, etc. shall be
coordinated and compatible with that of the dwelling unit.
§ 30-228 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-228
1:538
(6) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
in such a manner that the common boundary between the
residential lots and any preserved farmland shall be minimized in
length to reduce potential conflicts.
(7) A buffer zone of at least 75 feet in width shall be required between
residential and agricultural uses and shall be thickly planted with
fast growing native shrubs and trees to create an effective barrier
separating residential uses from fields and pastures.
G. Performance standards.
(1) The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City
reserves the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication.
(2) If the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted
by the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own
and maintain the common open space for the benefit of the
residents of the development. These lands shall be owned by one of
the following legal entities: owned jointly or in common by the
owners of the building lots or owned by a land conservation trust.
The agreement of the management organization shall guarantee
continued ownership and maintenance of all of the common open
space.
(3) All lands preserved as farm land shall be subject to a permanent
deed restriction or conservation easement. The preserved farm
land shall be mowed or plowed at least once annually.
(4) As part of the agreement of the management organization,
residents shall be informed of the private right to farm covenants
established in the agreement, and the residents shall acknowledge
that they live in a predominantly agricultural district which
includes customary farming practices such as the use of farm
equipment and machinery, the application of chemicals, fertilizers,
insecticides, manures and other organic and inorganic farm
materials on the land. The covenants contained in the agreement
shall specify the hours of farm operation and climactic conditions
for limiting the practice of cultivation and the application of
chemicals, fertilizers, insecticides and manures.
(5) The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easements, deeds of
trust and the management agreement which provides for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
H. Required condition of approval. The use of credits transferred shall only
be upon the approval of a preliminary site plan or subdivision that
includes lands within both the Agricultural Conservation District and a
village node.
§ 30-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-229
1:539
§ 30-229. Planned lakeshore community development. [Amended
1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
A. Purpose. The planned lakeshore community development shall be a
planned unit residential development allowed within the Lakeshore
Conservation District. The purpose of the planned lakeshore community
development option is to create a village node with amenities, open
space, and a strong pedestrian network utilizing a grid or grid modified
for environmental factors in the layout and design of streets, parks, and
the siting of buildings. The development is intended to be built at a
neighborhood scale with blocks arranged for pedestrian mobility and
integrated into public spaces occupying prominent locations combined
with a mix of housing types and lot sizes within such blocks to create a
walkable and diverse new community.
B. Eligibility criteria. The following eligibility requirements shall be met in
order for an applicant to exercise this option: [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
(1) An application for development shall be made with a minimum tract
area of 300 acres under the control of one person or one
development entity.
(2) An applicant submitting an application for development within the
planned lakeshore community development shall be responsible for
obtaining an adequate water allocation for the project from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The water
allocation request shall include the additional source of supply
capacity, such as the addition of one or more new wells, to the
extent that it increases the City of Millville's firm source capacity
by a minimum of three times the average daily flow of the entire
project as determined by the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-5 et seq.) and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations
(N.J.A.C. 7:10-12 et seq.). The applicant shall also obtain an
increased monthly allocation of 1 1/2 times the average monthly
flow for the entire project and an increased annual flow equal to the
average annual flow projected for the entire project. Millville City
shall be the applicant for any modification to its water allocation
permit; however, the developer of the planned lakeshore
community development shall be financially responsible for all
aspects of obtaining the additional water allocation permit or
increase in allocation including all application fees, engineering
fees, and other similar fees and costs.
(3) A minimum of 40% of the total tract area shall be in permanently
preserved open space. Stormwater management facilities equal in
area up to a maximum of 5% of the total tract acreage may be
counted towards the minimum open space requirement, provided
that such facilities are suitably landscaped. Such facilities must
§ 30-229 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-229
1:540
have a minimum depth of three feet above the seasonal high water
table.
C. Land use standards.
(1) Accessory uses. The following uses and structures accessory to the
above uses shall be permitted:
(a) Accessory uses as permitted in § 30-114D of the Lakeshore
Conservation District.
(b) Community center for the common use of all residents.
(c) Community swimming pool for the common use of all
residents.
(d) Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court
sports.
(e) Off-street parking and private garages.
(f) Common satellite dish and television antennae.
(g) Management building and sales office.
(h) Maintenance building.
(i) Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
(2) The planned lakeshore community development may be agerestricted.
(3) The design and use of open space shall conform to the
requirements of § 30-210.
(4) Walking distance. Eighty percent of the total number of lots for
dwellings shall fit within a single one-mile-diameter circle.
(5) Additional requirements. The following additional requirements
shall apply to the perimeter of any planned lakeshore community
development.
(a) Except for recreational structures within common or public
open space, no building or lot shall be permitted within 300
feet of the normal water elevation of Union Lake.
(b) Woodland retention. Within areas identified for common open
space or public open space, at least 70% of the existing
woodland shall remain.
(c) Required buffers. A buffer zone of 100 feet shall be required
between the proposed new residential lots (excluding roads
and utilities) and existing residential areas. Any other buffers
that may be required shall be in accordance with the standards
and requirements set forth in § 30-155.
§ 30-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-229
1:541
D. Area, lot, coverage and density standards. The following area, yard,
coverage and density standards shall apply to lots in the planned
lakeshore community development.
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
Use
Single-
Family
Detached
A
Single-
Family
Detached
B
Single-
Family
Detached
C
Single-
Family
Detached
D
Minimum lot size 7,800
square feet
10,800
square feet
15,000
square feet
18,000
square feet
Maximum lot size(1) 12,000
square feet
16,000
square feet
20,000
square feet
45,000
square feet
Minimum lot
frontage
65 feet 90 feet 100 feet 120 feet
Minimum lot depth 120 feet 120 feet 150 feet 150 feet
Maximum building
coverage
40% 30% 25% 20%
Maximum lot
coverage
55% 50% 40% 35%
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height
Limitations
Front yard 25 feet 25 feet 30 feet 35 feet
Side yard(2) 15 feet
combined
12 feet 15 feet 20 feet
Rear yard 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depth and Height
Limitations
Front yard N.P. N.P. N.P. N.P.
Side yard 5 feet 10 feet 10 feet 15 feet
Rear yard 5 feet 10 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum accessory
building height
18 feet 18 feet 20 feet 22 feet
Tool shed height 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet
Tool shed side and
rear yard
5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
§ 30-229 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-229
1:542
Notes:
(1) The maximum lot size for all single-family detached dwelling
types may be increased by 40% where lots front upon the convex
side of a street with a radius of less than 100 feet.
(2) For single-family detached A dwelling types, the side yards
combined must total 15 feet with a minimum of no less than six
feet on one side.
(1) Additional requirements and modifications.
(a) Each residential subneighborhood consisting of several blocks
separated by residential collectors or subcollectors that
contains single-family detached dwellings shall include no
more than 80% of Type A, B, C or D dwellings, except that any
block utilizing existing public rights-of-way for lot access may
have one type of single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Reduced frontage. Lots fronting on a curve with a radius of less
than 200 feet shall meet the lot frontage requirement at the
line established by the required setback for the front yard,
provided that the lot frontage is no less than 80% of the
required lot frontage.
(2) Density. The permitted number of dwelling units within the planned
lakeshore community optional standards shall be determined as
follows:
(a) Base density. Development shall be permitted at a density of
1.6 dwellings to the base acre. Gross tract acreage shall first
be determined by a boundary survey indicating the total
acreage of the tract. From this figure, existing rights-of-way
and easements to be retained and riparian waters and state
open waters (excluding intermittent or permanent streams)
shall be subtracted. The resulting sum shall then be multiplied
by the minimum open space percentage of 40% to determine
the base acreage. The permitted number of dwellings shall be
equal to 1.6 times the base acreage, rounded.
(b) Bonus densities. Additional density may be added to the
underlying base density of the planned lakeshore community
development, as provided for in Subsection D(2)(a) above, but
in no event shall it exceed an additional 0.65 dwelling unit per
base acre:
[1] Age-restricted. Additional density may be obtained by
providing a percentage of age-restricted dwellings in
accordance with the following table:
§ 30-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-229
1:543
Age-Restricted Bonus Density
Minimum Percent of Age-
Restricted Dwellings
Added Density
(units per acre)
25% 0.10
30% 0.15
35% 0.20
[2] Open space. Additional density may be obtained by
providing a higher percentage of open space in excess of
the minimum percentage in § 30-229B(3) in accordance
with the following table:
Open Space Bonus Density
Minimum Percent of Tract
Acreage
Added Density
(units per acre)
45% 0.10
50% 0.20
55% 0.30
60% 0.40
[3] Neighborhood parks. Additional density may be obtained
by providing neighborhood parks of 1/4 acre or larger
integrated into the block system of the development in
excess of the number required in Subsection D(3)(c) in
accordance with the following table:
Neighborhood Parks Density Bonus
Number of Parks
Added Density
(units per acre)
1 0.10
2 0.15
3 0.20
4 0.25
5 0.30
[4] Community parks. Additional density may be obtained by
the dedication of public open space for community park
use in accordance with the following table. Such
community park land shall be counted towards the
required open space of the development.
§ 30-229 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-229
1:544
Community Park Density Bonus
Added Density (units per acre)
Minimum
Community Park
Acreage
Not Adjacent to
Existing Public
Open Space
Adjacent to
Existing Public
Open Space
5 0.05 0.10
10 0.10 0.15
15 0.15 0.20
20 0.20 0.25
25 0.25 0.30
[5] Walking distance. Additional density may be obtained by
creating more compact development than required in
§ 30-229C(4) in accordance with the following table:
Walking Distance Density Bonus
Percentage of Lots for
Dwellings within One
Mile
Added Density
(units per acre)
85% 0.05
90% 0.10
95% 0.15
100% 0.20
(3) Open space and civic uses.
(a) The common open space shall include a community center
located within the development. The center shall include a
swimming pool, tennis courts, or other similar recreational
uses sufficient to satisfy the active recreational needs of the
residential community. The community center shall be a
minimum size of 10 square feet per dwelling unit or 3,000
square feet, whichever is larger, and be available to all
homeowners or renters in the development.
(b) The active and passive recreational needs of the residents shall
be met through the community center and a network of small
parks, as required in Subsection D(3)(c) below, and nature
trails designed for bicycle and pedestrian travel.
(c) Neighborhood parks. For each 100 dwelling units or part
thereof, a single and separate neighborhood park of at least 1/4
acre shall be integrated into a central location within the
planned lakeshore community development in addition to any
other common open space that may be required. Such parks
shall be included in the calculation of required open space.
Parks may be developed with active recreation appropriate to
§ 30-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-229
1:545
the population being served or may function as passive
recreation and seating areas.
E. Design standards. The design and layout of any development shall
conform to the standards of § 30-228E, as applicable, and any
additional village node design standards as may be promulgated.
(1) The development shall be laid out with a distribution of all types of
single-family homes (A, B, C, D) throughout the development. Each
type of single-family home (A, B, C, D) must be part of the overall
project layout. The location of each type of housing shall be in
conformance with § 30-229F(3).
(2) The development is encouraged to be designed with a road network
with multiple points of ingress and egress so that traffic generated
by the project will be evenly disbursed and will not negatively
impact the surrounding neighborhoods or existing levels of service
for neighborhood roadways. The development must be designed
with an integrated street network system that functions at an
acceptable level of service without connecting to the existing
roadways servicing the adjacent neighborhoods.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) (Reserved)
F. Performance standards.
(1) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
to minimize the clearing of existing woodlands by grading to
minimize cuts and fills.
(2) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
to minimize the loss of scenic viewsheds by limiting the extent of
structures visible from Union Lake.
(3) Large single-family detached lots (Housing Type C and D) shall be
located, to the extent feasible, near or adjacent to the existing
residential neighborhood and laid out in a design similar to the
existing design pattern. Small single-family detached lots (Housing
Types A and B) shall be located, to the extent feasible, near or
adjacent to the existing commercial development.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
G. Common open space requirements.
(1) The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City
reserves the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication.
Should the City reject a proposed public dedication of a community
§ 30-229 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-229
1:546
§ 30-230. Planned residential community development.
park created pursuant to § 30-229D(2)(b)[4], the applicant may
dedicate such land to another public entity, land conservation trust,
or other organization acceptable to the City for active or passive
recreation.
(2) If the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted
by the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own
and maintain the common open space for the benefit of the
residents of the development. These lands shall be owned by one of
the following legal entities: owned jointly or in common by the
owners of the building lots or owned by a land conservation trust.
The agreement of the management organization shall guarantee
continued ownership and maintenance of all of the common open
space.
(3) All preservation lands shall be owned by one of the legal entities
described above and shall be subject to a permanent deed
restriction or conservation easement.
(4) The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easements, deeds of
trust and the management agreement which provides for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
(5) Information concerning the nature of the lakeshore buffer and
allowed activities therein shall be distributed to each homeowner
and lessor at the time of the sale and rental.
A. Purpose. Planned residential community development is authorized as
an option for development within the R-20 Residential District in
accordance with the standards contained in this chapter. The purpose
of a planned residential community development is to provide for one or
more residential clusters as a single planned entity which includes a
common open space component and appropriate commercial, public or
quasi-public uses primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
B. Eligibility criteria.
(1) An application for development shall be made on lands with a
minimum size of 50 acres which shall be under the control of one
person or one ownership entity and which may include
noncontiguous parcels.
(2) An application for development shall demonstrate that the project
can be serviced by the municipal wastewater collection and
treatment system and the municipal water system.68
C. Land use standards.
§ 30-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-230
1:547
(1) Permitted uses shall be as specified in the Schedule of District
Regulations for the R-20 Residential District. In addition to those
uses, reduced lot size, detached single-family, attached singlefamily
and multifamily housing types shall be permitted.
(2) Permitted accessory uses shall include project maintenance
buildings, private attached garages architecturally integrated into
residential structures, a golf course, swimming pools, tennis courts
and other similar recreational uses.
(3) Permitted ancillary commercial uses shall include convenience
stores, day-care centers, office and medical services and other uses
that primarily serve the residents of the development, provided
these uses shall not occupy more than 10% of the land area of the
development.
D. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
(1) Bulk standards. In order to provide full flexibility in the design and
layout of residential lots and structures and to insure a compatible
relationship between all residential uses and residual land uses, an
application for development shall not be required to meet the
minimum lot size, minimum lot depth and the minimum yard
dimensions within the R-20 Residential District. However, the bulk
variations allowed shall meet all public health, safety and general
welfare requirements including, the building and fire codes.
(2) Density. Residential development shall be permitted to a maximum
density of six dwelling units per gross acre of land to be developed.
(3) Open space.
(a) The total area of open space within the development shall be at
least 25% of the gross acreage.
(b) The common open space shall include a network of small parks
or nature trails through wooded areas designed for bicycle and
pedestrian travel or similar recreational uses sufficient to
satisfy the active and passive recreational needs of the
residential community.
(c) An application for development may include any vacant parcel
toward the calculation of required open space that is
contiguous with the subject parcel whether it is located within
the City or outside of the City, provided the Planning Board of
the affected jurisdiction approves the plan.
E. Design standards.
68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which required residential development to provide
affordable housing to be eligible for a planned residential community development, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010.
§ 30-230 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-230
1:548
§ 30-231. Planned riverfront mixed-use development. [Amended
7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009]
(1) Where the proposed development is to occur on infill sites
surrounded partially or completely by preexisting residential
developments, lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest
extent feasible to be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood community with regard to architectural design,
disposition and orientation of buildings and the visual integrity of
the natural landscape.
(2) Lots and structures shall be adequately buffered from the
surrounding preexisting residential developments to create an
effective barrier separating the proposed development from the
preexisting residential developments.
F. Performance standards.
(1) The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City
reserves the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication.
(2) If the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted
by the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own
and maintain the common open space for the benefit of the
residents of the development. These lands shall be owned by one of
the following legal entities: owned jointly or in common by the
owners of the building lots or owned by a land conservation trust.
The agreement of the management organization shall guarantee
continued ownership and maintenance of all of the common open
space.
(3) The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easements, deeds of
trust and the management agreement which provides for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
A. Purpose. A planned riverfront mixed-use development is authorized as
the sole option for development or redevelopment within the Riverfront
Mixed-Use District. The purpose of a planned riverfront mixed-use
development is to provide for a diverse mix of compatible land uses and
density which are consistent with a high quality of development
anticipated by the Master Plan and the Maurice River Development
Plan for the Riverfront Mixed-Use District.
B. Eligibility criteria.
(1) There is no minimum acreage requirement for a project in the
Riverfront Mixed-Use District;
(2) An application for development shall demonstrate that the project
can be served by the municipal wastewater collection and
§ 30-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-231
1:549
treatment system and the municipal water system and comply with
all stormwater management regulations; and
(3) All applications must comply with general planned development
eligibility criteria set forth in § 30-223 of this chapter.
C. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
(1) Bulk standards. In order to provide full flexibility in the design and
layout of lots and structures and to ensure a compatible
relationship among all land uses, structures and components of the
Maurice River Development Plan, an application for development
shall not be required to meet specific minimum lot size, lot depth or
yard dimensions within the Riverfront Mixed-Use District.
(2) Density.
(a) Base density. Residential density shall be permitted at a base
density of the following dwelling units per gross acre of land
for each individual subarea contained within the zoning
district. For purposes of these regulations, density is
determined by taking the total acreage of a tract of land based
upon a boundary survey and from this figure subtracting
existing rights-of-way and easements to be retained and
riparian waters. The resulting sum shall be the base acreage
and the base density per acre shall be applied to this sum. Base
densities for each subarea are as follows:
[1] Millyard Mixed-Use District: 10 units/acre;
[2] Overlook Arts and Entertainment District: 12 units/acre;
[3] Transit District: 10 units/acre;
[4] Civic and Recreation District: 10 units/acre; and
[5] Glassworks Transit and Marina District: 10 units/acre.
(b) Density bonuses. Additional density may be added to the
underlying base density of the planned development for each
subarea, as provided for in Subsection C(2)(a) above, but in no
event shall density exceed a maximum as indicated below:
[1] Millyard Mixed-Use District: 12 units/acre;
[2] Overlook Arts and Entertainment District: 15 units/acre;
[3] Transit District: 12 units/acre;
[4] Civic and Recreation District: 12 units/acre; and
[5] Glassworks Transit and Marina District: 12 units/acre.
(c) Density bonus menu. The following site amenities, linkages and
priorities shall be considered in negotiating with a developer
§ 30-231 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-231
1:550
for density bonuses as part of the adopted Municipal
Development Agreement:
[1] Establishing a program of public art in the downtown or
within the surrounding neighborhoods;
[2] Provision of a public parking structure or other plan for
public parking;
[3] Open space/recreation facilities beyond the required
thirty-foot waterfront easement for continuation of public
access and trail system;
[4] Artist live/work space within the development or as a
secondary project in a downtown neighborhood;
[5] A downtown cultural or historic preservation component,
which could include the restoration or financing of key
historic properties or the assimilation of other new or
existing cultural facilities into the downtown area;
[6] A community benefit provision as part of the Municipal
Development Agreement dedicating a portion of all new
employment and training opportunities to the residents of
the surrounding neighborhoods;
[7] Use of LEED-certified green building techniques and/or
the use of recycled or renewable materials; and
[8] An innovative program or plan for creative linkages
between the project and the downtown and surrounding
neighborhoods so the new development does not function
as a self-contained community.
(3) Open space.
(a) All common open space shall be designed in a manner so that it
is compatible with the existing design and landscaping theme
established along the waterfront by the existing public
improvements to ensure a uniform appearance in character
and quality;
(b) All projects with frontage along the water shall designate and
permanently preserve a right of way 30 feet wide for the
purposes of creating a public walkway;
(c) The development shall comply with the open space standards
set forth in § 30-210C;
(d) The location of all common open space shall be planned as
much as possible as a contiguous area located for the
maximum benefit of the residents, preserving and, where
possible, enhancing natural features;
§ 30-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-231
1:551
(e) Wetlands and floodplains and steep slopes may compose up to
a maximum of 30% of the required open space; and
(f) Conservation of natural topographical and geological features,
preventing soil erosion and surface and groundwater
contamination, and preserving significant environmental
features and significant habitat are all priorities to be
addressed by the open space plan.
D. Design standards. The Planning Board shall consider the following
design principles:
(1) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
to allow for the effective use of stormwater management practices
that will reduce the amount of pollutants discharged into the
Maurice River.
(2) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
to minimize the loss of scenic viewsheds to the Maurice River.
(3) Infill residential development shall, to the greatest extent feasible,
comply with the standards for traditional neighborhood
development as set forth in this chapter. Architecture and building
materials must be consistent with the design of the development
and compatible with the adjacent neighborhood. The style and form
should relate to the historic setting and the unique qualities of the
City's waterfront location.
(4) Streets, utilities, parks, public buildings and drainage features
must be designed to have adequate capacity to serve the proposed
development.
(5) The architecture in the Planned Riverfront Mixed-Use District
should strike a balance between creativity and innovation on the
one hand, while avoiding obtrusive, incongruous structures on the
other. Architectural styles that do not build upon and promote the
existing character of the City are strongly discouraged.
(6) Planned development architecture should demonstrate the
cohesive planning of the development and present a clearly
identifiable design feature throughout the project. Buildings should
not be totally uniform in appearance. Rather, cohesion and identity
can be demonstrated in similar building scale or mass; consistent
use of facade materials; similar ground-level detailing, color or
signage; consistency in functional systems, such as roadway or
pedestrian way surfaces, signage or landscaping; the framing of
outdoor open space and linkages or a clear conveyance in the
importance of various buildings and features on the site. The
project shall be integrated into other projects and planned systems
such as pedestrian ways, landscaping patterns, lighting concepts
and traffic movements.
§ 30-231 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-231
1:552
(7) A single, dominant building mass shall be avoided. Where large
structures are required, mass should be broken up through the use
of setbacks, projecting and recessed elements, and similar design
techniques. Monotony of design in single- or multiple-building
projects shall be avoided by varying detail, material and form.
(8) Treatment of river edges should be visually appealing from the
river vantage point as well as from the shore. Maintaining the
existing natural character and contours of grade of the existing
river bank is encouraged.
(9) Each housing component of a mixed-use project shall contain at
least three different types of housing.
(10) An interconnected street system is required for new development
to promote orderly and safe development. Streets should be
interdependent and connected to existing transportation routes,
providing continuous and comprehensive traffic circulation.
(11) Pedestrian circulation shall be provided through internal and
external walkways. Pedestrian movement within the planned
development shall be facilitated by the safe, efficient and
harmonious groupings of structures, uses and facilities with open
spaces with minimal conflicts with vehicular traffic. The pedestrian
network shall provide pathways between and among the
development components and should encourage trips on foot from
the downtown to the waterfront area. The pedestrian systems
should use appropriate lighting, landspacing, graphics, street
furniture and concrete and brick paving systems in compliance
with the existing design within the Central Business District.
(12) Pedestrian lighting should be incorporated into the design of
parking areas and along pedestrian walkways. Lighting for parking
and vehicle queuing areas should provide adequate illumination for
vehicle and pedestrian safety and security while shielding
surrounding areas from excessive light trespass and glare. All light
shall be directed downward. A designated family of fixtures shall be
used along public roadways, site driveways, public sidewalks and
bikeways and parking lots in order to reinforce a unified image.
(13) Shared access driveways and parking areas should be encouraged
wherever possible for mixed use developments and/or adjacent
uses which have different hours, days and/or seasons of peak
parking demand.
(14) Parking areas shall include provisions for the parking of bicycles in
locations that are safely segregated from automobile traffic and
parking.
(15) The design of parking lots should include access and parking lot
entryways to abutting properties across roadways aligned to create
§ 30-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-231
1:553
direct intersections, providing efficiency and safety for vehicles
entering and exiting the sites.
(16) Mechanical equipment or utility equipment located on the exterior
of a building should be appropriately screened from public view or
designed as an integral part of the overall exterior appearances of
the building facade.
(17) Service areas, refuse collection and storage areas, and loading
docks or zones, should be located away from or screened from
public view and shall not impede on-site vehicular and pedestrian
circulation. On waterfront locations, the service and loading
facilities shall not be located on the water side of the structure and
shall be placed in a manner to minimize and screen such uses from
public view.
(18) All utility services shall be constructed underground. Utility
components required to be aboveground (transformers, meters,
etc.) shall be screened by landscaping away from public view and,
to the extent practicable, located to the rear of buildings.
(19) Affordable housing. Development within the Planned Riverfront
Mixed-Use District shall conform to the statewide standards for
affordable housing for the entirety of the residential and
nonresidential development in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94 and
N.J.A.C. 5:95, as amended or superseded, and the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan of the City of Millville. Applicants may elect to
construct affordable housing on site or within the City's
redevelopment areas or provide a payment in lieu of construction
for up to 50% of the affordable housing obligation.
E. Performance standards.
(1) A plan shall be submitted for the ownership of common areas such
as loading areas, parking lots, pedestrian walkways and other
common open spaces.
(2) The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City
reserves the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication. If
the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted
by the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own
and maintain the common open space for the benefit of the
residents of the development and for the public. These lands shall
be owned by one of the following legal entities: owned jointly or in
common by the owners of the building lots or owned by a land
conservation trust. The agreement or the management
organization shall guarantee continued ownership and
maintenance of all the common open space.
(3) The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easements, deeds of
§ 30-231 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-231
1:554
trust and the management agreement which provides for the
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
(4) Nonconforming uses and structures: Nonconforming uses and
structures must comply with the legal principles set forth in § 30-83
of this chapter.
F. Procedure for submitting an application for development.
(1) Concept plan. All development proposed within the Riverfront
Mixed-Use District must be submitted as a concept plan for initial
review by municipal staff and professional consultants. After
general agreement on the concept plan is reached, the applicant
can proceed in submitting the general development plan.
(2) General development plan. After submission of a concept plan, the
applicant must submit a general development plan followed by
more detailed preliminary and final subdivision or site plans for
each stage. The more detailed plans shall be consistent with the
requirements for major site plan and/or subdivision approval as
specified in Article VI of this chapter. In addition to submitting the
requirements stated in Article VI for a general development plan,
the applicant for a planned riverfront mixed-use project must
submit the following in narrative form:
(a) Definitions of the land use designations, including density
ranges and product types for residential development shown
on the general development plan graphics required by this
section;
(b) A table setting the minimum and maximum total dwelling units
and nonresidential square footage and the minimum acreage
for common open space, natural resource areas, public uses
and any other planned uses;
(c) A description of residential and mixed-use neighborhoods;
commercial, office and research and development uses;
common open space and natural resource areas, public
buildings, uses and access and any other proposed uses;
(d) A description of how the proposed plan is consistent with the
Millville Master Plan (2005) and the Riverfront Development
Plan (2006);
(e) Preliminary elevations of all proposed structures drawn to
scale, indicating building heights, materials, colors and the
general appearance of existing and proposed structures; and
(f) Preliminary plot plans for each building site in the plan,
including a typical plot plan for single-family dwelling types.
(3) Subdivision and site plans. After submission and approval of a
general development plan, the applicant must submit detailed
§ 30-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-231
1:555
preliminary and final subdivision or site plans for each stage in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Article VI of this
chapter.
(4) Completeness determination and timeframe for approval. All
applications for a planned riverfront mixed-use development will be
deemed complete and be acted upon in accordance with the
timeframes established by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for general development plans and
planned development.
G. Affordable housing requirements. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
(1) All planned riverfront development projects are considered to be
inclusionary housing projects. As such, each project must create
25% of the project’s total dwelling units as on-site affordable
housing units consistent with the current regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the Fair Share
regulations set forth in Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) All affordable housing obligations will be set forth in the Planning
Board resolution approving the project and in the municipal
development agreement for each project. The Planning Board will
consider on an individual project basis the ability of the project to
meet its affordable housing obligation by creating the affordable
dwelling units on an alternate site within the municipality,
including within any existing redevelopment areas.
§ 30-231 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-231
1:556
ARTICLE XX
Residential Clusters
§ 30-232. Purpose. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
§ 30-233. (Reserved)70
§ 30-234. Applicability. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 34-2005;
1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007; 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008]
Residential cluster development shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of this article. This form of planned development is authorized as
a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
R-40 Residential District
R-20 Residential District
§ 30-235. General criteria for eligibility.
One of the prime objectives of a residential cluster development of land
is the availability and quantum of open space made possible by deviation
from usual zoning requirements. The following general criteria shall govern
the eligibility of an application for development of this type of planned
development:
A. Article VI of the Municipal Land Use Law69 authorizes municipalities to
adopt an ordinance providing for planned developments in the form of
residential clusters. This form of planned development encourages and
promotes flexibility and economy in layout and design while preserving
substantial open space, including agricultural lands and
environmentally sensitive lands.
B. A residential cluster of single-family dwellings may be permitted as an
alternative form of development in specific zones on contiguous parcels
that are developed as a single entity, according to a plan that preserves
a significant area of open space. Applicants utilizing the cluster
development option must demonstrate that compared to a conventional
layout, the cluster design will benefit the community by reducing
impervious surfaces, conserving natural resources and open space by
minimizing land disturbance from grading and clearing, reducing the
need for roadway and utility infrastructure and reducing the need for
stormwater management basins.
A. Minimum required acreage. The required minimum acreage shall be:
[Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
69.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 30-233, Definitions, as amended 10-5-2004 by Ord. No. 36-2004,
was repealed 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 34-2005.
§ 30-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-235
1:557
§ 30-236. Land use and design standards.
The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number of
dwelling units based on the permitted gross density and the plan for open
space, in its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing
of the various sections or phases of development. The general development
plan and the subsequent site plan or subdivision shall conform to the
following land use and design standards:
(1) In the Agricultural Conservation District, a residential cluster
development shall be a minimum of 10 acres of contiguous land.
(2) In all other districts where permitted, a minimum of 25 acres of
contiguous land shall be required for a residential cluster
development.
B. One person or one legal entity shall own or control by deed, contract,
option or other legal instrument the land area at the time that the
application for development is filed.
C. Municipal sewage shall be available to the project site at the time that
the application for development is filed or planned to be online at the
time of project occupancy.
D. Municipal water shall be available to the project site at the time that the
application for development is filed or planned to be online at the time
of project occupancy.
E. Residential cluster developments may be built in stages, provided the
applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board the
following:
(1) The plan submitted for preliminary approval shall delineate each
phase and include an expected construction schedule.
(2) The residential cluster development may provide for a greater or
lesser concentration of density within a section than the overall
project density, provided that it is offset by a lesser or greater
density in subsequent stages.
(3) Each stage of development shall be substantially self-functioning
and self-sustaining with regard to traffic circulation and access,
utility services, off-street parking and loading and open space.
(4) Each stage shall be properly related to every other stage of
development and the neighborhood and community as a whole and
to all necessary community services needed in the future to
accommodate the proposed development.
A. Land use standards.
§ 30-235 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-236
1:558
(1) Permitted gross density. The permitted gross density of residential
units shall not exceed the dwelling units per acre in the following
table: [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
Zoning Districts Dwelling Units
per Gross Acre
Agricultural Conservation
District
0.50
Riverfront Conservation
District
0.25
R-40 Residential District 1.10
R-20 Residential District 2.20
(2) Single-family detached dwellings shall be the only permitted
principal housing types in residential clusters. [Amended
1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
(3) Permitted accessory uses shall include project maintenance
buildings, private attached garages architecturally integrated into
residential structures and active and passive recreational uses
incidental to the residential development.
(4) Permitted active recreational uses shall include golf courses,
swimming pools and courts for badminton, basketball, racquetball,
tennis and volleyball.
(5) Permitted passive recreational uses shall include parks and nature
trails suitable for bicycle and pedestrian travel.
(6) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
in a manner to preserve the natural landscape of the site, including
scenic vistas that may exist on the site.
(7) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
in a manner to meet the energy conservation standards contained
in this chapter.
(8) Lots and residential structures shall be arranged to maximize
privacy for residents and neighbors in the surrounding community
and to minimize conflict with abutting uses and exposure to
nuisance factors such as lighting glare and noise.
(9) The safety of the residents shall be considered in project design
particularly with regard to the elements of circulation,
landscaping, lighting and the location of lots and structures.
B. Circulation standards.
(1) A traffic impact study shall be submitted with the application for
development as required by this chapter.
§ 30-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-236
1:559
(2) Traffic facilities affording general access to and circulation within
the development may be developed as public streets or private
roads. However, access must be perpetually available to residents
and emergency vehicles.
(3) Streets contained within the development shall conform with the
design standards contained in this chapter. The City has the right to
refuse to accept streets proposed as public streets if they do not
meet these standards.
(4) The approving authority may require whatever off-tract
improvements are necessary to accommodate projected traffic
impacts based on the development's proportional share of
additional traffic to insure safe vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(5) Clear site triangles shall be required where streets intersect
dedicated public streets. A distance of 300 feet shall be maintained
clear of obstructions measured from the stop sign of the streets
within the development.
(6) Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(7) Access for bicyclists and pedestrians entering or leaving the site
shall be made by convenient and safe routes. Such access need not
be adjacent or limited to the vicinity of access points for motor
vehicles. Sidewalks shall be constructed for pedestrian access.
Bicycle and pedestrian paths within the development shall be
encouraged to be separated from motor vehicle traffic to the
greatest extent feasible. Bicycle paths shall be interconnected with
the existing or proposed bicycle circulation system for the City.
(8) Where there are bicycle or pedestrian paths from within the
development to a street at its edge, no material impediment to
visibility shall be created.
(9) Curbing shall be required along all public streets and the streets
within the development in accordance with the standards
contained in this chapter.
(10) Concrete sidewalks shall be required along all dedicated public
streets and the streets within the development in accordance with
the standards contained in this chapter.
(11) Sidewalks shall be required to connect all residential units to
parking areas. Paths intended for recreational use may be
constructed of materials other than concrete.
(12) Resident spaces for residential structures may be provided by
driveway allowing a maximum of two stacked cars. Garages may be
§ 30-236 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-236
1:560
counted toward meeting the parking requirements only if the
management organization prohibits their conversion to living
spaces.
C. Open space standards.
(1) Open space standards shall conform to the requirements of
§ 30-210. [Amended 3-7-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
(2) The minimum percentage of open space land within a residential
cluster development, based on the total tract acreage within the
City of Millville shall be as indicated below: [Amended 3-7-2006
by Ord. No. 8-2006]
(a) Agricultural Conservation District: 50%.
(b) Lakeshore Conservation District: 40%.
(c) River Conservation District: 50%.
(d) R-40 Residential District: 25%.
(e) R-20 Residential District: 25%.
(3) Common open space shall include an area of land reserved for the
use or enjoyment of the owners and residents of the development.
Such land may contain complimentary structures and
improvements as are appropriate and necessary for the use or
enjoyment of the owners and residents of the development,
including active and passive recreational uses.
(4) The common open space shall be considered part of the open space
for the purpose of fulfilling the open space requirements contained
in this article.
(5) Wherever feasible, the common open space shall connect to
existing conservation lands, historic sites, parks or recreational
lands, or, as applicable, lands proposed for these uses in the Master
Plan.
D. Local service and utility standards.
(1) The development shall be serviced by the municipal wastewater
collection and treatment system. The developer shall design and
construct a common system on site to tie into the municipal system.
(2) The development shall be serviced by the municipal water system.
The developer shall design and construct a common system on site
to tie into the municipal system.
(3) All electric, telephone, television and other communication
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided by
underground wiring within easements or dedicated public rightsof-
way and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards
§ 30-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-236
1:561
and practices of the utility or other companies providing such
services. Overhead lines may be permitted as an exception by
the Planning Board in areas of severe geological conditions. The
placement and alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen
the visual impact of overhead lines.
(4) The developer shall provide adequate and efficient methods for
handling solid waste disposal, including materials that are required
to be recycled pursuant to municipal ordinance.
E. Stormwater management standards.
(1) Stormwater management systems shall emphasize a natural
drainage strategy as opposed to an engineered drainage strategy.
The applicability of a natural drainage strategy depends on such
factors as site storage capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity
and maintenance needs and resources.
(2) Where natural drainage strategies are inadequate to accommodate
stormwater management for the site, detention facilities and other
stormwater facilities shall be designed and engineered according
to the best available technology.
(3) When the site contains or is adjacent to natural lakes, ponds, rivers,
streams or wetlands, the runoff collection system shall be designed
to prevent watershed runoff into these areas to the greatest extent
feasible.
(4) A stormwater management system shall be designed and
engineered to prevent an increase in nonpoint pollution to the
greatest extent feasible.
F. Environmental and visual standards.
(1) An environmental impact study shall be submitted as required by
this chapter. It shall include an inventory and general description of
the natural attributes of the site, including an inventory and
general description of the soils, topography, vegetation, geology
and surface hydrology on the site.
(2) Special natural features such as lakes, streams, wetlands and
woodlands as well as scenic viewsheds shall be preserved to the
greatest extent feasible.
(3) Lots and structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible
so they are located on the least environmentally sensitive area of
the site and in a manner which maximizes the preservation area for
long term conservation.
(4) A buffer zone of at least 150 feet in width shall be required between
residential uses and environmentally sensitive areas such as
floodplains, natural drainageways, unique vegetation, wetlands and
wildlife habitats.
§ 30-236 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-236
1:562
§ 30-237. Performance standards.
(5) Within the AC Agricultural Conservation District, lots and
structures shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible on the
least fertile soils for agricultural uses and in a manner which
maximizes the farmland preservation area for active agricultural
use.
(6) A buffer zone of at least 75 feet in width shall be required between
residential uses and agricultural uses and shall be thickly planted
with fast growing native shrubs and trees to create an effective
barrier separating residential uses from fields and pastures.
(7) The design and placement of lots and structures shall be made in a
manner to integrate the development attractively and
harmoniously with its surroundings to enhance the natural features
of the site.
(8) Careful attention shall be given to the design and quality of all
structures and site amenities so that they are compatible within the
development and compatible with the natural landscape.
(9) Adequate and functional lighting shall be located so as to provide
maximum aesthetics and safety while minimizing glare and
nuisance.
(10) Existing topography and natural drainage patterns shall be
retained to the maximum extent feasible.
(11) Grading and construction plans shall comply with applicable soil
erosion and sediment control regulations.
(12) Fences, walls or hedges shall be utilized at the edges of the site
where buffers or screening are needed to protect the residents
from undesirable views, lighting glare, noise or other off-tract
influences which are undesirable. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
(13)Off-street parking areas, service areas and areas for the collection
and storage of garbage and refuse shall be screened by a visual
barrier of at least six feet in height.
A. The land proposed to be set aside for common open space may be
dedicated by the developer to the City for public use. The City reserves
the right to accept or reject the proposed dedication.
B. If the common open space is not dedicated to the City and accepted by
the City, the developer shall provide for an organization to own and
maintain the common open space for the benefit of the residents of the
development. These lands shall be owned by one of the following legal
entities: owned jointly or in common by the owners of the building lots
or owned by a land conservation trust. The agreement of the
§ 30-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-237
1:563
§ 30-238. Waivers and adjustments.
The Planning Board may grant a waiver or an adjustment to a particular
design or performance standard contained in this article if the Board finds
that the use of a more flexible design or performance standard will achieve
or enhance the benefit intended by this chapter. No design or performance
standard contained in this chapter shall be waived where it adversely
affects the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 30-239. Off-tract improvements.
Where improvements outside of the boundaries of the residential cluster
development are necessary to insure adequate access or provision of
necessary facilities or utilities such as drainage, street, sewer and water,
plans for such off-tract improvements shall accompany the preliminary plan.
management organization shall guarantee continued ownership and
maintenance of all of the common open space.
C. All preservation lands reserved for agricultural use or environmental
protection shall be owned by one of the legal entities described above
and shall be subject to a permanent deed restriction or conservation
easement.
D. As part of the agreement of the management organization, residents of
the development shall be informed of the customary farming practices
related to agricultural use or the environmental sensitivities of the area
and shall be provided with all guidelines and restrictions that are
identified by the Planning Board in its review of the site.
E. The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easement, deeds of trust and
the management agreement which provides for the ownership and
maintenance of the common open space.
§ 30-237 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-239
1:564
ARTICLE XXI
Planned Commercial Developments
§ 30-240. Purpose.
Article VI of the Municipal Land Use Law authorizes municipalities to adopt
an ordinance providing for planned developments in the form of planned
commercial developments. This form of planned development encourages
and promotes flexibility and economy in layout and design and provides
for a comprehensive development of various commercial, office and related
land uses.
§ 30-241. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
indicated:
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or
both, and any residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use
as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Includes planned unit developments,
planned unit residential developments, residential clusters, planned
commercial developments or planned industrial developments.
§ 30-242. Applicability.
Planned commercial development shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of this article. This form of planned development is authorized as
a permitted use in the following zoning districts within the City:
I-2 Interchange Mixed Use District
§ 30-243. General criteria for eligibility.
The following general criteria shall govern the eligibility of an application
for development of this type of planned development:
A. A minimum of 25 acres shall be required for a planned commercial
development. The planned development shall be designed as one
comprehensive development showing how each individual element
relates to the whole, including the construction or relocation of streets
to be dedicated to public use.
B. Municipal sewage shall be available to the project site at the time that
the application for development is filed or planned to be online at the
time of project occupancy.
§ 30-240 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-243
1:565
§ 30-244. Land use and design standards.
The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number of
buildings and uses according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of
the various sections of the development. The general development plan and
the site plan shall conform to the following land use standards and general
design standards:
C. Municipal water shall be available to the project site at the time that the
application for development is filed or planned to be online at the time
of project occupancy.
D. Planned commercial developments may be built in stages, provided the
applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board the
following:
(1) The plan submitted for preliminary approval shall delineate each
phase and include an expected construction schedule.
(2) The planned commercial development may provide for a greater or
lesser concentration of coverage within a section than the overall
project coverage, provided that it is offset by a lesser or greater
coverage in subsequent stages.
(3) Each stage of development shall be substantially self-functioning
and self-sustaining with regard to traffic circulation and access,
utility services, off-street parking and loading and open space.
(4) Each stage shall be properly related to every other stage of
development and the neighborhood and community as a whole and
to all essential services needed in the future to accommodate the
proposed development.
A. Land use standards.
(1) Permitted uses include conference and convention centers,
professional and general business offices, restaurants, including
drive-through, and retail sales and service.
(2) Accessory uses include essential services, parking, signage and any
use usually incidental and subordinate to any permitted use.
(3) Uses shall be arranged so that accesses, circulation, landscaping
and open space serve the entire development.
(4) Buildings shall be arranged in large shopping centers with multiple
uses, small pad sites or large single users.
B. Bulk, coverage and density standards.
(1) Minimum development tract size: 25 acres.
(2) Minimum lot size within tract: two acres.
§ 30-243 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-244
1:566
(3) Minimum frontage: 300 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: 50 feet to perimeter and 0 feet between
buildings,
(6) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(7) Maximum height: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum coverage: 75%.
C. Circulation standards.
(1) A traffic circulation plan for both on-site and off-site traffic shall be
submitted as part of the overall site plan. The off-site plan shall
include all roadways within one mile of the site. The plan shall
include the proposed impact on the affected roadways at the
buildout of the proposed project.
(2) Streets contained within the development shall conform with the
design standards contained in this chapter. The City has the right to
refuse to accept streets proposed as public streets if they do not
meet these standards.
(3) Clear site triangles shall be required where streets intersect
dedicated public streets. A distance of 300 feet shall be maintained
clear of obstructions measured from the stop signs of the streets
within the development.
(4) Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(5) Curbing shall be required along all public streets within the
development in accordance with the standards contained in this
chapter.
(6) Concrete sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be required
along all public streets within the development and eight feet in
width along any facade abutting a public parking area or any
facade with a customer entrance.
(7) Pedestrian walkways at least 12 feet in width shall be provided at
intervals of not less than 120 feet in all public parking areas. The
walkways must feature lighting, landscaping, benches and other
such materials and facilities for their entire length. The walkways
must be clearly distinguished from the driving surfaces to enhance
pedestrian safety and the attractiveness of the walkways.
(8) One parking space shall be required per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 30-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-244
1:567
(9) There shall be no restriction on the amount of parking which shall
be permitted between the front facade of a principal building and
the primary abutting roadway.
D. Open space standards.
(1) A minimum of 20% of the developed area shall be utilized for
landscaping.
(2) There shall be a minimum of 30 feet landscaped buffer around the
entire perimeter of the property.
(3) Undeveloped areas shall be seeded, mowed and maintained .
(4) Significant trees and significant vegetation natural to the site shall
be maintained to the greatest extent feasible.
E. Local service and utility standards.
(1) The development shall be serviced by the municipal wastewater
collection and treatment system. The developer shall design and
construct a common system on site to tie into the municipal system
(2) The development shall be serviced by the municipal water system.
The developer shall design and construct a common system on site
to tie into the municipal system.
(3) All electric, telephone, television and other communication
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided by
underground wiring within easements or dedicated public right-ofway
and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
Overhead lines may be permitted as an exception by the Planning
Board in areas of severe geological conditions. The placement and
alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact
of overhead lines.
(4) The developer shall provide adequate and efficient methods for
handling solid waste disposal, including materials that are required
to be recycled pursuant to municipal ordinance.
F. Stormwater management standards.
(1) Stormwater management systems shall emphasize a natural
drainage strategy as opposed to an engineered drainage strategy.
The applicability of a natural drainage strategy depends on such
factors as site storage capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity
and maintenance needs and resources.
(2) Where natural drainage strategies are inadequate to accommodate
stormwater management for the site, detention facilities and other
stormwater facilities shall be designed and engineered according
to the best available technology.
§ 30-244 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-244
1:568
(3) When the site contains or is adjacent to natural lakes, ponds, rivers,
streams or wetlands, the runoff collection system shall be designed
to prevent watershed runoff into these areas to the greatest extent
feasible.
(4) A stormwater management system shall be designed and
engineered to prevent an increase in nonpoint pollution to the
greatest extent feasible.
G. Environmental and visual standards.
(1) The design and placement of lots and structures shall be made in a
manner to integrate the development attractively and
harmoniously with its surroundings to enhance the natural features
of the site.
(2) Careful attention shall be given to the design and quality of all
structures and site amenities so that they are compatible within the
development and compatible with the natural landscape.
(3) Grading and construction plans shall comply with applicable soil
erosion and sediment control regulations.
(4) Adequate and functional lighting shall be located so as to provide
maximum aesthetics and safety while minimizing glare off site.
(5) All delivery areas are to be located at nonpublic entrances to the
structures.
(6) Trash collection areas are to be adequately screened by berms,
plantings or fencing.
(7) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited
without the granting of a site plan waiver by the Planning Board.
H. Architectural criteria and building design.
(1) Entrances. Each principal building shall have a clearly defined and
highly visible customer entrance.
(2) Facades. No uninterrupted facades in excess of 100 feet shall be
permitted. Facades greater than 100 feet must incorporate
recesses and projections along at least 20% of the facade length.
(3) Materials and colors. Exterior building material shall be of
attractive and durable materials such as brick, textured concrete,
masonry, stone, stucco, glass or finished wood. Unfinished concrete
block and prefabricated metal panels shall be prohibited. Facade
colors shall be of low reflectance and use neutral or earth tones.
Building trim may utilize brighter shade for enhancement of the
structures.
§ 30-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-244
1:569
§ 30-245. Performance standards.
§ 30-246. Waivers and adjustments.
The Planning Board may grant a waiver or an adjustment to a particular
design or performance standard contained in this article if the Board finds
that the use of a more flexible design or performance standard will achieve
or enhance the benefit intended by this chapter. No design or performance
standard contained in this chapter shall be waived where it adversely
affects the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 30-247. Off-tract improvements.
Where improvements outside the boundaries of the planned commercial
development are necessary to insure adequate access or provision of
necessary facilities or utilities such as drainage, street, sewer and water,
plans for such off-tract improvements shall accompany the preliminary plan.
§ 30-247.1. Airpark Motorsports Entertainment District created.
[Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 23-2004]
An Airpark Motorsports Entertainment District is hereby created which
authorizes a planned commercial development as a permitted conditional
use in the I-3 Airport Industry District pursuant to this chapter and the
regulations contained in this article.
(4) Roof lines. Roof lines must use parapet walls to conceal rooftop
equipment and utilize eves or different roof slopes to minimize the
appearance of a continuous roof plane.
I. Signage.
(1) Freestanding signs. One for every 100 feet of frontage on an
arterial road with a maximum height of 50 feet and area of 50
square feet for every 50,000 square feet of floor area or part
thereof.
(2) Facade signage. Signage for principal uses up to 200 square feet on
the front facade and up to 50% of front facade along a side. Signage
for individual use a designated area along the facade with a
maximum of three square feet per store frontage.
A. The developer shall provide for an organization to own and maintain the
common open space for the benefit of the owners and tenants of the
development.
B. The applicant shall provide copies of the articles of Incorporation,
bylaws, deeds with covenants, deeds with easement, deeds of trust and
the management agreement which provides for the ownership and
maintenance of the common open space.
§ 30-244 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-247.2
1:570
§ 30-247.2. Purpose. [Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 23-2004]
The purpose of the Airpark Motorsports Entertainment District is to set
forth regulations that authorize a form of planned commercial development
for a specific land use activity that is unique to a small number of
communities. This planned commercial development provides flexible
layout and design standards for commercial, entertainment and
recreational uses related to motorsports that also will ensure the
substantial preservation of the natural setting and unique characteristics of
the zoning district.
§ 30-247.3. Definitions. [Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 23-2004]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
indicated:
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for conferences, meetings, and
seminars with accommodations for food preparation and eating, recreation,
entertainment, meeting rooms, and resources.
MOTORSPORTS ACADEMY — A preparatory boarding school designed to
provide specialize instruction in motorsports activities, such as automobile
design, manufacturing, and engineering, with a full curriculum that will
lead to a high school diploma consistent with the graduation requirements
of the New Jersey Department of Education.
OVAL TRACK — A paved track approximately 3/4 mile in length, utilized
for racing, testing motor vehicle design and components, educational and
training activities and public racing events.
RACEPLEX — A series of light industrial buildings to be utilized for office,
storage, light manufacturing, or warehousing.
RACES OR MOTORSPORTS-RELATED EVENTS — An event which occurs
over a period of four days or less and which appears on the annual schedule
of events submitted by the developer/operator to the City Clerk.
RACETRACK — A measured course where motor vehicles are entered in
competitions of speed or endurance against one another or against time.
SPECIAL EVENT — A planned non-motorsport type of event with
anticipated public attendance of 10,000 people or more for which a special
permit from the Board of Commissioners is required.
TRACK-SIDE VILLAS — Time share, fee simple, cooperative, or a leased
townhouse facility located adjacent to the motorsports race area which can
be owned in any number of manners consistent with the tourism industry.
§ 30-247.4. Applicability. [Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 23-2004]
An airpark motorsports entertainment development shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of this article. This form of planned
commercial development is permitted as a conditional use in the following
zoning districts within the City of Millville:
§ 30-247.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-247.4
1:571
I-3 Airpark Industry District
§ 30-247.5. General criteria for eligibility. [Added 8-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 23-2004]
The following general criteria shall govern the eligibility of an application
for development of this type of planned development:
§ 30-247.6. Land use and design standards. [Added 8-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 23-2004]
The general development plan shall set forth the permitted uses and
location of such uses and all buildings, and the plan for open space, in
its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of various
sections of the development. The general development plan and the site
plan shall conform to the following land use standards and design
standards:
A. A minimum of 450 acres shall be required for an airpark motorsports
entertainment development. The planned commercial development
shall be designed as one comprehensive development showing how
each individual element relates to the whole, including the construction
or relocation of streets to be dedicated to public use.
B. Municipal sewage shall be available to the project site or planned to be
online at the time of project occupancy,
C. Municipal water shall be available to the project site or planned to be
online at the time of project occupancy.
D. Planned airpark motorsports entertainment development may be built
in stages, provided the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Planning Board the following:
(1) The plan submitted for preliminary approval shall delineate each
phase and include an expected construction schedule.
(2) Each stage of the planned development shall be substantially selffunctioning
and self-sustaining with regard to traffic circulation
and access, utility services, off-street parking and loading and open
space.
(3) Each stage shall be properly related to every other stage of
development and the neighborhood and community as a whole and
to all essential services needed in the future to accommodate the
proposed development.
E. One person or one legal entity shall own or control by deed, contract,
option, or other legal instrument the land area at the time that the
development application is filed.
A. Land use standards.
§ 30-247.4 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-247.6
1:572
(1) Permitted uses include: racetracks for on-site racing of vehicles;
conference and convention centers; professional and general
business offices; restaurants; hotels and motels; condominiums or
villas; retail sales offices; professional business offices; recreation
and entertainment facilities; including but not limited to,
campgrounds, picnic grounds, sports and athletic clubs and
facilities, swimming pools, and tennis clubs; grandstands and areas
for spectators; motorsports schools or training academies; radio or
television broadcasting stations or towers; heliports or helistops;
museums and art galleries; private clubs; public buildings such as
fire or police substations or schools; public utilities or services such
as generating or treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations or
transmission lines; assembly halls; golf courses; bars or cocktail
lounges as an accessory to a private or recreational club or as part
of a hotel development; outdoor stadiums; off-street parking and
loading areas; vehicle sales; and special events with the necessary
events permit.
(2) Accessory uses include: essential services; parking; signage; uses
customary and incidental to various types of car racing, including
garages for storage, maintenance and repair of cars and trailers;
bleachers; and dormitories for use during racing and special events
by event staff and participants.
(3) Uses shall be arranged so that accesses, circulation, landscaping,
and open space serve the entire development.
(4) There shall be 100 feet of buffer around the perimeter of the
planned commercial development. This buffer may consist of
natural areas, berms, landscaping or other pervious developed
open lands or open space.
(5) Night racing utilizing the oval racing track shall be prohibited.
Additional time during evening and night hours shall be allotted to
enable cleanup and the closing of the track.
(6) No more than six major public spectator races having an
attendance of 10,000 people per event shall be held annually on the
oval track.
B. Bulk, coverage, and density standards.
(1) Minimum development tract size: 450 acres.
(2) Maximum height: the maximum height permitted by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
(3) Maximum coverage: 60%.
C. Circulation standards:
(1) A traffic circulation plan for both on-site and off-site traffic shall be
submitted as part of the overall site plan for each phase of the
§ 30-247.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-247.6
1:573
project. The off-site traffic impact analysis plan shall reference any
existing studies completed within the last three years on roadways
surrounding the site. The plan shall also include the estimated
impact on the affected roadways at the build out of the proposed
project. The design and construction of internal roadways and
access roads for operational use shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
(2) Streets contained within the development shall conform to the
design standards for each type of use contained in this chapter or
the design standards contained in this chapter. The City has the
right to refuse to accept streets proposed as public streets if they
do not meet these standards or if a waiver has not been granted.
(3) Clear sight triangles shall be required where streets intersect
dedicated public streets. A distance of 300 feet shall be maintained
clear of obstructions measured from the stop signs of the streets
within the development.
(4) Principal vehicular accesspoints shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(5) Parking requirements for proposed commercial and residential
uses or facilities will be in compliance with Chapter 30 Article XIV,
§ 30-137 of the Land Use and Development Regulations.
(6) A plan for a service or access roadway capable of providing ingress
and egress for emergency and service vehicles without hindrance
by spectator or participant traffic.
D. Open space standards.
(1) A minimum of 40% of the site shall be undeveloped open space,
natural areas, berms, buffers, landscaping or pervious parking
areas.
(2) Undeveloped areas shall be maintained.
(3) Significant trees and vegetation natural to the site shall be
maintained to the greatest extent feasible.
E. Local service and utility standards.
(1) The development shall be serviced by the municipal wastewater
collection and treatment system. The developer shall design and
construct the on-site system to tie into the municipal system.
(2) The development shall be serviced by the municipal water system.
The developer shall design and construct a system on site to tie into
the municipal water system.
§ 30-247.6 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-247.6
1:574
(3) All electric, telephone, television and other communications
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided within
easements or dedicated public right-of-way and intalled in
accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the
utility or other companies providing such services. The placement
and alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen the visual
impact of overhead lines.
(4) The developer shall provide adequate and efficient methods for
handling solid waste disposal, including materials that are required
to be recycled pursuant to municipal ordinance.
(5) All temporary or portable sanitation facilities must be noted on a
plan approved by the county health department as being adequate
for anticipated attendance at any activity or event.
F. Stormwater management standards.
(1) All stormwater management systems shall be designed and
engineered in accordance with the best available technology and in
consultation with the City of Millville Engineering Department.
(2) A stormwater management system shall be designed and
engineered to prevent an increase in non-point source pollution to
the greatest extent feasible. The runoff collection system shall be
designed to prevent watershed runoff to the greatest extent
feasible.
G. Environmental and visual standards.
(1) The design and placement of the racetracks and any structures
shall be made in a manner to integrate the development
attractively and harmoniously with its surroundings to enhance the
natural features of the site.
(2) Careful attention shall be given to the design and quality of all
structures and site amenities so that they are compatible within the
development and compatible with the natural landscape.
(3) Grading and construction plans shall comply with applicable soil
erosion and sediment control regulations.
(4) Adequate and functional lighting shall be located so as to provide
maximum aesthetics and safety while minimizing glare off site.
(5) All delivery areas are to be located at nonpublic entrances to the
structures.
(6) Trash collection areas are to be adequately screened by berms,
plantings or fencing.
H. Signage. All identification, traffic circulation, and on-site advertising
signs shall be governed by Article XXIII, § 30-264. All signage that is
§ 30-247.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-247.6
1:575
§ 30-247.7. Waivers and adjustments. [Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No.
23-2004]
§ 30-247.8. (Reserved)71
§ 30-247.9. Motorsports scheduling and special events permits.
[Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 23-2004]
connected with a site plan for a permitted use in the district shall be
reviewed at the time of the submission of the site plan for any future
development at a site.
A. The Planning Board may grant a waiver or an adjustment to a particular
design or performance standard contained in this article if the Board
finds that the use of a more flexible design or performance standard will
achieve or enhance the benefit intended by this chapter. No design or
performance standard contained in this chapter shall be waived where
it adversely affects the public health, safety, or general welfare.
B. The Planning Board shall have the authority to increase or decrease the
buffer required herein around the perimeter of the property where the
Board finds that the existing residential property lines are close or
distant from the racetracks proposed and barriers to sound currently
exist or are proposed for the development.
A. The developers/operators shall submit for advisory purposes an annual
schedule of races and motorsports related events by February 1 of each
year, beginning in the second full year of operation, to the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall be notified of any significant changes to the
proposed schedule, including cancelled events or added events.
B. An annual schedule of all non-motorsport special events, as defined in
the definitional section herein, must be submitted to the City Clerk. The
City shall be advised of any changes to the non-motorsports special
events schedule. [Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 43-2018]
C. For non-motorsports special events expected to attract visitors of
10,000 people or more, based upon contract arrangements and
expected ticket sales, the event organizers must acquire a special
events permit from the City of Millville City Clerk's office. This permit
shall encompass all planned special events under one permit for the
calendar year.
D. For all events expected to attract 10,000 spectators or more, there must
be on file in the City Clerk's office a standard plan for crowd control,
traffic flow and control, fire protection and medical emergencies, and
trash collection. This plan is intended to maintain an orderly flow of
spectators and traffic and to prevent spillover or trespass on adjoining
71.Editor's Note: Former § 30-247.8, Noise, was repealed 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2-2017 and
3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 12-2017. See now Ch. 52, Police Regulations, Art. XVI, Noise.
§ 30-247.6 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-247.9
1:576
properties that are not intended as the location of the proposed event.
This standard procedures plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk's
office 30 days prior to opening the premises and shall remain on file
with the City Clerk's office and is subject to the review and approval of
the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Rescue Squad Chief, who may conduct
a periodic review of said plan.
E. In the event any of the aforementioned plans are found to be inadequate
by the City professionals or consultants, the developers shall be notified
and provided a reasonable amount of time to correct any deficiencies
and resubmit said plan.
F. The Board of Commissioners and its assigns shall have the right to
immediately revoke any permit issued under this section upon
noncompliance with any of its provisions or conditions, provided the
developer/operator has been provided at least 30 days' notice of said
violations without compliance.
§ 30-247.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-247.9
1:577

ARTICLE XXII
Resource Extraction
§ 30-248. Permits and licenses required.
In any zoning district as provided in the Schedules of District Regulations,
no sand, gravel, rock, earth, minerals, clay or other burden shall be moved
or extracted until a conditional use permit is obtained from the City of
Millville Planning Board and any licenses required by this or any other
ordinance of the City of Millville or other applicable regulation have been
obtained. Applications for conditional use permits for resource extraction
shall be made in writing to the City Planning Board and in addition to any
requirements as hereinafter set forth including § 30-45 of this chapter.
§ 30-249. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to resource extraction.
ABANDONED MINE SITE — See § 30-251C(13) of this section for conditions
of determination of abandonment.
ACTIVE MINE SITE — A mining operation where land is being disturbed in
preparation for and during the removal of a mineral material, not including
casual use as defined herein.
BERM — A pile or mound of earth capable of acting as a visual screen or
used to control drainage or erosion.
BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION — The generally flat area at the lowest level
adjacent to the face of the pit; also commonly known as "toe of slopes."
CASUAL USE — The temporary use of lands for geological investigations
(test drilling, sampling, etc.) which do not involve either any significant
surface disturbance or site preparation.
CONTIGUOUS LANDS — Lands shall be considered contiguous to each
other if they abut each other, or if they are separated by streets, ways,
pipelines, electric power lines, conduits or rights-of-way, owned or
controlled by third parties.
DISTURBED LAND — Land on which clearing has occurred, excavation has
occurred or upon which overburden has been deposited, or both.
DRY PIT — An excavation in which the bottom conduits or rights-of-way are
owned or controlled by third parties.
EARTH EXTRACTION — The removal of sand, topsoil, gravel, fill dirt or
mineral or clay products for sale or use at another site but not including
agricultural operations or the process of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a structure for which application for building permit has
been made.
EXCAVATIONS or WORKINGS — Shafts, tunnels, entries, winzes, slopes,
open cut and any working places and parts of a mine, either above ground
§ 30-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-249
1:579
or underground, excavated or being excavated, whether abandoned or in
use.
FACE or BANK — The sides from the bottom or floor of a pit or quarry to the
surface surrounding the pit. Where one or more benches or levels are used
in a pit, each bench or level has a separate face.
MINE — Any mines within the City, whether on the surface or underground
and any mining plant, material equipment or explosives on the surface or
underground which may contribute to the mining or handling of ore or
other metalliferous or nonmetalliferous products. The term "mine" shall also
include quarry, sand pit, gravel pit, clay pit and shale pit.
MINING OPERATIONS — Earth extraction, excavations, workings,
production, processing, stockpiling, loading and all other functions and
accessory uses necessary and related to the proper operation of a mine.
OPERATOR — Individual, partnership, firm, association, trust or
corporation responsible for the general operation, management and
condition of the facility located at the mining site in question, for which a
permit is applied for or granted for any activity covered by this article.
OVERBURDEN — Soil material of any nature (including topsoil),
consolidated or unconsolidated that overlies a mineral deposit of useful
materials or ores that are to be mined.
PERMIT AREA — The specific land proposed to be used for mining
operations, including required buffers, reclamation areas and related plant
facilities.
PIT or QUARRY — Includes any excavation, pit, bank or open cut working
for the extraction of stone, rock, gravel, sand or any other mineral and shall
embrace any and all parts of the property of such quarry or open pit mine
that contribute directly or indirectly to the extraction of such mineral.
RECLAMATION — The restoration of an area of land (to include filling,
grading, topsoiling, revegetation, equipment removal, etc.) such that the
land is made useful for some future use.
SETBACK — The distance from the bottom of excavation in the case of a
dry pit and the normal seasonal high waterline in the case of a wet pit, to
a referenced line (i.e.: property line, zoning line, right-of-way line) when
measured at right angles to the referenced line.
WET PIT — An excavation in which the bottom is normally wet and the
bottom of which is at or below the normal seasonal high water table.
§ 30-250. Requirements for conditional use permit.
Applications for conditional use permits for mining/extraction use as
defined in § 30-4 hereof shall be made in writing to the Millville Planning
Board and shall include the following information, unless specifically waived
by the Board in writing, designed to comply with the provisions of this
Article XXII.
§ 30-249 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-250
1:580
A. General information.
(1) Thirteen copies of completed application form including, but not
limited to the following:
(a) The name, address and phone number of the applicant, the
lessee, the mining operator and the property owner. In case of
a lease agreement between the landowner and mining
operator, the application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the landowner granting the municipality the right of
access to make inspections to ensure compliance during
periods of operation and to perform all necessary reclamation
of bonded property in the event of forfeiture of the bond.
(b) The name and phone number of the person responsible for the
daily operation of the mining facility, who has the authority to
act as agent for the operator.
(c) The official City Zoning Map classification of the area where
the applicant proposes to engage in a mining operation.
(d) Location to include road, tax map sheet block and lot.
(e) Total acreage (to nearest 1/10 of an acre) of permit area, tax
lot, and sum of all contiguous lands owned or leased by the
same owner or lease holder.
(f) Brief description of the proposed use.
(g) Interest of applicant if other than owner.
(h) If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the corporation
or partnership shall list the names and addresses of all
stockholders or individual partners owning at least 10% of its
stock or at least 10% of the interest in the partnership.
(2) A written boundary description prepared by an engineer or land
surveyor of the specific land upon which the applicant proposes to
engage in a mining operation (permit area) and the total number of
acres (to the nearest 1/10 of an acre) for which a mining permit is
requested. This description may be either a legal metes and bounds
description or a description of natural boundaries such as roads or
streams.
(3) A copy of the most recent Tax Map sheet indicating the location of
the proposed permit area.
(4) An aerial photograph at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which
accurately reflects the conditions of the site at the time of
application with the permit area delineated.
(5) Thirteen copies of all documents and plans required under
§ 30-250B to E of this chapter shall be submitted to the Board for
§ 30-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-250
1:581
review. Upon approval, two reproducible Mylars of each of the
approved plan drawings shall be submitted to the Board for
approval signatures, one of which will be returned to the applicant
and one of which will be retained by the City.
(6) A list stating the status of any local, county, state or federal
approvals or permits which the applicant is required to obtain, to
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection-Water
Diversion.
(b) New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection-Stream
Encroachment.
(c) Coastal Areas Facility Review Act (CAFRA).
(d) New Jersey Wetlands.
(e) Cumberland County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan.
(f) Local or county site plan approval.
(g) Riparian rights.
(7) Proof of notice of applicants as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 as
presently enacted or hereafter amended.
(8) A certified check or money order in an amount equal to the permit
and application fee.
(9) A deposit in escrow, in the amount determined according to
§ 30-255 to cover the expense of all engineering and professional
review of the application.
B. Existing conditions site plan.
(1) A plan prepared at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shall
clearly show conditions on the site at the time of application and
shall include the following details:
(a) The perimeter metes and bounds data of the proposed permit
area, based on physical features, scaled directions and scaled
distances to the nearest 10 feet.
(b) A site locator map based on the Official Cumberland County
Map showing the location of the site.
(c) Contour lines based on USC & GS datum at the minimum
interval available from existing data (i.e., USC & GS
quadrangle sheets, county data, topography plan of site, etc.)
but in no case less than ten-foot intervals.
§ 30-250 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-250
1:582
(d) Roads or streets within 500 feet of the site showing name,
right-of-way width, pavement width and pavement type and
any available traffic count data.
(e) Primary and emergency routes of access to the site from
dedicated City or county roads showing ownership, pavement
width and type, and any easements, if existing.
(f) Any and all easements through or adjacent to the site
identifying the width and nature (i.e. electric, drainage, etc.).
(g) Natural land features such as watercourses drainageways,
swamps and wooded areas, as well as any easements, if
existing.
(h) Man-made features, such as buildings, equipment structures,
dams, dikes and impoundments of water.
(i) Location of soil borings as required in Subsection B(3) below.
(j) Soil type classifications plotted on the plan as determined from
the County Soil Survey Report prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(2) A master plan which shall show the entire tract (tax parcel) of land
with the permit portion delineated, and all adjacent tracts of land
owned by the same or related owner. The plan may be prepared at
an appropriate scale to enable all tracts to be shown on a single
sheet. The following data shall be indicated:
(a) The Municipal Tax Map block and lot numbers and acreage of
all parcels.
(b) All other parcels within 200 feet of that parcel of which the
proposed permit area is a portion indicating block, lot, owner's
name and acreage as determined from most recent municipal
tax records.
(c) Present land uses of all parcels shown (i.e., vacant , farmland,
dwelling, etc.) and general locations of all existing mining
facilities on the owners or adjacent parcels indicating type of
facility (i.e., pits, stockpiles, plants and equipment, etc.).
(d) Previously approved permit areas.
(3) Soil and groundwater results from soil borings within the permit
area at a minimum depth of 10 feet or groundwater, whichever is
greater, showing date of boring, depth to groundwater, direction of
groundwater flow and log of general soil types encountered. The
number and distribution of soil borings to be conducted shall be
determined by the City engineer based on site specific conditions.
C. Operational plan.
§ 30-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-250
1:583
(1) Purpose. The purpose of an operational plan is to provide the
municipality the opportunity to ensure that the operation of a sand
mining facility will conform with the environmental performance
standards and the reclamation plan as are required within this
article.
(2) A plan prepared at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet utilizing
existing contours and topography from Subsection B of this
§ 30-250 as base data, which, in addition shall show the following
details:
(a) Processing with intended uses.
(b) Specific areas to be excavated including proposed depth of
excavation.
(c) Proposed location of principal service or processing buildings,
equipment and enclosures.
(d) Phasing of operations showing areas involved serially
numbered and projected timetable.
(e) Access roads to processing and mining areas indicating type
surface, traffic patterns, and volumes, and nature of each.
(f) Location of screening berms, overburden storage, and topsoil
stockpiles with notes provided indicating when they will be
used as reclamation material and temporary treatment to
prevent erosion.
(g) Fences and gates including their type of construction.
(h) Site drainage features indicating flow directions.
(3) An operational statement which shall clearly describe the intended
general method and sequence of the operation and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
(a) The approximate date of commencement of the excavation and
the duration of the operation.
(b) Proposed hours and days of operation.
(c) Estimated type volume and final depth.
(d) Method of extracting and processing, including the disposition
of overburden or topsoil.
(e) Equipment proposed to be used in the operation of the
excavation.
(f) A description of the sequence of the operation indicating for
the serially numbered areas in § 30-250C(2)(d), the
approximate starting dates, phasing, timing and duration.
§ 30-250 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-250
1:584
(4) A preliminary environmental assessment based on existing data
which shall include an analysis of the impact of the proposed
operation and measures taken to minimize any adverse impacts, in
terms of the following conditions:
(a) Physical characteristics, including air quality, hydrology,
groundwater, surface water topography and slope, drainage,
vegetation, and soil erosion and water table.
(b) Wildlife, including fish and aquatic organisms, wild animals,
threatened and endangered species.
(c) Man-made conditions, including sanitary and storm sewer
systems, noise characteristics and levels, traffic volume, land
use and aesthetics; and impact to adjacent water supply.
(d) Community character, including demography cultural and
historic resources, particularly archaeological significance.
(e) A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be avoided.
(f) A thorough description of the steps to be taken to minimize
adverse environmental impact before, during, and after
construction of the development both at the construction site
and surrounding region affected thereby.
D. Reclamation plan.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a reclamation plan is to provide the
applicant for an extraction operation the opportunity to illustrate
and describe the general methods and staging that will be
undertaken to preserve the natural resources of the remaining
areas of the site for some future development, as required by this
article.
(2) A sketch plan prepared at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which
shall show the following details:
(a) Planned final land grades of the disturbed areas with five-foot
contour intervals for slopes of 15% or less and ten-foot
intervals for slopes greater than 15% and delineation of slope
areas greater than 15%.
(b) Location and type of existing vegetation associations to remain
undisturbed (such as mature wooded areas, successional
areas, meadows, etc.).
(c) Estimated final depth of excavation.
(d) Location and nature of existing and proposed surface water
features (i.e., lakes, ponds, streams, etc.) and their connections
to streams or drainageways.
§ 30-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-250
1:585
(e) Permanent buildings, structures or equipment to remain.
(f) Proposed typical landscaping plan in accordance with
§ 30-251C(11) indicating type, quantity, and size of plantings.
(g) A statement of alternatives to the proposed development which
might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects.
(h) Location and nature of any areas to be filled with overburden.
(i) Roads to remain, with nature and condition of each.
(j) Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control facilities or
structures.
(k) A delineation of the phasing of areas (indicated by letters or
numbers) showing the extent of each phase.
(3) A reclamation statement which shall clearly describe the methods
of accomplishment, phasing and staging sequence and shall
include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Description of the planned phasing indicating areas to be
reclaimed (referenced by letter or number on plan,
§ 30-250D(2)(k), sequence and staging. This should be related
to the operational plan and should clearly indicate that state of
reclamation to be accomplished during specific stages of the
mining operation.
(b) Methods to be used to stabilize slopes or excavated areas.
(c) Analysis of stability of filled areas and methods to be utilized
for stabilization, if necessary, to prevent "quicksand" or caving
conditions.
(d) Methods planned to prevent stagnation and pollution.
(e) Methods used to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation runoff.
(f) Analysis of existing and cover soil and methods used to
establish vegetation (i.e. fertilization, planting period, etc.).
(g) Method of disposing of any equipment or structures used in the
mining operation upon completion.
(h) Description of the degree of flexibility considered to be needed
in execution of the plan.
(i) Vegetative management plan describing methods to ensure
satisfactory vegetative cover, establishment of proper growth,
and steps to be taken to remedy unsuccessful plantings.
E. Future land use plan.
§ 30-250 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-250
1:586
§ 30-251. Design and performance standards.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the future land use plan is to ensure the
municipality that the remaining reclaimed land after the conclusion
of the sand extraction operation would be usable for future
development opportunities.
(2) The reclaimed site shall be analyzed (by plan, statement, or
combination of both) as to its suitability for future development
uses based on the following criteria:
(a) Physical topography.
(b) Best uses of water features, if permanent water bodies are
provided, for water-related activities.
(c) Compatibility with contiguous land uses.
(d) Traffic circulation and transportation.
(e) Suitability of soils for development and storm drainage.
(f) Suitability for development in accordance with sound
engineering and planning practices.
(g) Municipal Master Plan and land use plan consistency with
Municipal Master Plan and zoning policies.
(h) State and federal development regulations (i.e., CAFRA, State,
Master Plan).
(3) A plan shall be a conceptual plan at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet utilizing the final land form from the reclamation plan as base
data. The purpose is to show that the final land form portrayed has
a viable land use or uses, each demonstrating that developed areas
are accessible by roads and that physical attributes of the final land
form are compatible with potential future use or uses. It is
understood that this may be a hypothetical exercise, but it will be
evaluated as such and not be considered a commitment to the use
portrayed. In addition to the base data, the plan shall show the
following details, if applicable:
(a) Proposed use or uses.
(b) Proposed open space or recreation areas.
(c) Total number of lots proposed, by use if applicable.
(d) Acreage of site with total acreage for each proposed use type.
(e) Location of existing and proposed streets.
(f) Zone district boundaries.
A. General standards.
§ 30-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-251
1:587
(1) Plan preparation. Plans shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a
licensed engineer, surveyor, land planner, or landscape architect,
as provided for by law, and in accordance with applicable statutes
thereto.
(2) Drawing sizes. All plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall
be on one of the following standard sheet sizes:
(a) 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches.
(b) 15 inches by 21 inches.
(c) 24 inches by 36 inches.
(d) 30 inches by 42 inches.
B. Standards relating to mining operations.
(1) Size of tract. Any tract of land to be used for a land mining
operation shall be at least 50 acres in size unless it is contiguous to
lands in the same ownership or leasehold interest used for an
active land mining operation at the date of application for a permit,
in which case, the coordination of rehabilitation plans between the
new and existing uses will be required.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Five hundred feet from boundary of residential zone line.
(b) Earth extraction activities shall not be conducted closer than
300 feet from:
[1] The boundary of any zone where such operations are not
permitted;
[2] The boundary of an adjoining property line unless such
adjoining property is in the same ownership or leasehold
interest as the permit property, and an appropriate
easement or deed restriction is provided such that the
setbacks required by this section are not violated if the
adjoining property is conveyed or separated from the
permit property.
[3] The edge of the right-of-way of any dedicated street, road,
highway or water body when it is determined that such
setback areas are not suitable for future permitted
development proposed due to environmental constraints of
the site, (such as areas subject to flooding, severe
limitations for an on-site sewage disposal systems,
topography, etc.) or when a more desirable layout for the
future land use plan can be achieved; the setback may be
reduced to that deemed necessary by the Planning Board,
provided that an average setback of 300 feet is
§ 30-251 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-251
1:588
maintained, but in no case shall such a setback be reduced
to that 150 feet. Compliance with the total setback
requirement shall be determined by computing the area
between the proposed setback line and the perimeter line
requiring setback as described above, which shall be equal
to or greater than the length of the perimeter line
requiring setback times 300 feet.
(c) Buildings or structures actively used in the mining or
subsequent production and/or processing operations shall not
be located closer than 100 feet to a public right-of-way or
adjoining property lines.
(3) Buffer zones and fencing. On the property covered by the setback
requirements above, there shall be maintained within this setback
undisturbed buffer zones of natural foliage, trees, or other like
plantings of at least 150 feet in width, and such zones are to be
specifically shown on the plans with a complete description of the
type of natural cover contained thereon. The Planning Board may
require, in its discretion, additional screening such as additional
vegetative cover, landscaped earth mounds or dense evergreen
plantings, if necessary, to properly screen or buffer the operation
from surrounding uses. Perimeter of area currently being mined
shall be enclosed by six-foot high chain link fence.
(4) Production and processing operations. All buildings, structures,
and equipment used for mining, shall be constructed, maintained
and operated in compliance with § 30-135 of this chapter and in
such a manner as to reduce, noise, vibration, or dust, in order to
minimize the impact on adjacent or surrounding uses.
(5) Consistency with reclamation plan. All mining operations shall be
conducted in a manner not inconsistent with the reclamation plan
and in such a manner that the objectives of the plan may be
realized after the sand, gravel, and other material has been
removed.
(6) Access roads. Haul roads shall be located in such a manner as to
minimize the impact on existing land uses, and to avoid the routing
of vehicles to and from the mining operation over streets that
primarily serve developed areas. Entrances shall be restricted to as
few as are absolutely necessary, preferably no more than two,
unless warranted by specific conditions of the site or operation.
(7) Signs. Traffic control signs shall be provided and maintained by the
operator on internal roads and at entrances when necessary for
safety reasons. All entrances shall be clearly marked with
identification of operator of facility and type of facility. All
entrances and routes shall be clearly marked in order to guide
workers, haulers, and authorized visitors who may be unfamiliar
with the site, to designated areas, (i.e.: office, loading area, etc.).
§ 30-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-251
1:589
All areas where access is to be restricted because of safety reasons
shall be clearly marked and maintained.
(8) Security gates. Security gates or other suitable guard mechanisms
shall be provided at all entrances leading to or from public roads or
rights-of-way which shall prohibit access during periods of
nonoperation.
(9) Dust and dirt control. Roads within the site shall be constructed in
such a manner as to minimize and control the amount of dust
created, including the amount of mud and dirt carried onto public
roads by the wheels of vehicles from the site which, when deposited
on roads, will contribute to dust problems over a wider area. If
deemed necessary, the Planning Board may require special
treatment at the point where access roads meet public roads for a
distance not to exceed 300 feet and a width not to exceed 22 feet.
This special treatment may consist of gravel, stone, oil treatment,
or paving, as deemed appropriate.
(10) Spillage. During hauling operations, any spillage of materials on
public roads by owner's or contractor's equipment shall be
promptly and completely removed.
(11) Emergency access. Emergency access for fire, rescue and/or
ambulance equipment shall be provided and maintained at all times
at the plant, office facilities and all working areas.
(12) Fire protection. There shall be provided at the plant and office
facilities and at other locations specifically requested by the
applicable Fire Chief, a water supply hookup facility for fire
equipment use. Such facility shall be reviewed and approved by the
Fire Chief responsible for that particular area of the City.
(13) Grading. The slope of the surface of restored surfaces shall not
exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal. Any body of water
created by the resource extraction operation shall have a graded
shoreline with a slope not to exceed one foot vertical to five feet
horizontal.
(14) Topsoil preservation. As an integral part of each land mining
operation a sufficient amount of arable topsoil shall be set aside
and retained within or near the permit site to cover disturbed areas
in accordance with the reclamation plan. The amount required
shall be a quantity which when placed, will provide a maximum
depth of six inches, or an amount equal to that which was removed,
whichever is less, throughout all areas to be restored (six inches is
equivalent to 800 cubic yards per acre). This material shall, where
practical, be used for temporary screening or berming. All topsoil
stockpiles must be treated, planted or graded in accordance with
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
adopted by the New Jersey Soil Conservation Committee, in order
§ 30-251 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-251
1:590
to minimize the process of erosion by wind or water upon adjacent
property, public roads or streams.
(15) Erosion control. Erosion control methods must be in accordance
with an approved plan based on "Standards of Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey" adopted by the New Jersey Soil
Conservation Committee.
(16) Protection of vegetation. Existing trees, woods, and ground cover
shall be protected and retained to the maximum degree possible.
Clearing shall be strictly limited only to those areas which are
absolutely necessary for the proposed mining operation.
Reestablishment of trees and vegetation shall be required in those
areas which are unnecessarily destroyed. However, this provision
shall not prohibit agricultural or forestry uses as permitted within
the zoning district.
(17) Protection of water tables. Maximum depth of excavation shall not
be below existing groundwater, except in such cases where the
reclamation plan indicated that a lake or lakes will be part of the
final use of the land or where such plan indicates that adequate fill
from overburden is to be used to refill such excavation for
conformance to the approved reclamation plan. No extraction
operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to permanently
alter the water table of surrounding inhabited properties, or to
alter the stability of adjacent lands, or to create a potential
subsidence of adjacent lands. As a monitoring device, the operator
shall install prior to commencement of extraction operations,
observation or monitoring wells in accordance with the following
table based on a total of all permit areas currently applied for and
previously approved under the ordinance.
(a) Zero to 50 acres: two wells.
(b) Fifty to 100 acres: three wells.
(c) Each additional 100 acres or any portion thereof: one
additional well.
These wells shall be located and constructed to a depth and in
accordance with details approved by the Planning Board and
each well shall have a permanent reference bench mark on or
adjacent to the facility. As extraction areas increase for new
permit periods, these wells may have to be relocated in order
to adequately surround the perimeter of the excavated areas.
C. Standards relating to land reclamation.
(1) Exceptions. The parties issued any permit for a land mining
operation are responsible for the reclamation of the area in
compliance with the reclamation plan on file with the City.
§ 30-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-251
1:591
(2) Progressive reclamation. Land restoration shall be planned and
implemented as contemporaneously as possible with the extraction
of the resource, considering the ultimate use of the area as stated
in the reclamation plan. Typically, it should include the following
steps:
(a) Removal and storage of the topsoil and other overburden.
(b) Terracing or sloping the pit or face walls during the extraction
period.
(c) Final grading and shaping of the worked-out area.
(d) Replacing and contouring the topsoil and other overburden;
and
(e) Replanting.
(3) Timing. Reclamation shall be a continuous process and each
portion of the parcel shall be restored within two years after the
resource extraction is completed for the permitted area.
Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time frame as
set out in the extraction schedule.
(4) Dry pit rehabilitation. The dry pit may be backfilled with sand,
gravel, overburden, topsoil or other non-noxious, nonflammable,
nontoxic, noncombustible solids.
(5) Wet pit rehabilitation. Like dry pit rehabilitation, the wet pit may be
filled. Any filling must be accomplished in accordance with the
conditions set forth for dry pit rehabilitation. In the alternative the
wet pit may be converted into a lake in accordance with the
rehabilitation plan and all other applicable standards of this
chapter. If a lake is to be created, pollution and stagnation must be
prevented.
(6) Site clearance. All organic materials, boulders, and other debris
resulting from the excavation or related activities shall be disposed
of by approved methods.
(7) Removal of topsoil. When topsoil is removed sufficient arable soil as
required by § 30-251B(14) of this article shall be set aside on the
site for respreading over the reclamation area. These stockpiles of
topsoil should be used to minimize the effects of erosion of wind or
water upon public roads, streams, or adjacent land uses. No topsoil
shall be removed from the overall tract.
(8) Slopes. All banks shall be left in accordance with topography
established in reclamation plans, and shall be sloped at a slope not
exceeding three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
(9) Drainage. Reclamation should proceed in such a way that natural
waterways and storm drainage, where they enter and leave the
§ 30-251 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-251
1:592
premises, shall be altered only to the least degree necessary to
carry out excavation and related activities. Any alteration of
natural waterways and storm drainage should not adversely affect
public roads or neighboring uses.
(10) Grading.
(a) When the extraction operation has been terminated, the area
shall be graded as close to the natural contour of the land as
possible to facilitate planting.
(b) All regrading and reclamation shall be undertaken with the
minimum amount of disturbance in order to minimize the
amount of compaction of the soil.
(11) Landscaping.
(a) A planting plan shall be approved by a forester or landscape
professional showing the areas to be planted, final grades, type
and quantity of plant material to be used, and all specifications
necessary for implementation.
(b) Planting shall not be performed later than May 15 or earlier
than September 15 of the year. It is preferable and
recommended that planting be performed in the spring of each
year if possible.
(c) All planting and plant scheduling shall be in accordance with
the approved planting plan.
(d) If soil erosion is critical on a site, an inexpensive mulch shall be
required such as cut grass, weeds, leaves, etc., or spotted low
shrubs and herbaceous materials such as weeping love grass.
In excessively weedy areas the ground shall be prepared prior
to planting with the use of a disk, rototiller, spring tooth
harrow or similar cut harrow along the rows.
(e) All plants shall be nursery grown seedlings and planted in
accordance with the following standards:
[1] Slopes less than 15%: 1,000 seedlings per acre.
[2] Slopes over 15%: 1,200 seedlings per acre.
(f) All rows shall be planted with the same species type.
(g) The following is the recommended plant list. Other plant
material may be used upon the advice of a qualified arborist
and/or a landscape professional, when approved by the
Planning Board.
[1] Pinus rigida - Pitch Pine.
[2] Pinus stobus - White Pine.
§ 30-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-251
1:593
[3] Pinus virginia - Virginia Pine.
[4] Betula populifolia - Gray Birch.
[5] Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum.
[6] Populas trumuloiedes - Quaking Aspen.
(12) Compatibility with future land uses. All provisions of the
reclamation plan shall be consistent and compatible with the
Projected Future Land Use Plan and provide as much flexibility as
is possible for similar, but varying future land use patterns.
(13) Abandoned uses/termination of operations. Operations should be
considered to have been abandoned if:
(a) The operator does not demonstrate his intention to resume
operations and keep his bond in force more than one year after
operations have ceased in a given site. A new permit would be
required prior to further excavation or processing if this
occurs.
(b) Within a period of six months, unless extended by written
permission by the Millville Planning Board, after notice of the
termination by the operator of an extraction operation or after
the abandonment of such operation due to its failure to operate
according to ordinance standards and requirements, all
unused structures, buildings, and equipment along with all
buildings, structures and equipment presently used in such
operation, shall be dismantled and removed by and at the
expense of the operator last operating such buildings,
structures and equipment, except such buildings, structures
and equipment need not be dismantled and removed as long as
they are in good repair and they may reasonably be expected to
be used for continued land mining operations or for some other
purpose permitted in the zone which they are located. Further
specific steps necessary to complete the reclamation plan shall
be undertaken.
D. Standards relating to future land use.
(1) Zoning conformance. The future land use plan shall be based on
acceptable sound planning practices in conformance with existing
zoning.
(2) Compatibility with surrounding land uses. The future land use plan
shall be compatible with adjacent and surrounding present land
uses and potential future land uses.
(3) Development patterns. Development shall be planned to avoid
adverse impacts on the desirable future development and/or
subdivision of adjoining land, and strip development of existing
highway frontages shall be discouraged. The Future Land Use Plan
§ 30-251 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-251
1:594
§ 30-252. Performance bond requirements.
should conform to design standards that will provide safe and
efficient access to the neighborhood street and highway system;
relate the design of the plan to natural topography and existing
vegetation cover of the site; and contribute to the harmonious
development of the municipality and enhance the public welfare of
the community.
(4) Conformance with reclamation plan. The future land use plan shall
exhibit conformance with the reclamation plan approved by the
Planning Board and shall make maximum use of those areas
reclaimed and rehabilitated. The two plans shall be planned in
conjunction with each other so that reclamation efforts are not
wasted for probable future land uses and to avoid irreversible
mistakes.
(5) Flexibility. The greatest degree of flexibility shall be utilized in
design of the future land use plan to make it adaptable to varying
future land uses. To achieve this, all alternatives should be
considered and investigated, and more than one future land use
plan sketch may be submitted to justify the reclamation plan
submitted.
(6) Lakes and ponds. The use of lakes and ponds resulting from wet pit
excavations shall be highly encouraged for their aesthetic and
recreational values; and for the value as recharge and retarding
basins in stormwater management.
(7) Environmental. The future land use plan shall not promote or
create the potential for serious air or water pollution problems
which would be in violation of local, state or federal pollution
standards, or seriously jeopardize the health, safety, and welfare of
the community.
A. Prior to the issuance of any license for a land mining operation, the
owner or operator shall file with the City Clerk, a performance bond
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State
of New Jersey, or a certified check payable to the City in amount of the
necessary dollar figure as determined by the Planning Board, for each
acre requiring reclamation pursuant to the approved reclamation plan
submitted to the Planning Board for these areas included in the mining
license. The security shall be no less than $7,500 or such greater sum
as is determined by the Planning Board.
B. Such bond or surety or certified check shall be accompanied by an
agreement signed by the applicant and land owner, if a different person,
granting the municipality the right of access to make inspection to
ensure compliance during period of operation and to perform all
necessary reclamation of bonded property in the event of forfeiture of
the bond or surety.
§ 30-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-252
1:595
§ 30-253. Existing land mining operation.
C. In the event of default, forfeiture shall be determined by the City
Commission after public hearing on not less than 15 days' written
notice to the principal and surety at their last known post office address
which notice shall be complete upon mailing. The bond or other
security may be released upon satisfactory reclamation of the complete
project area or portions of the security may be released as proportional
states of reclamation are accomplished as determined by the City
Commission in compliance with the conditional use permit and the
mining license which includes the approved reclamation plan.
D. The performance bond requirements shall not be waived nor shall the
minimum bond amount of $7,500 per acre be reduced.
E. The City Commission shall review the bond at each annual review of the
license. The performance bond shall remain in full force and effect until
the reclamation plan has been completed.
A. Existing mining operations shall be defined as a site which has been
and at the time of the adoption of this Article XXII is being actively
mined as part of the regular business of the operator and shall include
the entire site area on which the operation is situated.
B. In connection with extraction operations in existence at the date of
adoption of this Article XXII, the operator shall, within six months
thereafter, file with the City Planning Board and City Commission a
statement and topographical sketch of the existing pits, aerial
photographs of the operation, a plan for their reclamation pursuant to
§ 30-253D of this article and information requested in § 30-250A and B
of this article. Upon filing the material requested and review of same by
the Planning Board and the City Commission, a mining license for not
more or less than two years shall be issued by the City Commission to
the operator.
C. If at the date of the expiration of the license issued under the provisions
of this section the operators desire to continue such operation,
application must be made for a conditional use permit to the City
Planning Board and for the issuance of a mining license under the terms
and conditions set forth in this Article XXII for a new operation and all
other applicable ordinances.
D. Applications to open new pits for mining by an existing mining
operation, after the adoption of this Article XXII, must be made in
accordance with the provisions of this Article XXII and all other
applicable ordinances and will be treated as an application for a new
operation.
E. The licensing fee for existing land mining operations under this section
shall be the same as for new operations.
§ 30-252 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-254
1:596
§ 30-254. Administration and enforcement.
§ 30-255. Fees.
A. Compliance Officer; appointment of City Engineer as Compliance
Officer. The City Commission shall appoint the City Engineer as the
Compliance Officer to administer and ensure compliance provisions
covering mining/extraction uses. He shall be appointed for a term of
one year commensurate with the date of his appointment as City
Engineer. The Compliance Officer shall receive such compensation for
his services as shall be established by the City Commission in the City
Salary Ordinance.72
B. Duties of Compliance Officer. The Compliance Officer shall inspect the
mining and extraction sites located in the City on a periodic basis, but
not less than quarterly to monitor compliance with the rules and
regulations established herein. He shall make a written report annually
to the City Commission and the Planning Board setting forth with
particularity the results of his inspections on each particular licensee.
C. Notice of violation. The Compliance Officer shall issue a written notice
of violation with copies being furnished to the City Commission and
Planning Board, specifically listing any violations observed. The
Compliance Officer shall prescribe the form of this notice, which shall
include the specific subsection of this Article XXII deemed to be
violated, a time by which the violation must be corrected and any other
pertinent information which the Compliance Officer deems necessary
the time allowed for correction shall not exceed 45 days. If the violation
has not been corrected within the time imposed, the Compliance Officer
shall cause complaints to be signed in the Municipal Court charging the
violations as set forth in the notice of violation and shall be empowered
to issue a stop-work order.
A. At the time of submission of a conditional use application to the
Planning Board of City of Millville for mining/extraction use, under the
provisions of this section, an application fee of $1,000 shall be paid to
the Administrative Officer of the Planning Board to cover the
administrative costs of reviewing the application and documents
submitted therewith.
B. In addition to the foregoing application fee, the applicant for the
conditional use permit under the provisions of this section shall deposit
with the Chief Financial Officer a sum of money to be computed at the
rate of $250 for the first acre or part thereof, and $25 for each
additional acre or part thereof, covered by the said application, but in
no case to exceed $5,000. The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit
same in a separate account to be carried under the City's trust fund
section of accounts for the City. The amount of money so deposited at
this time shall be used to pay the fees of all professional personnel
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Administration, Art. XX, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 30-254 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-255
1:597
§ 30-256. Procedure upon completion of application.
§ 30-257. Suspension or revocation of license.
employed to review and make recommendations on the conditional
use application and documents submitted therewith and to inspect and
approve the sites proposed.
C. If at any time it becomes evident that the escrow funds are or will be
insufficient to cover the fees, the applicant shall increase the fund as
required by the Planning Board upon receipt of written itemized
substantiation of such additional fee. All funds not used in review of the
conditional use permit application shall be returned to the depositor.
A. Planning Board shall upon completion of application by its resolution
stating its factual findings, approve or deny the granting of conditional
use permit for resource extraction as herein provided. It shall forward a
copy of said resolution without delay to the City Clerk of the City of
Millville whereupon a license shall be issued by said City Clerk to
permit the resource extraction. The fee shall be $2,500 per annum plus
$800 per acre per annum for each acre in the approved active mine site.
B. Duration of license. License shall be issued for not more than three
years from date resolution of granting conditional use permit by
Planning Board and shall lapse unless application is made six months
prior to date of expiration to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation for renewal to the City.
C. Ongoing administration and expenses. As part of the condition of
issuance of license and in addition to the fees and costs heretofore
provided there shall be ongoing review and inspection of resource
extraction activities conducted by the City Engineer or such other
person, agency or governmental department as is designated by the
City of Millville, the expense of which shall be reimbursed on an
ongoing basis by license. Such inspections shall be no less frequent
than biweekly. The licensee shall provide currently updated plans of all
extraction activities complying with ordinary engineering standards
and shall be provided to City Engineer's office at least every six months.
D. Insurance. No license shall be issued until a certificate of public liability
insurance reflecting the insurance to the licensee of a policy of public
liability insurance wherein the City is named as co-insured for damages
arising out of any activity, of the applicant under a license issued under
this Article XXII, in an amount not less than $1,000,000/$3,000,000 for
death or bodily injury and $500,000 for property damage.
A. Conditions permitting suspension or revocation of license by City
Commission.
(1) Where the licensee has not paid to the City any sum due to the City
under this Article XXII.
§ 30-255 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-257
1:598
(2) Where the licensee has failed or refused to correct a condition that
would constitute a violation of this article.
(3) Where the licensee conducts a mining, excavation, extraction,
removal or relocation of any soil, sand, gravel or stone without
having a conditional use permit covering the land upon which such
operation is or has been conducted.
(4) Where the licensee fails to submit any map or document required
under this article.
(5) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
provisions of this article relating to grading, seeding or
reforestation.
(6) Where the licensee has failed to pay or caused to be paid any taxes
upon the lands covered by the license.
(7) Where the licensee is in violation of any federal, state, county or
municipal law or ordinance or health regulations as a result of any
activity or operation under this article.
(8) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
requirements of this article relating to insurance.
(9) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
requirements of this article relating to bonding.
(10) Where the licensee has failed or refused to keep and maintain true
and accurate records.
(11) Where any operation of the licensee under this Article XXII
endangers the person or property of adjoining landowners or other
persons in the City.
B. Procedures for suspension or revocation of license.
(1) Notice of violation.
(a) Whenever any of the compliance or other enforcement officers
of the City of Millville determine that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this Article XXII or of a rule or regulation, if any,
adopted pursuant thereto, notice of such alleged violation(s)
shall be given to the person or persons responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided.
(b) Such notice shall be put in writing; include a statement of the
reasons why it is being issued; outline a reasonable time for
the performance of any act it requires; be served upon the
owner or agent, provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent if a copy thereof
is served personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by certified
§ 30-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-257
1:599
mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee or agent at the
address set forth in the license application, or if a copy thereof
is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the licensed
premises affected by the notice or if he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the
laws of this state.
(c) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these
subsections and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
(2) Hearing.
(a) Any person or entity affected by any notice which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of this chapter may
request and shall be granted a hearing before the City
Commission, provided that such person shall file in the office of
the City Clerk a written petition requesting a hearing and
setting forth a statement of the grounds for the request within
10 days after the date that notice was served. Upon receipt of
such petition, the City Clerk shall set a date, time and place for
the location of the hearing and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof.
(b) At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show cause why the notice should be modified
or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
30 days after the date which the petition was filed; provided,
however, that the petitioner and the City Commission may, by
mutual consent, postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond the thirty-day period.
(c) After such hearing, the City Commission shall make specific
findings and shall either sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice. If the City Commission sustains or modifies the notice,
it shall be deemed an order which, at the discretion of the City
Commission, may operate as a revocation of the license. Any
notice served pursuant to this subsection shall automatically
be an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed with
the City Clerk within 10 days after the date the notice was
served.
(d) The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings of fact,
shall be summarized, reduced to writing and filed as a matter
of public record in the office of the City Clerk.
C. Procedure for suspension in emergency.
(1) Whenever the compliance or enforcement officers of the City of
Millville find that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action to protect the public health or safety, they may, without
§ 30-257 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-257
1:600
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as they
deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing,
depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
Article XXII and the rules and regulations, if any, adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the City Commission shall
continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
(2) Where a licensee requests in writing a hearing on an emergency
suspension, such hearing shall be held within 72 hours of the
receipt by the Clerk of a written request for such hearing.
D. Enforcement pursuant to § 30-254C may be pursued concurrently with
enforcement under this provision and prosecution in Municipal Court.
§ 30-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-257
1:601

ARTICLE XXIII
Signs
[Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
§ 30-258. Legislative findings and purpose.
§ 30-259. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
AREA OF SIGN — A measurement in square feet of the entire surface plane
of the sign, exclusive of the supporting structure.
BANNER — Any temporary sign applied to fabric, paper, plastic or other
generally nondurable material erected above a public right-of-way.
BILLBOARD — Any off-premise commercial sign erected or maintained for
the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising for products or services.
CANOPY — Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal
with metal frames attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign designed in such a fashion that the
message on the sign can be easily and periodically altered, typically with
moveable individual letters and symbols or by electric or electronic means.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign which is located at the entrance or exit
driveways of a site or adjacent to an entrance door.
ERECT — To affix, attach, build, construct, hang, place or suspend. It also
includes the painting of wall signs.
FACING or SURFACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illuminated on the sign.
FLASHING SIGN — Any changeable copy sign that scrolls, changes copy,
color or video message with a frequency of less than eight seconds.
A. The governing body of the City finds and declares that the proliferation
of signs throughout the community adversely affects the aesthetic
beauty and environmental quality of the City. The governing body
further finds and declares that the proliferation of signs can adversely
affect property values and traffic safety.
B. The governing body of the City acknowledges the constitutional right of
free speech and recognizes the different constitutional standards
applicable to commercial signs and noncommercial signs. It is the
purpose and intent of this article to regulate the time, place and manner
in which signs may be erected and to provide reasonable standards for
the placement of signs in order to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
§ 30-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-259
1:603
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, designs, figures,
letters or outlines artificially illuminated.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A wall sign located at telephones, rest rooms,
windows, doors or other public conveniences for informational, as opposed
to advertising, purposes.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign whose sole source of
artificial illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
MAINTENANCE — Includes repair or replacement without significant
change of any parts or support of any sign, including painting without
change of the design, size or text of the sign and without removal of the sign
from the wall or structure supporting it.
MARQUEE — Any awning or hood of permanent construction projecting
from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a
thoroughfare, including signs attached thereto, the supports of which are
an integral part of the original structure and which is not retractable.
MESSAGE BOARDS (electronic) — Any sign that presents a written
scrolling or flashing message or picture that changes the message or
picture or the color or colors of the message or picture with a frequency of
seven seconds or more.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign generally rectangular in shape
arising directly from the ground or masonry base without visible posts or a
pylon support.
MURAL — A large work of art applied to the walls or ceiling of a building.
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN — A sign identifying the name of a subdivision
of residential homes, whether single-family or multifamily, attached or
detached, or an apartment complex.
OFFICIAL SIGN — A sign, symbol or device, erected, constructed or
maintained by the federal, state, county or local government, or any agency
thereof, for the purpose of informing or guiding the public or for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
OFF-PREMISES COMMERCIAL SIGN — A sign containing a commercial
message which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the
property on which the sign is located.
OFF-PREMISES NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN — A sign that does not contain a
commercial message which directs attention to an institution, government
or nonprofit corporation and their policies; or contains a message directed
to the general public for health, safety and welfare purposes.
§ 30-259 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-259
1:604
PENNANT — Any lightweight fabric, plastic or other material suspended
from a rope, string or wire, usually in series and designed to move in the
wind, whether or not containing a message of any kind; a gonfalon.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, limited-liability
corporation, limited partnership, partnership, trust or other legal entity.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including
but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels,
signs converted to A- or T-frames, menu and sandwich-board signs, balloons
used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — A sign located in a district zoned for residential
purposes that does not contain any commercial message except for
nonresidential uses permitted or by duly authorized variance within said
district.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof surface.
SIGN — Includes any device, either freestanding or attached to a building or
structure, which displays any design, emblem, illumination, insignia, letter,
model, name, number, projection, word or other representation used for one
or more of the following purposes:
TEMPORARY SIGN — All signs which are freestanding or attached to a
structure and are easily relocated, removed or replaced and usually made
of lightweight materials.
A. To identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises.
To advertise any business, industry, profession, service, trade or other
activity.
B.
To rent, use or sell all or any part of the premises where the sign is
displayed.
C.
To direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, other than state, county or
municipal highway or roadway markers.
D.
To include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia or any representation used to advertise or promote
the interest of any person.
E.
In no event shall the word "sign" be construed to mean any sign located
within the interior of any structure, except for such signs that are
visible from the exterior of the structure at a property line.
F.
§ 30-259 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-259
1:605
VEHICLE SIGN — A sign affixed or painted on a vehicle or trailer and
parked at a location conspicuous to the traveling public for a period in
excess of 48 continuous hours.
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to or painted on the facade of a building
or structure in such a manner that the facade becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign, and which does
not extend more than 12 inches from the supporting facade.
WINDOW — Includes any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any
structure for the purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not covered
with glass, plastic or other covering.
WINDOW DISPLAY SIGN — Includes all signs which are situated within
12 inches of the window surface and which are visible from outside the
building or structure.
WINDOW SPACE — Includes the aggregate square footage of all windows
on any given side and any given story of any structure, regardless of the
angle or angles at which they are set. In computing window space, there
shall be included all portions of any door which contains a window.
§ 30-260. Permit required.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person
to alter, erect or relocate any sign within the City of Millville without
first making application for a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer, or
other approving agency designated to issue permits, and obtaining such
permit.
B. A fee shall be assessed for each zoning permit in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
C. All signs that exceed six square feet in are shall require a construction
permit. Any sign which requires a construction permit may be subject
to the development review procedures set forth in this chapter,
including site plan review.
D. A permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the favorable action
of the approving authority, when required, subject to any other
applicable governmental regulations.
E. A permit for the replacement of an existing sign may be issued by the
Zoning Officer without the necessity of approval by the approving
authority only upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
(1) There is no physical alteration or expansion to the existing sign
beyond the limits permitted herein; and
(2) The sign conforms in all respects to the provisions contained
herein; and
(3) No other signage is proposed to be added to the premises beyond
those permitted herein.
§ 30-259 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-260
1:606
§ 30-261. Applications; permit invalidation; abandonment.
F. A permit for the placement of a banner for a period of no longer than 20
days may be issued by the Zoning Officer. The fee for each banner is
$25. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
A. The zoning permit application required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the Zoning Officer on forms prescribed by his
office. The application shall be sufficient to describe the premises and
location where the sign is to be erected and shall include the following
information:
(1) The name and address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name and address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
(3) A statement as to whether the owner has consented to the
application if the applicant is other than the owner.
(4) A rendering, to scale, of the sign reflecting its composition, colors,
dimensions, elevation from grade level and lighting.
(5) Specifications and location of all existing signs. Scaled
photographs may be submitted in lieu of this information.
(6) In the case of freestanding signs, the sight distances in relation to
driveways on the premises where the sign is to be located, adjacent
premises and intersecting streets within 200 feet of the proposed
sign(s).
(7) The method by which the sign shall be secured.
B. The Zoning Officer shall review the application and plans submitted and
shall within 10 business days of receipt of the application:
(1) Issue a permit if the proposed sign or signs conform to all of the
provisions of this article;
(2) Require full site plan review as required by this chapter; or
(3) Deny the permit, setting forth the reasons for the denial.
C. In the case of signs which are to be erected in connection with a
proposed development requiring subdivision or site plan review, the
proposed signs shall be reviewed as part of the subdivision or site plan
application. Appropriate details of any proposed signs shall be
submitted along with other required subdivision or site plan
information.
D. Sign permit invalidation. Any of the following shall cause a zoning
permit issued for a sign to be invalidated:
§ 30-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-261
1:607
§ 30-262. General regulations.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all signs shall be designed, erected
and maintained in accordance with the following provisions and standards:
(1) Invalidation of a certificate of occupancy for the use to which the
sign relates.
(2) An alteration in the structure of a sign support.
(3) Vacation of the premises by the user to which the sign relates.
(4) Abandonment pursuant to § 30-261F of this section.
E. Effect of invalidation. For a period of not more than three months, a
sign may continue to be displayed once its permit has become invalid,
provided the property is being actively marketed for a new owner or
tenant. In any other instance, the sign shall be removed within 10 days
of the permit invalidation. Internally illuminated box signs shall be
considered to meet the requirement for removal if the message is
turned to face the interior of the box. At no time shall the lighting
elements of the sign box be visible to passersby.
F. Abandonment. If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no
longer operating or being offered or conducted for a period of time
greater than six months, that sign shall be considered abandoned and
shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be completely removed
by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located or
other party having control over such sign. In this context, a seasonal
business such as a farm stand shall be considered operational even
though closed for a period not to exceed nine months.
A. Freestanding signs shall comply with the following:
(1) Freestanding signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products
or services located on the premises where they are erected.
(2) No freestanding sign shall exceed an area of 24 square feet, except
as otherwise provided herein.
(3) No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of 20 feet, except as
otherwise provided herein.
(4) Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
street right-of-way line and 10 feet from any other property line.
(5) Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted for any single
development or lot, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Wall-mounted signs shall comply with the following:
(1) Wall signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products or
services located on the premises where they are erected.
§ 30-261 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-262
1:608
(2) No wall sign identifying as establishment shall be permitted to
project forward more than six inches from the building nor be
attached to a wall at a height of less than eight feet above the
ground or sidewalk.
C. All signs shall conform to the standards of the Uniform Construction
Code.73 All signs shall be permanently fixed to the ground or attached to
a building or structure. The frames and support structures for all signs
shall be constructed of durable materials such as concrete, metal, stone
or wood.
D. Official sign imitation. No sign shall be erected that is of such character,
form, shape or color that it imitates or resembles any official traffic
sign, signal or device, or that has any characteristics which are likely to
confuse or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor
vehicle.
E. Awnings and canopies. Fixed or permanent awnings or canopies used
as sign supports shall not project more than three feet from the building
nor be wider than 25 feet or the width of the building, whichever is less.
No awning or canopy shall be less than nine feet above the ground
elevation. No awning or canopy shall extend more than four feet in
height from its lowest point.
F. Computation of area and height of signs.
(1) The area of a single-faced sign shall be computed by drawing a
square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the
display, emblem, representation or writing, together with the sign
frame and any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed.
(2) The area of a sign with more than one face shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one
point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that
both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time,
the area of the sign shall be computed by the measurement of one
of the faces.
(3) The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the
base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest attached
component of the sign.
G. Relief and sign face distance. No sign shall contain characters or
graphics exceeding three inches in relief from the sign face. The
maximum distance between the faces of a double-faced sign shall not
exceed 18 inches. No wall sign shall project more than 12 inches from
the plane of the attaching surface.
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 30-262 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-262
1:609
H. Illumination.
(1) No sign shall be illuminated except as provided herein.
(2) No sign shall be externally illuminated by neon gas-filled tubes
except within the Arts District Overlay Zone. Within the Arts
District Overlay Zone, exposed neon tube illumination can be
utilized as sign copy projection, border or frame. [Amended
8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(3) Externally lit signs are permitted to be illuminated only with steady,
stationary, down-directed and shielded light sources directed only
onto the sign. Monument signs may have ground-mounted lighting.
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(4) Signs may be internally illuminated by neon gas filled tubes.
(5) Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint (red or
green) and illuminated tubing outlining doors, roofs, windows or
wall edges of a building are prohibited.
(6) No sign shall be artificially illuminated after 10:00 p.m. or before
7:00 a.m. unless the premises are occupied and attended, except in
the business and industrial zoning districts of the City.
I. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good condition at all
times. Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all
hazards such as loose fittings and faulty wiring. In the event that the
Zoning Officer of the municipality determines that any sign has fallen
into a state of disrepair, has become dilapidated or constitutes a safety
hazard, the sign owner and property owner shall be given written
notice to correct the condition within 20 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice. The Zoning Officer may be assisted by the
Construction Code Official, who may make an independent
investigation under the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.74
Failure to correct the condition or file an appeal within the time
provided shall constitute a violation of this article. The City of Millville
shall have the right to recover from said owner the full costs of the
removal and disposal of such signs should the owner fail to heed such
correction notice. Signs shall conform to the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code75 and any other property maintenance code
of the municipality.
J. Number of signs. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a
sign shall be considered to be a single display device or surface when
the elements are composed, organized or related to form a unit. Where
the components are displayed in a random manner without organized
elements or where there is a reasonable doubt about the relationship of
the elements, each element shall be considered to be a separate sign.
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A.52:27D-119 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A.52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 30-262 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-262
1:610
§ 30-263. Signs allowed without permit.
The following signs shall be permitted without a permit or the payment of a
fee as set forth in this chapter:
K. Sight triangles. No sign shall be erected within the clear sight triangle
area as otherwise established in this article, unless the topmost portion
of such sign is less than 2 1/2 feet (30 inches) high. In no case shall any
sign be so erected that it impedes the vision of motorists or pedestrians,
or otherwise endangers their safety.
L. Any use shall be permitted to display a sign required by law to be
exhibited by federal, state or local law in accordance with standards set
forth in that law.
M. Temporary signs/banners. Banners shall not be hung for a period longer
than 20 days and only after the issuance of a permit by the Zoning
Officer. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
A. A temporary freestanding bulletin board sign not exceeding 16 square
feet in area and six feet in height utilized for charitable, public or
religious institutions when located within the property lines of the
institution.
B. Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other governmental
agency, subject to reasonable restrictions on the location and size of the
flag.
C. Official signs and signs legally required for public notice.
D. Incidental signs not to exceed 11 inches by 17 inches or normal poster
size and shall be limited to four per building. [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]
E. Memorial signs, tablets or names on a building, date of erection and
historical markers when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other durable metal or materials not
exceeding eight square feet in area.
F. Parking lot signs not exceeding four square feet in area erected to
control the movement of traffic on the parking lot shall be permitted,
provided the signs direct traffic only and are not used for advertising
purposes. Signs marking individual use of parking spaces, excepting
handicapped parking signs, shall conform to the size limitations of
incidental signs.
G. Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area
identifying the person and profession when located within the property
lines of the professional premises.
H. Residential nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area
identifying a single-family residence and street address when located
within the property lines of the residential premises.
§ 30-262 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-263
1:611
§ 30-264. Signs allowed by use and permit.
Signs are permitted within the various zoning districts within the City based
on the uses which are permitted within each zoning district. They are
regulated under a time, place and manner standard. The following signs
shall be permitted upon the issuance of a sign permit:
I. Residential signs not exceeding four square feet in area and, if
freestanding, no more than four feet in height.
J. Signs not exceeding four square feet in area prohibiting fishing,
hunting or trespassing shall be permitted on the property where the
prohibitions are desired.
K. Signs on vending machines.
L. Window signs, provided that all of the signs individually or collectively
do not exceed 33% of each window panel across the frontage of the
building. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
M. Any sign internal to a building not visible to passersby.
N. Noncommercial holiday lights and decorations.
A. Animal kennels, banks, funeral homes, indoor commercial recreation
facilities, swimming pool retail centers and theaters:
(1) Except where the use is located within a residential zoning district
or one of the land conservation zoning districts, each use may have
one freestanding or monument sign identifying the use on the
premises where there exists at least 250 feet of unbroken frontage
on an arterial street or collector road as classified in the City
Circulation Plan. The freestanding sign shall not exceed 60 square
feet in area and 16 feet in height. A monument sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet and eight feet in height, including the
monument base. A freestanding sign shall be set back from the
street right-of-way and from driveways at least 30 feet and shall not
be located closer than 100 feet from any residential zoning district
or residential property line. A monument sign shall be set back
from the street right-of-way and from driveways at least 15 feet.
The signs may not be located within 100 feet of a residential
district.
(2) Each use may have one sign identifying the use attached flat
against the front of the building not exceeding an area equivalent
to 5% of the front of the building or 100 square feet in area,
whichever is smaller. Where the use is located in a building on
property having frontage on more than one street, one additional
sign identifying the use may be attached flat against the building
for each side of the building fronting on a street not classified as a
minor street in the City Circulation Plan. The sign shall not exceed
5% of the building facade where it is to be attached or 100 square
§ 30-263 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-264
1:612
feet in area, whichever is smaller. Where the building is designed
for rear or side entrances, one nonilluminated sign may be
attached flat against the building at the rear and side entrances,
and the sign shall not exceed an area equivalent to half that of the
sign on the front of the building.
B. Apartment, multifamily dwelling complexes and trailer parks.
(1) Each development having in excess of five dwelling units may have
one sign identifying the development located along any roadway
where there exists at least 200 feet of unbroken road frontage. The
sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and six feet in height. It
shall be set back from the street right-of-way and edge of
intersecting driveways at least 20 feet, unless the sign is located
within a landscaped median, and shall not be located closer than 50
feet from any adjoining property line.
C. Automobile repair garages and service stations.
(1) Each use shall be permitted one freestanding sign not exceeding 60
square feet in area and 20 feet in height. It shall be set back from
the street right-of-way at least 15 feet and shall not be located
closer than 100 feet to any residential property line. If a residential
district is across the street from the intended sign location, a sign
shall be permitted. One additional freestanding sign shall be
permitted when the property is a corner lot, provided that the lot
frontage associated with the sign is a minimum of 250 lineal feet.
Such signs shall be permitted changeable copy.
(2) Each use shall be permitted one wall sign attached flat against the
building not exceeding an area equal to two square feet per lineal
foot of building frontage to which it is attached.
(3) In addition to the above permitted signs, the use may have wall
signs identifying automotive services to be performed within one or
more repair bays attached flat against the building and directly
above the portion of the building where the service will be
performed. Each sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and
shall not be illuminated.
(4) Within a B-4 Business District, gasoline service stations may
display not more than two temporary signs advertising fuel price,
tire sales or other product sales or service. The temporary signs
shall not exceed 10 square feet in area and shall not be located
closer than 10 feet from any curbline or property line.
(5) Changeable copy price signs not to exceed one square foot for each
grade of motor fuel sold shall be permitted on each fuel pump.
Incidental signs shall be permitted on pumps and canopy supports
in addition to incidental building signs as may be permitted.
§ 30-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-264
1:613
D. Automobile dealers, boat yards, farm equipment vendors, truck dealers,
construction equipment, heavy equipment vendors, recreational vehicle
or equipment dealers, trucking terminals and similar uses.
(1) Each use may have one freestanding sign for every 200 feet of
unbroken frontage on a roadway with a maximum of three signs per
site. Each sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and 20 feet
in height. Each sign shall be set back from the street right-of-way at
least 15 feet and from driveways at least 20 feet and shall not be
located closer than 50 feet to any adjoining property line.
(2) In addition to the freestanding signs, the following attached signs
are permitted. One sign attached flat against the front of the
building used for a sales office or showroom not exceeding an area
equivalent to 5% of the front facade of the building or 100 square
feet, whichever is smaller.
(3) For duly franchised new vehicle or equipment dealers, in lieu of a
single sign as permitted in Subsection D(2) herein, one wall sign for
business identification purposes, not to exceed 80 square feet in
area, plus one wall sign for each brand of vehicle or equipment
sold, not to exceed 40 square feet in area, or a total of three such
signs.
(4) One attached sign shall be permitted for each accessory use which
identifies the accessory use such as a garage, office or service area.
Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be
located directly above or in close proximity to the entrance of the
accessory use or structure.
(5) Temporary signs advertising special sales, including balloons,
banners, streamers, or other inflated signs or searchlights
displayed for the purpose of attracting the attention of pedestrians
and motorists; all such signs shall not be used for a period of
greater than 20 days.
E. Business offices, convenience stores, eating and drinking
establishments, professional offices, small retail goods and services
establishments and similar uses.
(1) Each use may have one wall sign identifying the use attached flat
against the front of the building not exceeding an area equivalent
to 5% of the front facade of the building or 40 square feet,
whichever is smaller, except if the building exceeds 20,000 gross
square feet, a sign not exceeding 80 square feet shall be permitted.
(2) Where the building is designed for rear or side entrances, one
nonilluminated wall sign may be attached flat against the building
at the rear and side entrance not exceeding an area equivalent to
half the surface area of the sign on the front of the building.
§ 30-264 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-264
1:614
(3) Where the front facade of the building is more than 40 feet from the
street line, and the building has 100 feet of road frontage, one
freestanding sign or one monument sign may be utilized. The signs
are not to exceed 32 square feet. The freestanding sign may not
exceed 10 feet in height and the monument sign may not exceed
eight feet in height. The signs must be set back at least 10 feet from
the public right-of-way and 30 feet from any driveway or property
line. The signs must meet the traffic sight triangle requirements
and cannot impede the view of motorists.
F. Churches, hospitals, public utilities, and schools.
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted identifying the use. The
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 10 feet in height. It
shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way and
shall not be closer than 25 feet from any adjoining property line.
(2) One additional sign shall be permitted attached to the building. The
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
G. Construction companies, industrial assembly, fabricating,
manufacturing and processing plants, laboratories, metalworking
enterprises, warehouses, wholesale distribution centers and similar
uses.
(1) Each use shall be permitted one freestanding sign identifying the
use. The sign shall not exceed 90 square feet in area and 17 feet in
height. It shall be set back from the street right-of-way and
driveways at least 30 feet and shall not be located closer than 100
feet from any adjoining property line.
(2) In lieu of the freestanding sign, each use shall be permitted one
sign identifying the use attached to the front of the building. The
area of the sign shall not exceed 5% of the front of the building or
200 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(3) If the use is located on property having 200 feet of frontage on
more than one arterial street or collector road, each frontage shall
be permitted one attached sign or one freestanding sign as outlined
above.
H. Department stores, discount stores, furniture stores, garden centers,
hardware stores, lumberyards, major appliance stores, supermarkets
and variety stores.
(1) Except where the use is located within a residential zoning district
or land conservation zoning district, each use may have one
freestanding sign identifying the use on the premises where there
exists at least 250 feet of unbroken frontage on an arterial street or
collector road as classified in the City Circulation Plan. The sign
shall not exceed 90 square feet in area and 17 feet in height. The
sign shall be set back from the street right-of-way and from
§ 30-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-264
1:615
driveways at least 30 feet and shall not be located closer than 100
feet from any residential zoning district or residential property line.
(2) Each use may have one illuminated or nonilluminated wall sign
identifying the use attached flat against the front of the building
not exceeding an area equivalent to 10% of the front of the building
or 200 square feet, whichever is smaller. Where the use is located
in a building on property having frontage on more than one street,
one additional sign identifying the use may be attached flat against
the building for each side of the building fronting on a street not
classified as a minor street in the City Circulation Plan. The sign
shall not exceed 10% of the building facade where it is attached or
200 square feet, whichever is smaller. Where the building is
designed for rear or side entrances, one nonilluminated sign may
be attached flat against the building at the rear and side entrances,
and the sign shall not exceed an area equivalent to half that of the
sign on the front of the building.
(3) Each use may have one electronic message board, provided the
following requirements are met:
(a) If mounted on the exterior wall it is to be used as an accessory
to the primary freestanding or wall sign. It shall not exceed
either in width and shall not exceed 10 square feet. It shall be
mounted under the main freestanding or wall sign.
(b) If mounted as a window sign, it may not exceed five square
feet.
(c) If mounted in a shopping center, a letter of permission from the
owner of the property must accompany the application.
(4) No electronic message boards are permitted in the Arts District
Overlay Zone or in residential areas.
I. Arts Overlay District. Notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary,
signs requiring a permit for uses contained within the Arts Overlay
District shall conform to the following:
(1) Design guidelines and standards. In this section, guidelines are
overall principles to be used in the design of signs. Standards are to
be followed in the placement and design of signs unless specifically
waived by the approving authority.
(a) Design guidelines.
[1] Signs should strengthen the architectural diversity of the
City's buildings.
[2] Signs should be appropriate for the era in which the
building was constructed.
§ 30-264 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-264
1:616
[3] Signs should not alter the way in which a building
functions.
[4] Signs should be integrated with a building's architecture
in terms of form, materials and size.
[5] Designers should strive for creativity in the form and
variety of signage within the size limitations set forth
herein.
[6] Designers should include symbols, images and other
objects to convey the type of establishment using the sign.
[7] The typeface used to represent words should convey the
character of the establishment and the era of the building.
The contrast of a sign's lettering and symbols with its
background should be high to convey legibility.
[8] Relief in the sign face is encouraged to create threedimensionality.
[9] Illumination shall be accomplished through external
floodlights only, which shall be trained in a downward
direction on the sign face. Pursuant to these regulations,
internal illumination is not permitted in the Arts District
Overlay Zone. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
(b) Design standards.
[1] Wall sign locations. For single-story buildings the wall sign
should be located on the parapet wall above the storefront
or on an awning or canopy and below the capstone. For
buildings of two stories or more the sign should be located
on the facade above the storefront but below the window
sills of the second floor. If there are cornices or beltlines
separating the first and second stories, the wall sign
should be placed below such horizontal architectural
elements.
[2] Projecting sign locations. Projecting signs for first-floor
establishments should be just below the second-floor
windows. Projecting signs for establishments on the
second floor or higher should be located above the secondstory
windows.
[3] Sign complexity. Facade and freestanding signs oriented
towards motorists should convey no more than seven items
of information. More complex signage should be limited to
projecting signs oriented towards pedestrians.
(c) Sign materials. Sign materials should relate to the
architectural era of the building. Where modern buildings are
§ 30-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-264
1:617
designed to evoke an earlier era, signage should reflect that
age. Sign materials.
[1] Pre-World War I: painted or carved smooth-surfaced wood;
carved stone; cast brass; tinned and forged metal; and
gold-leafed lettering.
[2] World War I to 1940: any of the above, plus individual
wood or metal letters on building facade.
[3] 1940 to 1970: any of the above, plus neon signs.
[4] 1970 to present: any of the above and sandblasted wooden
or resin signs.
[5] Internally lit neon signs are permitted in post-1940
buildings in the Arts District.
[6] Neon open tubing signs are permitted in all buildings.
(2) Freestanding signs. No use shall be permitted a freestanding
identification sign unless the main building facade is more than 30
feet from the right-of-way line. Where allowed, no more than one
freestanding sign per street frontage shall be permitted; it shall be
no larger than 12 square feet and no more than six feet in height
and set back three feet from the right-of-way line.
(3) Wall signs. Each first-floor use may have one externally illuminated
or nonilluminated wall sign identifying the use, attached flat
against the front of the building, not exceeding an area equal to one
square foot for each lineal front foot of the building or 60 square
feet, whichever is smaller. Where the use is located in a building on
property having frontage on more than one street, one additional
sign identifying the use may be attached flat against the building
for each side of the building fronting on a street. Establishments
with entrances accessible from a rear yard public parking area may
have an additional wall sign not to exceed six square feet in area.
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(a) In lieu of a wall sign, a permanent window sign shall be
permitted, provided it does not exceed 10% of the total
storefront glass area on the first floor and 50% of any one
window.
(b) Individual letters, symbols, or characters used singularly or in
combination to identify a business or building shall be
considered wall signs and must conform to the size
requirements herein.
(c) In the case of buildings with multiple tenants or multiple uses,
each individual business storefront will be required to meet the
size requirements for wall signs based upon the size in square
§ 30-264 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-264
1:618
feet of their individual frontage in proportion to the entire
building.
(4) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be located above secondstory
windows and shall not in any way impede access to the
primary entryway for any business. One projecting sign per
building may be erected facing each street frontage. However,
whenever a building has more than one projecting sign, no more
than one wall sign identifying the main establishment shall be
permitted. The permitted sign area shall be limited to 3% of the
total facade area or a maximum of 16 square feet, whichever is less.
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(5) Changeable copy. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted for
institutional uses, establishments booking live performances and
for service stations selling motor fuel. Such signs shall not exceed
12 square feet in area and shall be integrated with permanent-copy
freestanding or wall signs as otherwise permitted.
(6) Where commercial establishments are located on a floor other than
the first floor, one directory sign shall be permitted, attached to the
facade at a main entrance, rear entrance or stair access to upper
floors.
(7) Restaurants or other eating establishments may erect the following
additional signs: one additional wall sign for the placement of a
menu or other bill of fare, provided the sign does not exceed six
square feet in area. Businesses located on side streets of the Arts
District shall be permitted to place an A-frame sign at the nearest
intersection directing pedestrians to their location as long as the
sign does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(8) Awning signs. One awning sign in lieu of a projecting sign shall be
permitted. The awning sign shall adhere to the size limitations for
projecting signs.
(9) Banners and gonfalons erected by the municipal government or a
designated agent of the municipal government shall be permitted
for a period not to exceed 20 days. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
(10) The following signs are specifically not permitted in the Arts
District Overlay Zone: [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
(a) Internally illuminated signs, with the exception of I(1)(c)
above.
(b) Internally illuminated awnings.
§ 30-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-264
1:619
(c) Off-premises signs, except as otherwise authorized in these
regulations.
(d) Banners, flags or signs blocking access to the primary ingress
or egress of a business or building.
(e) Any sign which by reason of its location will obstruct the view
of any authorized traffic sign, traffic signal or other traffic
control device, or which by reason of its color, position or
shape could be confused with or interferes with any traffic
sign, signal or control device.
(f) Any sign attached to the following infrastructure or structure
is expressly prohibited: bridge, curb, fence, fire hydrant, park
bench, public building, public property, streetlight, tree, and
utility pole.
(11) Murals shall be permitted on the front, sides or rear of buildings
within the Arts Overlay District. The Millville Development
Corporation shall promulgate and enforce rules governing the
development of murals in the downtown.
(12) Portable A-frame signs for retail establishments. All retail
establishments shall be permitted to have a portable A-frame sign
provided they conform to the following conditions:
(a) The sign may be displayed only during business hours on the
business property.
(b) Each side of the sign may not exceed six square feet.
(c) The location of the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(d) The sign must be removed from the sidewalk at the close of the
business day.
(e) For special events and third Fridays, businesses may place
portable A-frame signs off the business property to direct
people to their actual location. In such cases A-frame signs are
limited to one per business and must be placed at the
intersection closest to their location and not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(13) Strolling billboard signs shall be permitted without a permit but
are limited to one per business. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
J. Golf courses, private clubs, lodges and similar uses.
(1) One freestanding sign identifying the use is permitted. It shall not
exceed 12 square feet in area and 10 feet in height. It shall be set
§ 30-264 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-264
1:620
back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way and from adjoining
property lines.
(2) Additionally, one sign identifying the use is permitted, attached to
the principal building. It shall not exceed 30 square feet in area.
K. Hotels and motels, multioffice complexes and professional office
centers.
(1) Each use may have one sign identifying the use, either attached to
the building or freestanding, not exceeding an area equivalent to
5% of the first floor portion of the front facade or 150 square feet in
area, whichever is smaller.
(2) Where an individual office unit has direct access from the outside, a
sign identifying the use, attached to the building at the office
entrance, not exceeding six square feet in area, is permitted.
L. Industrial parks.
(1) Each park may have one freestanding sign identifying the park
located adjacent to an arterial street or collector road where the
park has at least 150 feet of unbroken frontage. The sign shall not
exceed 150 square feet in area and 25 feet in height. It shall be set
back from the street right-of-way and driveways at least 50 feet and
shall not be located closer than 150 feet from any adjoining
property line.
M. Shopping centers.
(1) Each center or grouping of uses may have freestanding signs
erected to identify the shopping center or permitted use and list
individual occupants, provided that no more than one sign shall be
erected for each 500 feet of unbroken frontage on a street, and
further provided that the aggregate area of all sides of any signs
shall not exceed 200 square feet plus one square foot for each
1,500 square feet of gross floor area in the principal building or
buildings in excess of 20,000 square feet. The signs shall not
exceed the height of the principal building. The signs shall be set
back from the street right-of-way and driveways at least 50 feet and
shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any adjoining
property line and 200 feet from a residential zoning district.
(2) In addition to the freestanding signs permitted above, each center
may have the following attached signs. One illuminated
identification sign shall be permitted, attached to the building
fronting on a street. The sign shall not exceed an area equivalent to
one square foot per lineal foot of frontage on the individual use or
100 square feet in area, whichever is smaller. The signs shall not
extend above the roofline of the building where they are attached.
§ 30-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-264
1:621
§ 30-265. Signs prohibited in all zoning districts.
Any sign not permitted by the sign regulations herein is hereby prohibited,
with the following signs specifically prohibited:
(3) In areas having common walkways roofed over with a permanent
rigid canopy, there may be one nonilluminated sign for each
business, attached in a perpendicular fashion from the underside of
the canopy and not exceeding four square feet in area on either of
two sides.
(4) Each use may have one nonilluminated directory sign for each
principal entrance for all business occupants. The signs shall be
attached flat against the facade of the building and shall not exceed
four square feet in area.
(5) Additionally, each use may have one identification sign on each
window and awning, provided that the signs do not exceed four
square feet in area.
(6) All signs in a shopping center shall conform in character to all other
signs in the center and shall blend with the overall architectural
scheme of the shopping center.
N. Whenever it is proposed to erect a sign for a use permitted under this
chapter which use does not generally approximate a use set forth in this
section for sign standards, one attached or freestanding sign shall be
permitted. An attached sign shall not exceed 5% of the front of the
building upon which it is attached or 100 square feet in area, whichever
is smaller. A freestanding sign shall not exceed 90 square feet in area
and 17 feet in height. The sign may be illuminated or nonilluminated.
Additional signs not conforming with the area requirements for the use
shall be permitted only after review and approval by the Planning
Board.
O. Traffic control signs. Freestanding signs may be erected in connection
with a permitted use which are necessary to regulate the movement of
traffic on the interior roadways on the premises, provided that the
location and number of the signs are reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board. The signs shall not exceed four square feet in area and
shall not exceed six feet in height.
P. Banners in zoning districts other than residential districts. No person
shall erect or install a banner within a nonresidential zoning district
without securing a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer. The location
for all banners must be approved by the Zoning Officer and the time
period for use shall not exceed 20 days. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 14-2010]
A. No sign shall be placed on benches, bridges, culverts, curbs, fences,
hydrants, lamps, rocks, sidewalks, street signs, traffic signs, stumps,
trees or utility poles.
§ 30-264 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-265
1:622
B. No sign shall be placed on public property within the City, including
property owned or leased by the City of Millville, County of
Cumberland, State of New Jersey or Millville Board of Education, or
their agencies, unless specifically authorized by the governmental
entity and the primary purpose of the sign is to further a legitimate
governmental interest and public interest. Examples of permitted signs
on public property include highway directional signs providing
motorists with information concerning the location of gasoline, food
and lodging. This section shall not apply to athletic fields where
commercial signs are used to provide funding for nonprofit
organizations.
C. No sign shall be located so as to obstruct driver vision, traffic signals or
traffic control or directional signs.
D. No sign shall be located so as to obstruct doors, fire escapes, other
places of business, other lawful signs or ventilation openings.
E. No sign shall be erected containing information not protected by the
First Amendment of the United States Constitution, such as signs that
promote an illegal activity, provide false advertising or any sign which,
when applying contemporary community standards, has a dominant
theme or purpose which appeals to prurient interests or is obscene in
nature.
F. No sign shall be located so as to obstruct the free flow of pedestrian
traffic on any sidewalk.
G. No sign shall be located in a planting strip between the sidewalk and
the curbline, except for official signs.
H. No sign shall extend from the facade of a building more than 12 inches,
unless it is an awning or projecting sign as otherwise permitted in this
article.
I. No sign shall be attached or affixed to the roof of a building and no wall
sign shall project above the lowest level of a roof or beyond the corner
of a wall.
J. Vehicle signs.
K. Portable signs, except as may be permitted in the Arts Overlay District.
L. Temporary signs, except as may otherwise be permitted in this article.
M. No sign shall be installed which emits smoke, visible vapors or
particles, sound or odor, or any sign that emits electromagnetic
radiation outside the wavelengths of visible light which is measurable
beyond the property boundary, and signs causing interference with
radio or television reception.
N. Banners in residential areas.
§ 30-265 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-265
1:623
§ 30-266. Nonconforming signs.
§ 30-267. Temporary signs.
O. Flashing signs.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this section that all nonconforming signs
shall be eliminated as soon as legally possible.
B. Any signs existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which
violate any provisions contained herein shall be deemed a
nonconforming use and may be continued, maintained and repaired
upon the premises or location, provided that such sign was lawful under
any prior ordinance. Any sign unlawful under any prior ordinance shall
remain unlawful unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter
and there is issued by the Zoning Officer a sign erection permit.
C. Any nonconforming sign which is associated with a change in
occupancy or ownership shall necessitate an application to the Zoning
Officer or other approving authority designated to issue a sign permit.
D. When a business or use has ceased operation, any nonconforming sign
located on the premises shall be removed forthwith.
E. Any sign which has been damaged to the extent that the cost of repairs
shall exceed 50% of the current value of the sign shall be deemed as
destroyed, and the owner thereof shall not be permitted to erect or
restore the sign except in accordance with this chapter.
A. No commercial sign shall be erected on residential property unless the
sign is related to a use permitted within a residential zoning district.
Examples of commercial signs permitted in a residential zoning district
include real estate "for sale" signs and casual sale signs like "garage
sale." These signs are regulated under a time, place and manner
standard. Noncommercial signs are also regulated under a time, place
and manner standard.
B. Casual sale signs not exceeding four square feet in area shall be
permitted on private property when a casual sale is legally licensed
under Chapter 33 of this Code, provided the signs are set back at least
10 feet from the curbline and the signs are removed within 48 hours
after the casual sale is completed. A casual sign shall only be permitted
in lieu of a residential sign.
C. Contractor signs not exceeding six square feet in area shall be
permitted on private property when placed upon a work site under
construction, provided the signs are set back at least 10 feet from the
curbline and the signs are removed within 48 hours after the work is
completed.
D. Developer signs not exceeding 40 square feet in area advertising a
major site plan development or major subdivision that has received final
§ 30-265 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-267
1:624
approval from the Planning Board shall be permitted, provided the
signs are set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way and
adjoining property lines and the signs are removed within 48 hours
after construction is completed.
E. Noncommercial signs not exceeding six square feet in area which
promote an event sponsored by a person shall be permitted on private
property in all zoning districts within the City, provided the signs are
set back at least 10 feet from the curbline and the signs are removed
within 48 hours after the event is over.
F. Political signs not exceeding six square feet in area which identify a
candidate running for public office shall be permitted on private
property in all zoning districts within the City, provided the signs are
set back at least 10 feet from the curbline and the signs are removed
within 48 hours after the election is over.
G. Real estate signs shall be permitted on private property which
advertises the sale or rental of the premises where the signs are
located, provided the signs are set back at least 10 feet from the
curbline and the signs are removed within 48 hours after the sale or
rental is completed.
(1) Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted. The maximum
size of the sign shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
[Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 14-2010]
(a) Residential and conservation zones: six square feet.
(b) Commercial and institutional zones: 32 square feet.
(c) Industrial zones: six square feet.
(2) Off-premises directional real estate signs identifying an open house
shall also be permitted. Signs may be two-sided and may not
exceed three square feet per side. Signs may be installed only with
the written permission of the property owner(s). Signs may be
installed for a period of time up to 24 hours preceding the open
house and must be removed the same day.
H. Roadside stands shall be permitted one sign, attached to the roadside
stand, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, which advertises the
products sold. The sign shall be removed during the season when the
products are not offered for sale.
I. Temporary signs advertising special sales may be used at a rate of one
per 200 feet of road frontage. Such signs must be set back from the
public right-of-way at least six feet and must be removed at the end of
each business day. Such signs may be used for no more than seven
consecutive days. No temporary signs shall be permitted in a regional
shopping center without the written permission of the owner.
§ 30-267 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-267
1:625
§ 30-268. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
§ 30-269. Violations and penalties.
Temporary signs are not permitted in residential zones or in the Arts
District Overlay Zone.
J. Political signs shall be considered temporary signs. They shall not be
placed earlier than 60 days before the election. They must be set back
six feet from the public right-of-way and shall not exceed six square
feet. All political signs require the permission of the owner and must be
removed within 48 hours of the date of the election.
A. The Zoning Officer shall exercise control and supervision over all
regulations contained in this article. Any applicant for a permit may be
denied a permit, and any permit issued may be suspended or revoked
by the Zoning Officer for any of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with this chapter.
(3) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with state law
applicable to the permit being issued.
B. The applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the Zoning
Officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
A. The Zoning Officer may enforce the regulations contained in this article
by filing a complaint with the Municipal Court. Any person who shall
violate any portion of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article III, of the Code of the City of Millville. It shall constitute a
violation of this chapter for each and every day that a sign with an
expired permit is displayed in contravention of this article.
B. If the Zoning Officer determines that a sign has been erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter, he or she shall mail a written
notice of violation to the owner and occupant of the land where the sign
is located to the last known address by regular and certified mail. The
notice of violation shall provide that the person responsible shall have
10 days to repair or remove the sign.
C. If the sign is not repaired or removed or an appeal filed within the 10
days, the Zoning Officer shall revoke the permit issued for the sign and,
if feasible, repair or remove the sign, at the City's expense, and assess
all costs and expenses incurred in the repair or removal of the sign
against the land and buildings where the sign is located. The
assessment shall be made by resolution of the governing body and shall
include all costs and expenses incurred, including legal fees to cover
the cost of preparing the resolution.
§ 30-267 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-269
1:626
ARTICLE XXIV
Telecommunication Towers
§ 30-270. Findings.
§ 30-271. Purposes.
A. The Federal Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (hereinafter the "Act") grants the
Federal Communications Commission exclusive jurisdiction over:
(1) The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF)
emissions from telecommunication facilities; and
(2) The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF
spectrum.
B. The city's regulation of towers and telecommunication facilities within
Millville will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from
providing wireless telecommunication services in violation of the Act.
A. The general purpose of this article is to regulate the placement,
construction, and modification of towers and telecommunication
facilities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the
development of competitive telecommunications market place as it
relates to the City of Millville.
B. Specifically, the purposes of this article are:
(1) To regulate the location of towers and telecommunication facilities
within the City of Millville;
(2) To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of towers and telecommunication facilities;
(3) To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and
telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting,
landscaping and the innovative camouflaging techniques;
(4) To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and
antenna support structures as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single-use towers;
(5) To promote and encourage the utilization of technological designs
that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new
tower structures to support antenna and telecommunication
facilities;
(6) To avoid potential damage to property and personal injury to
residents caused by towers and telecommunication facilities by
ensuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed,
§ 30-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-271
1:627
§ 30-272. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings described to them in this article, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure other than
a tower which can be used for location of telecommunication facilities.
APPLICANT — Any person, corporation or other entity that applies for a
tower development permit.
APPLICATION — The process by which the owner of the parcel of land
within the City of Millville submits a request to develop, construct, build,
modify or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes
all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in
whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the City concerning such
request.
CITY — The City of Millville including its Planning and Zoning Board.
ENGINEER — Any engineer licensed to practice within the State of New
Jersey.
MONOPOLE — A type of freestanding tower with a single shaft of wood,
steel, concrete or other substance and a platform or racks for antennas
arrayed on top or attached thereto.
OWNER — The person, corporation or other entity with fee title or longterm
(exceeding 10 years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the City
who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon
such parcel of land.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not
for profit.
PROVIDER — A company, person or other entity which provides wireless
services via a local communications facility.
STEALTH — Any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to
enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to,
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower
such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not
necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole
tower designs.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES — Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with
constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer
used or are determined to be structurally unsound;
(7) To ensure that towers and telecommunication facilities are
compatible with surrounding land use.
§ 30-271 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-272
1:628
the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to
locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.
However, telecommunications facilities shall not include:
TOWER — A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure
constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The
term "tower" shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as
licensed by the FCC.
§ 30-273. Development of towers.
Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which
is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial.
A.
Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter
regardless of zoning category.
B.
A. Towers shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts within the City of
Millville subject to Planning Board approval except the River
Conservation District and any land subject to the River Management
Plan as adopted by the City of Millville and National Park Service. Any
application for a tower shall require conditional use approval and major
site plan approval. To the greatest extent possible, both requirements
shall be considered as part of a single application.
B. No person shall build, erect or construct a tower upon any parcel of
land within any zoning district set forth above unless approval has been
received by the appropriate Planning and/or Zoning Board within the
City of Millville.
C. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the
districts where located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150
feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of 150 feet in accordance with
§ 30-287, Criteria for site plan development modifications.
D. No new tower shall be built, constructed or erected in the City unless
the tower is capable of supporting another person's telecommunication
facility comparable in weight, size and surface area to the
telecommunication facility installed by the applicant on the tower
within six months of completion of the towers construction.
E. All persons seeking to build a tower must submit an application
regarding the same to the City Planning Board. An application to
develop a tower shall include:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be
evidenced in the application.
(2) The legal description, lot and block number, and address of the
parcel of land upon which the tower is to be situated.
§ 30-272 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-273
1:629
(3) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within the City
and also within a one-half-mile radius of the City boundaries,
including City-owned property.
(4) A description of the design plans proposed by the applicant
regarding the tower to be located within the City. The applicant
must identify its utilization of the most technological design,
including microcell design, as part of the design plan. The applicant
must demonstrate the need for towers and why design alternatives,
such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to accomplish the
provision of the applicant's telecommunication services.
(5) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate
the applicant's telecommunication facility on City-owned towers or
usable antenna support structures located within the City and a
one-half-mile radius of the City.
(6) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support
structures owned by other persons located within the City and a
one-half-mile radius of the City.
(7) Written technical evidence from the engineer that the proposed
tower or telecommunications facility cannot be installed or
collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support
structures owned by other persons located within the City or a onehalf-
mile radius of the City.
(8) A written statement from an engineer that the construction and
placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety
communications and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communications services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties.
(9) Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
structure meets the standards set forth in this article in § 30-81,
Structural requirements.
(10)Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer acceptable to
the Fire Marshal and the Construction Official operating within the
City that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunication
facility does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life
or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive or
hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas,
or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals.
(11) In order to assist the Planning and Zoning Boards in evaluating the
visual impact of the application, the applicant shall submit color
photo simulation showing the proposed site of the tower with a
§ 30-273 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-273
1:630
§ 30-274. Setbacks.
§ 30-275. Structural requirements.
All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally
sound, and at a minimum, be in conformance with the Uniform Construction
Code and BOCA National Property Code and all other standards as set forth
in this article or as otherwise applicable. All towers in operation shall be
fixed to land.
§ 30-276. Buffer requirements.
For the purpose of this section, the distances between towers shall be
measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site
photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would
appear viewed from the closest residential property and from
adjacent roadways.
(12) The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of
RF emissions and does not allow the City to condition or deny on
the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications
facilities (whether mounted on towers or antenna supports
structures) which meet FCC standards. The applicant shall be
required to submit information on the proposed power density of
their proposed telecommunications facility and demonstrate how
this meets FCC standards.
(13) A plot plan, survey and all other plans and documents required for
submission to the City Planning Board.
F. The City Planning Board may require an applicant to supplement any
information that is considered inadequate or that the applicant has
failed to supply. Any application may be denied on the basis that the
applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information in this article.
The application shall be reviewed by the City Planning Board in a
prompt manner, and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting
forth the reasons for approval or denial.
A. Setback for each tower shall be 150% of the height of the tower from
the property line on all sides. Example, a one-hundred-foot tower would
have to be setback at least 150 feet from each property line on the
property where said tower would be located.
B. Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is
located.
C. Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in § 30-287 of this
article, when placement of a tower in a location which will reduce the
visual impact can be accomplished.
§ 30-273 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-276
1:631
plan of the proposed tower. Tower separation distances from residentially
zoned lands shall be measured from the base of the tower to the closest
point of residentially zoned properties. The minimum tower separation
distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be
calculated and applied irrespective of the City's jurisdictional boundaries.
§ 30-277. Measuring of tower height.
Measurement of the tower height for the purpose of determining
compliance with all requirements of this article shall include the tower
structure itself, the base pad and any other telecommunication facilities
attached thereto which extend more then 20 feet over the top of the tower
structure itself. Tower heights shall be measured from grade.
§ 30-278. Illumination.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration. Upon commencement of construction of a tower,
in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which
is 300% of the height of the tower from the tower and when required by
federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA.
§ 30-279. Exterior finish.
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish
which enhances the compatibility with adjacent land uses, and the same
shall be approved by the Planning Board of the City of Millville. For
example, earth tone colors may be required for the fifty-foot portion of the
tower which is close to land or whose background is a forest or other type
scenery or blue or sky colors may be required for the portion of the tower
A. Towers shall be separated from residentially zoned lands by a minimum
of 200 feet or 200% of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is
greater. To the extent that this section imposes a greater setback
requirement than otherwise set forth in this article, this section shall be
controlling.
B. Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation
requirements from existing towers or towers which have a development
permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is
granted pursuant to this article:
(1) Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other
towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed by a
minimum of 750 feet.
(2) Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all other self-supporting guyed towers by a
minimum of 1,500 feet.
(3) Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of 750 feet.
§ 30-276 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-279
1:632
extending above 50 feet so that the same would blend in with the natural
horizon.
§ 30-280. Landscaping.
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support
structures or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscaping requirements as set forth in this Chapter 30, Land
Use and Development Regulations. In addition to said requirements, the
City may request perimeter trees which upon maturity would be 30 feet or
higher performing a circular pattern around such tower, antenna support
structure or telecommunications facility. Additionally, any nontree area shall
aesthetically pleasing environment and to enhance the compatibility with
adjacent land uses. A wooden fence may also be required, and any
landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any such fencing. A fence
may be required for safety purposes. All trees required shall be compatible
with indigenous Pineland trees.
§ 30-281. Access.
The parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at
least one paved vehicular parking space on site. Additional parking may be
required by the Planning Board based on use. Adequate area must exist for
vehicles to "turn around" at the site. All access roads to the site must be
paved with asphalt or be of compacted gravel.
§ 30-282. Stealth design.
All towers must attempt to use stealth design, and no tower which is
considered a conditional use shall be approved unless said stealth design is
used.
§ 30-283. Telecommunications facilities on antenna support
structures.
Any telecommunication facilities which are not attached to a tower may be
permitted on any antenna support structure at least 100 feet tall, regardless
of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the
structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all
other structures shall, by written certification to the Zoning Officer,
establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building permit:
A. That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall
not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure by
more than 20 feet;
B. That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are set
back one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in
height above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This
setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities
§ 30-279 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-283
1:633
§ 30-284. Modification of towers.
§ 30-285. Certifications and inspections.
and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna
support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from
view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening
techniques approved by the City of Millville. Setback requirements
shall not apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior
of antenna support structures below the primary roof, but which do not
protrude more than 18 inches from the side of such an antenna support
structure.
A. A tower existing prior to the effective date of this article, which was in
compliance with the City's zoning regulations immediately prior to the
effective date of this article, may continue in existence as a
nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structure may be
modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the
additional requirements of this article, except for § 30-276, Buffer
requirements, § 30-285, Certifications and inspections, and § 30-286,
Maintenance, provided that:
(1) The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole
purpose of accommodating, within six months of the completion of
the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications
facilities comparable in weight, size and surface area to the
discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person
currently installed on the tower.
(2) An application for a development permit is made to the City
Planning Board which shall have the authority to issue a
development permit without further approval. The grant of a
development permit pursuant to this section allowing the
modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing
nonconforming tower shall not be considered a determination that
the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming.
(3) The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications
facilities do not exceed the maximum height allowed under this
article.
B. Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use
may not be enlarged, increased in size or abandoned. For the purpose of
this article a nonconforming structure which is discontinued for a
period of more than 180 days, unless said discontinuance is for repairs,
shall be considered abandoned. This article shall not be interpreted to
legalize any structure or use existing at the time this article is adopted
which structure or use is in violation of any of the ordinances of the City
of Millville or any other federal, state or county statutes, regulations,
ordinance or other laws prior to the enactment of this article.
§ 30-283 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-285
1:634
§ 30-286. Maintenance.
A. All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and
in conformance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code and BOCA National Code and all other construction standards set
forth by the City ordinances and federal and state law. For new
monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an
application pursuant to § 30-273 of this article, and said application
shall be resubmitted every five years thereafter. For existing monopole
towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective
date of this article and then every five years thereafter. For new lattice
or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an
application pursuant to § 30-273 of this article and shall be resubmitted
every two years thereafter. For existing lattice of guyed towers,
certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of
this article and then every two years thereafter. The tower owner may
be required by the City to submit more frequent certifications should
there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of
the tower is jeopardized.
B. The City or its agents shall have the authority to enter onto the property
upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and
certifications required above, to inspect the tower for purposes of
determining whether it complies with all sections of this article and
other City ordinances and any federal or state law or state, county or
federal rule or regulation.
C. The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. No notice is required for
emergency inspections. All expenses related to such inspections by the
City shall be borne by the tower owners.
A. Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
B. Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code
and all FCC, state and local regulations and in such manner that will not
interfere with the use of the property.
C. All towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition
and working order, and shall be repaired so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person.
D. All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications
facilities or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
§ 30-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-286
1:635
§ 30-287. Criteria for site plan development modifications.
E. All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission
standards of the FCC and all other applicable FCC rules and
regulations.
F. In the event that the use of the tower is discontinued by the tower
owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its
intent to discontinue use and the date when said use shall be
discontinued. The tower owner shall be specifically responsible. If FCC
approval is required, the tower shall be dismantled within six months
from the time it is no longer being used for telecommunication
purposes and FCC approval is obtained, but in no event shall the tower
exist in excess of 12 months from the time of discontinued use.
A. Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this article, a
modification to the requirements may be approved by the Planning and/
or Zoning Board as a conditional use in accordance with the following:
(1) In addition to the requirement for a tower application, the
application for modification shall include the following:
(a) A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact
that might occur as a result of approving the modification.
(b) Description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any
adverse impact which might occur as a result of the
modification.
(c) A technical study that documents and supports the criteria
submitted by the applicant upon which the request for
modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by
an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts
related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to
surrounding rights-of-way and properties.
(d) For a modification of the setback requirement, the application
shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower
could be located, attempts by the applicant to contact and
negotiate an agreement for collocation, and the result of such
attempts.
(e) The Planning Board may require the application to be reviewed
by an independent engineer under contract to the City to
determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for
the modification requested. The cost to review by the City's
engineer shall be reimbursed to the City by the applicant.
(2) The Planning and/or Zoning Board shall consider the application
and modification based on the following criteria:
§ 30-286 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-287
1:636
(a) That the towers modified will be compatible with and not
adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding
properties and the existing zone.
(b) Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse
impacts, if any, created by the modifications.
(c) In addition, the Board may include conditions on the site where
the tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to
preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods
affected by the proposed tower to mitigate any adverse impact
which arise in connection with the approval of the
modification.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A, in the following cases,
the applicant must also demonstrate, by written evidence, the
following:
(1) In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement,
§ 30-274, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel
of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located and the
alternative for the person is to locate the tower at another site
which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land.
(2) In the case of a request for modification to the separation and
buffer requirements from other towers set forth in § 30-276, that
the proposed site is zoned industrial, heavy industrial and the
proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for
separation from residentially zoned lands as provided in said
§ 30-276.
(3) In the case of request for modification of the separation and buffer
requirements from residentially zoned land as set forth in § 30-276,
if the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer
that the proposed tower and telecommunications facility must be
located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage
requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system
and if the person is willing to create approved landscaping and
other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially
zoned properties.
(4) In the case of a request for modification of the height limits for
towers and telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height
requirements for antenna support structures, that the modification
is necessary to:
(a) Facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in order
to avoid construction of a new tower;
(b) To meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless
communications system which requirements must be
documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer
§ 30-287 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-287
1:637
§ 30-288. Abandonment.
§ 30-289. Minimum lot area.
The minimum lot area for any lot which will have a tower located thereon
within the City of Millville shall be sufficient to comply with the setback
requirements set forth in § 30-274. The minimum lot area shall be sufficient
to permit a setback of a minimum of 150% of the height of the tower,
measured from the perimeter of the base of the tower to the nearest
property line. The height of the tower shall be calculated as set forth in
§ 30-277.
§ 30-290. Site plan review.
All applications to determine whether or not a tower may be sited within the
City of Millville shall be submitted to reviewed and approved or disapproved
by the City Planning Board. In addition to addressing the requirements set
forth in this article, the Planning Board shall consider any and all additional
site plan requirements.
§ 30-291. Federal and state approvals.
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, all applicants must receive
any and all necessary federal and state approvals, including but not limited
to approval from the FCC and FAA, if applicable.
that demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is
the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and
no tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be
approved.
A. If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days,
the City Commission or City Planning Board, through the City Clerk,
shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that such site has
been abandoned. The owner shall have 30 days from the receipt of said
notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tower has
been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to show
that the tower has been in use or under repair during said period, the
City Commission shall issue a final determination of abandonment, the
owner shall within 75 days apply to the FCC for the dismantling and
within 180 days of such approval dismantle and remove the tower. If no
such FCC approval is necessary, then said tower shall be dismantled
and removed within 180 days of cease of use, In no event shall the
tower not be dismantled within 365 days from cease of use.
B. As security for the obligations set forth in this section, the applicant, at
the time of submitting the application, shall post a bond in an amount as
determined by the City Engineer which said bond being of such amount
to cover the anticipated cost and any removal of any such tower.
§ 30-287 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-292
1:638
§ 30-292. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted at or on any tower or antenna support structure
except signs warning of any potential danger at such location.
§ 30-292 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-292
1:639

ARTICLE XXV
Affordable Housing
[Added 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 29-200576; amended 8-21-2007 by Ord.
No. 23-200777; 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009]
§ 30-293. Development fees and regulations.
The governing body of the City of Millville (the Municipality) desires to
adopt an ordinance setting forth regulations for the collection, maintenance
and expenditure of development fees to comply with the regulations
established by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) in order to secure
third-round substantive certification for the Municipality.
§ 30-294. Purpose; legislative authority.
§ 30-295. Basic requirements.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52-27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7),78 COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. These regulations establish standards for the collection, maintenance
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations
and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 and §§ 32 through 38.79 Fees
collected pursuant to these regulations shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. These
regulations shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 30-192, Affordable housing.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance relocated the provisions pertaining to affordable housing
formerly found in Article XVII, §§ 30-192 and 30-192.1 through 30-192.11, to this new
article.
78.Editor's Note: Pursuant to the New Jersey Economic Stimulus Act of 2009, the Non-
Residential Development Fee Act, which was signed into law on 7-17-2008, was suspended.
For applicable development fees, consult the City offices.
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7,
respectively.
§ 30-293 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-295
1:641
§ 30-296. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 30-297. Residential development fees.
A. These regulations shall not be effective until approved by COAH
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Municipality shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning district(s), residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
§ 30-295 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-297
1:642
§ 30-298. Nonresidential development fees.
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on
the site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development, unless the developer
seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site plan
approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be
synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use or is
demolished and replaced. The development fee shall be calculated
on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
(4) Developers of structures demolished and replaced as a result of a
natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
§ 30-297 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-298
1:643
§ 30-299. Collection procedures.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land and
improvement, at the time the final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within the existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in
Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the properly tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Municipality as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
§ 30-298 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-299
1:644
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption, to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and
prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Municipality fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
§ 30-299 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-299
1:645
§ 30-300. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Municipality.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Municipality. Appeals from a determination of the Director
may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of
the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.,
within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount.
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Municipality's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Municipality shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form
of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank
and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
§ 30-299 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-300
1:646
§ 30-301. Use of funds.
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Municipality's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7
through 5:97-8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Municipality for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of construction of affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) The Municipality may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
§ 30-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-301
1:647
§ 30-302. Monitoring.
The Municipality shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Municipality's housing program, as well as
to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by
COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designated by
COAH.
§ 30-303. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Municipality to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the Municipality
has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification and has received COAH's approval of
its development fee ordinance. If the Municipality fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into
the New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to § 20
of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Municipality shall not impose
a residential development fee on a development that received preliminary
or final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification
or judgment of compliance, nor shall the Municipality retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The Municipality shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 30-301 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-304
1:648
§ 30-304. (Reserved)
§ 30-305. Fair share regulations.
The governing body of the City of Millville (the Municipality) desires to
adopt an ordinance setting forth regulations to comply with the
Municipality's constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of affordable
housing for low- and moderate-income households and in order to secure
third-round substantive certification for the Municipality.
§ 30-306. Intent.
This article of the Municipal Code sets forth regulations regarding the
low- and moderate-income housing units in the Municipality consistent
with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing" for the period beginning June 2, 2008,
with amendments through October 20, 2008, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
and the Municipality's constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of
affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households. In addition,
this article applies requirements for very low-income housing as established
in P.L. 2008, c. 46 (the Roberts bill). These regulations are also intended
to provide assurances that low- and moderate-income people occupy these
units. These regulations shall apply except where inconsistent with
applicable law.
§ 30-307. Proportion of low-income units by sale, rental and
number of bedrooms.
Except for affordable housing developments constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations:
§ 30-308. Bedroom distribution of affordable units.
A. At least half of the "for sale" affordable units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to low-income households.
B. At least half of the "rental" affordable units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to low-income households. Of
the total number of affordable rental units, 13% shall be affordable to
very low-income households.
C. At least half of the affordable units in each bedroom distribution within
each affordable housing development shall be affordable to low-income
households.
A. Affordable housing developments which are not limited to agerestricted
households shall be structured in conjunction with realistic
market demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is no greater
than 20% of the total number of affordable units.
§ 30-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-308
1:649
§ 30-309. Rents and sales prices of affordable units based on
household size and number of units.
(2) At least 30% of all affordable units shall be two-bedroom units.
(3) At least 20% of all affordable units shall be three-bedroom units.
B. Affordable housing developments that are limited to age-restricted
households shall, at a minimum, have a total number of bedrooms equal
to the number of age-restricted affordable units within the affordable
housing development. The standard may be met by creating all onebedroom
units or by creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency
unit.
A. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following shall be
used to determine maximum rents and sales prices of the affordable
units:
(1) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households.
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household.
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household.
(4) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half
person household.
(5) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person household.
B. For assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household.
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household.
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person household
or to two one-person households.
C. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each unit bedroom.
(2) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms.
(3) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
§ 30-308 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-310
1:650
§ 30-310. Establishing median income by household size.
Median income by household size shall be established using a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
HUD, computed as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.2.
§ 30-311. Establishing average rents of affordable units.
§ 30-312. Establishing average sales prices of affordable units.
A. The maximum rent of restricted rental units within each affordable
housing development shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 60% of median income. Each affordable housing development
must achieve an affordability average rental of no more than 52% for
restricted rental units. Each affordable housing development shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for all low- and
moderate-income units, provided at least 13% of these restricted rental
units are affordable to households earning no more than 30% of median
income. For low-income rental units established in a market to
affordable rental program only, the maximum rent for a low-income unit
shall be affordable to households earning no more than 44% of median
income.
B. Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating source
as market units within an inclusionary development.
C. Gross rents, including an allowance for utilities, shall be established for
the various-sized affordable units at a rate not to exceed 30% of the
gross monthly income of the appropriate household size as set forth in
Subsection A above. The allowance for utilities shall be consistent with
the utility allowance approved by NJDCA for use in its Section 8
Program.
D. No affordable rental units in the COAH requirement shall be subject to
a rent control ordinance which may be adopted or in place in the
Municipality during the time period in which affordable housing COAH
controls are effective.
A. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable housing development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income. Each affordable housing
development must achieve an affordability average sales price of no
more than 55% for restricted ownership units. Moderate-income
ownership units must be available for at least three different prices for
each bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be available
for at least two different prices for each bedroom type. For low-income
sales units established in a market to affordable sale program only, the
maximum sales price for a low-income unit shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 40% of median income.
§ 30-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-312
1:651
§ 30-313. Condominium or homeowners' association fees.
If an affordable housing unit is part of a condominium association or
homeowners' association, the master deed shall reflect that the assessed
affordable homeowners' fee be established at 100% of the market rate fee.
This percentage assessment shall be recorded in the master deed.
§ 30-314. Reservation of units.
§ 30-315. Reoccupancy certificates.
Upon resale of an affordable unit, a certificate of reoccupancy shall be
required in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
§ 30-316. Phasing of construction.
Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent upon the
affordable housing development meeting the following phasing schedule for
low- and moderate-income units, whether developed in one stage or in two
or more stages:
B. Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating source
as market units within an inclusionary development.
C. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying costs of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the
purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes,
homeowner and private mortgage insurance and condominium or
homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of an appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
A. Low-income housing units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income equal to or less than 50% of the median income
approved by COAH.
B. Pending release of COAH's rules implementing P.L. 2008, c. 46, very
low-income housing units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income equal to or less than 30% of the median income
approved by COAH.
C. Moderate-income housing units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH.
§ 30-312 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-316
1:652
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
§ 30-317. Control period for affordable housing.
Any conveyance of a newly constructed low- or moderate-income sales unit
shall contain the restrictive covenants and liens that are set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
§ 30-318. Administration of affordable housing program.
A. The Municipality is ultimately responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls and the
affirmative marketing plan in accordance with the regulations of COAH
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97 et seq., and the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
B. The Municipality has delegated to the Municipal Housing Liaison this
responsibility for administering the affordable housing program,
including administering and enforcing the affordability controls and the
affirmative marketing plan of the Municipality in accordance with the
provisions of this article, the regulations of COAH pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:96 and 5:97 et seq., and the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
The Municipality shall, by resolution, appoint the Municipal Planning
Director as the Municipal Housing Liaison.
C. Subject to COAH approval, the Municipality may contract with one or
more administrative agents to administer some or all of the affordability
controls and/or the affirmative marketing plan in accordance with this
article, the regulations of COAH pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 et
seq., and the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq. If the
Municipality enters into such a contract, the Municipal Housing Liaison
shall supervise the contracting administrative agent(s) and shall serve
as liaison to the contracting administrative agent(s).
D. The Municipality intends to contract with an experienced affordable
housing administrator to be the administrator of the sale and rental of
all new affordable housing. The experienced affordable housing
administrator will also oversee and administer income qualification of
low- and moderate-income households, place income-eligible
households in low- and moderate-income units upon initial occupancy,
place income-eligible households in low- and moderate-income units as
they become available during the period of affordability controls and
§ 30-316 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-318
1:653
§ 30-319. Affirmative marketing plan.
enforce the terms of the required deed restrictions and mortgage loans.
The experienced affordable housing administrator will specifically
administer and implement:
(1) An administrative plan and program and related monitoring and
reporting requirements as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15 et seq.,
and Chapter 30 of the Municipal Code, titled Land Use and
Development Regulations.
(2) A plan for certifying and verifying the income of low- and moderateincome
households as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16.
(3) Procedures to assure that low- and moderate-income units are
initially sold or rented to eligible households and are thereafter
similarly resold and rerented during the period while there are
affordability controls as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
(4) The requirement that all newly constructed low- and moderateincome
sales or rental units contain deed restrictions with
appropriate mortgage liens as set forth in the appendices in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
(5) The several sales/purchase options authorized under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq., except that the Municipality retains the right to
determine, by resolution, whether or not to prohibit, as authorized
under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq., the exercise of the repayment
option.
(6) The regulations determining whether installed capital
improvements will authorize an increase in the maximum sales
price and which items of property may be included in the sales
price as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.9.
E. The developers/owners of any inclusionary site shall be responsible for
the experienced affordable housing administrator's administrative fee,
affirmative marketing and advertising and such shall be a condition of
Planning Board or Zoning Board approval. Subsequent to the initial sale
of an affordable sale unit, the seller of an affordable sale unit shall be
responsible for the experienced affordable housing administrator's
administrative fee, affirmative marketing and advertising, and such
shall be a condition of any affordable housing deed restriction
governing the affordable unit.
F. The Municipality reserves the right to replace the experienced
affordable housing administrator with another municipal authority or
other agency authorized by COAH or the Superior Court to carry out
the administrative processes outlined above.
§ 30-318 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-319
1:654
§ 30-320. Time period for controls.
A. The Municipality shall adopt by, resolution, an affirmative marketing
plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15,
as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region 6 and covers the period of deed
restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 6,
comprised of Salem, Atlantic, Cape May and Cumberland Counties.
D. The Administrative Agent designated by the Municipality shall assure
the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent with the
affirmative marketing plan for the Municipality.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
G. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Municipality.
A. Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units shall remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a period of at
least 30 years.
B. Newly constructed low- and moderate-income for-sale units shall
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a period
of at least 30 years.
C. Rehabilitated owner-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standard shall be subject to affordability controls for 10 years.
D. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least 10 years.
§ 30-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-320
1:655
§ 30-321. Selection of occupants of affordable units.
§ 30-322. Adaptable and accessible units per N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
E. Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential structure
shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be subject to
affordability controls for new housing units as designated in
Subsections A and B above.
F. Affordability controls on accessory apartments shall be for a period of
10 years.
G. Affordability controls for units in alternative living arrangements shall
be for a period of 30 years.
H. Affordability controls on market to affordable units shall be for a period
of at least 30 years.
A. The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to select
occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
B. A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in accordance
with the provisions contained in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
A. The first floor of all townhouse dwelling units and of all other multistory
dwelling units which are affordable to low- or moderate-income
households shall be subject to the technical design standards of the
Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7).
B. Each affordable townhouse unit or other affordable multistory dwelling
unit that is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
(1) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(2) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(3) An accessible route of travel: An interior accessible route of travel
shall not be required between stories;
(4) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or
the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
(5) Accessible entranceways:
(a) The developer shall provide an accessible entranceway as set
forth at N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14 for each affordable townhouse unit
or other affordable multistory dwelling unit that is attached to
at least one other dwelling unit; or
(b) The developer shall provide funds sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible as set forth
at N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
§ 30-320 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-322
1:656
(6) The developer of the project shall submit a conversion plan
indicating the steps necessary to convert the unit from being
adaptable to accessible. Said plan shall be submitted at the time of
issuance of a building permit.
(7) Where the developer will provide funds sufficient to make 10% of
the adaptable entrances in the development accessible, the
developer of the project shall submit the following to the
Municipality, at the time of issuance of the building permit, in order
to determine the required funds:
(a) Funds sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the
development accessible; and
(b) A cost estimate for conversion of 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development to accessible.
(8) In the case of an affordable unit or units which are constructed with
an adaptable entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who
is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an accessible
entrance shall be installed by the Municipality.
§ 30-322 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-322
1:657
Chapter 33
LICENSING AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverage licenses — See Ch. 5, Art.
II.
Licensing of professions and
occupations — See Ch. 35.
Taxi stands — See Ch. 39.
§ 30-322 MILLVILLE CODE § 30-322
1:658
ARTICLE I
General Licensing Provisions
§ 33-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 33-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
BUSINESS — A commercial enterprise involving the sale of goods or
services carried on for profit.
COMMERCE — An exchange of goods and services on a scale involving
transportation between cities, states and nations.
A. Purpose. This article is enacted pursuant to Title 40, Chapters 48 and
52, and Title 45, Chapters 17 and 24, of the New Jersey Statutes. The
purpose of this article is to license and regulate certain business
activities to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, morals
and welfare, and to ensure compliance with applicable state and local
laws. The primary purpose of the licensing fees is to derive revenue to
defray the municipal expenses incurred in connection with the
regulation of those businesses.
B. Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all business licenses
of the City, except where a section of the Municipal Code concerning a
particular business contains a specific provision to the contrary, in
which case the specific provision shall apply.
C. Cigarette vending machines. The annual fee established for cigarette
vending machines is for the primary purpose of defraying municipal
expenses incurred in identifying, monitoring and inspecting these
machines on a regular basis within the City to ensure that cigarettes
are not being sold to minors in violation of state and local law.
D. Property taxes and assessments. No license shall be issued to the owner
of any land or building seeking to operate any business or commercial
activity which requires the issuance of a license unless the applicantowner
has paid all delinquent property taxes and assessments on the
property where the business or activity is to be conducted.
Furthermore, the City Clerk may revoke or suspend any license when
the licensee, who is the owner of the property upon which the licensed
business or commercial activity is conducted, has failed to pay the
property taxes and assessments due on the property for at least three
consecutive quarters. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes and
assessments, the license shall be restored. This section shall not apply
to any alcoholic beverage license issued pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act.80
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-2
1:659
GOODS — Tangible and movable personal property other than money such
as articles of trade.
INTERSTATE COMMERCE — Trade and other business activities conducted
between those located in different states.
MERCHANDISE — Goods or commercial wares that are bought and sold in
business.
MERCHANT — A person whose business is buying and selling goods or
wares for a profit.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
PORTABLE STANDS — Transportable stands or vehicles used by a person
engaged in a temporary business.
ROADSIDE PRODUCE STANDS — Stands used to sell fruits, vegetables and
farm products.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS — The sale of goods or services at a specific
location within the City for no longer than 10 days at one time. Said
business may be conducted on private property or public property with the
written consent of the property owner. Examples of this type of business
include portable food or novelty concession stands or portable flower
stands.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — A person who is
engaged in a merchandising business with the intent to close out or
discontinue the business within one year from the date of commencement,
including those who hire, lease or occupy any building, structure or railroad
car for the exhibition and sale of goods and wares. An example of this type
of business includes a person leasing a store for three months during the
Christmas season to sell children's toys.
VENDOR — A seller of goods and wares.
§ 33-3. License required for certain businesses. [Amended 3-5-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or commercial
activity covered by this article without obtaining a license from the city.
The businesses and commercial activities covered by this article are as
follows and include the following licenses: business license, amusement
game license, display license, garage sale license, street vendor license,
taxicab license, temporary business license, and transient merchant license.
A. Amusements:
Amusement parks and amusement parlors
Arcades and video games
Automatic amusement and music devices
Billiard and pool halls or tables
§ 33-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-3
1:660
Bowling alleys
Canvas structures used for performance
Carnivals
Circuses
Exhibitions
Entertainment halls and centers
Golf driving ranges
Miniature golf
Motion-picture theaters
Outdoor theaters and open-air concerts
Professional athletic events
Rental cart tracks
Riding stables
Skating rinks
Shooting galleries
B. Food and beverage vendors:
Roadside produce stands
Street vendors
Temporary business
C. Merchants:
Auctions and auctioneers
Cigarette vending machines
Dealers in secondhand jewelry
Flea markets
Garage sales
Going out of business sales
Gold buyers and coin dealers
Junkyards
Street vendors
Temporary businesses
Transient merchants
D. Other businesses:
Adult bookstores
Burglar alarms
Cesspool cleaners
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:661
§ 33-4. Applications for licenses.
Dating service
Escort service
Flyer distribution service
Handbill distributors
Massage business
Scavengers
Street stands and newsracks
Taxicabs
Trailer court and mobile home park
Trash haulers
Tree trimmers and sprayers
A. Applications for all licenses required by this article shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk. No license shall be issued until all appropriate
fees have been paid, all information required in the application has
been supplied, the written consent of the property owner for the
location requested has been furnished, all required investigations and
inspections have been made, and it does not appear that any applicable
state law or City ordinance will be violated by the operation of the
business at the location requested. The City Clerk is authorized to issue
the license upon compliance with this article and applicable law.
B. Each application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the
license desired, the location of the business, the time covered, the fee to
be paid, and such additional information as may be required for the
proper guidance of the City Clerk in the issuance of the license. The
written consent of the property owner where the business is to be
located must be presented if the location is not owned by the applicant.
Forms for all licenses and the application therefor shall be prepared
and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. Each license issued shall
bear the signature of the City Clerk.
C. Upon the receipt of an application for a license which necessitates an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of the license, the City
Clerk shall refer such application to the proper City officials for making
the investigations within 48 hours of the date when the application was
filed. The municipal officials charged with the duty of making an
investigation or inspection shall make a written report, either favorable
or otherwise within 10 days after receiving a copy of the application.
Examples of the types of referrals include the following:
(1) Issues involving the background or character of the applicant,
including criminal record, shall be referred to the Chief of Police.
§ 33-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-4
1:662
§ 33-5. License fees.
(2) Issues involving traffic safety shall be referred to that section of the
Millville Police Department.
(3) Issues involving the location of the business and zoning shall be
referred to the Zoning Officer.
D. A nonrefundable processing fee in the amount of $10 covering the cost
of processing the application shall be paid by the applicant at the time
the application is filed.
E. Approval standards. The City Clerk shall approve all applicants for a
license who have paid all required fees, complied with these
regulations, and complied with the following standards which are
applicable to the location and type of license required.
(1) The applicant for a license shall have a background check
performed by an authorized agency and shall provide the results of
said background check to the City Clerk at the time of submission
of the application. Exemptions to background checks and
fingerprinting include the following: flower stands, produce stands,
auctions, flea markets, yard sales, display licenses and temporary
businesses. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 23-2018;
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 57-2018]
(2) BOCA Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 11, Article XI). The
Bureau of Permits and Inspections shall make all appropriate
inspections of the business premises to ensure compliance with the
code and file a report with the City Clerk.
(3) Land Use and Development Regulations (Chapter 30). The Zoning
Officer shall make an inspection of the business premises to ensure
compliance with the Development Regulations and file a report
with the City Clerk.
(4) State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official and
Subcode Officials shall make all appropriate inspections of the
business premises to ensure compliance with the code and file a
report with the City Clerk.
(5) State Uniform Fire Code. The Fire Subcode Official and/or Fire
Inspector shall make all appropriate inspections of the business
premises to ensure compliance with the code or the retrofit
regulations and file a report with the City Clerk.
A. License fees shall be as follows:
(1) Amplifiers, loud speakers or other noise-making devices
advertising a business, or the sale of a product or service: $25 per
day.
(2) Auctions and auctioneers: $100 per day.
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:663
§ 33-6. License period.
(3) Billiard tables and pool tables located in public places: $50 per year
for each table.
(4) Carnivals and circuses: $300 per day.
(5) Coin-operated amusement devices and music machines located in
public places: $50 per year for each machine.
(6) Display license for sponsoring organization of exhibition or
convention: $300 per day.
(7) Distributor of commercial circulars advertising a business or the
sale of a product or service: $25 per day per person.
(8) Professional athletic events for which a single admission is
charged: $300 per event.
(9) Roadside produce stands: $100 for each thirty-day period or
portion thereof. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
(10) Street vendor license: $25 per day per person or $400 per year.
[Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
(11) Temporary business license: $25 per day for each location.
[Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
(12) Transient merchant license: $1,000 for 180 consecutive days
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-3. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
(13) Theaters or halls used for commercial entertainment including, for
example, movie theaters, concert halls, and convention centers:
$400 per year.
(14) Vending machines used for cigarettes located in public places: $50
per year for each machine.
B. All other businesses and commercial activities specifically named in
§ 33-3 shall require an annual business license of $400 per year unless a
different license fee is provided for in Article V of this chapter.
A. A license for a roadside produce stand shall be issued for the time
period requested by the applicant, provided that the license shall be
issued for consecutive days only and shall begin on the date when the
license is issued. The license shall not extend in time beyond the written
consent of the property owner where the stand is to be located.
[Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
B. A license for a street vendor, including canvasser, solicitor, hawker,
huckster, or peddler, may be issued for a certain number of days or for
one year at the discretion of the applicant. [Amended 3-5-2002 by
Ord. No. 7-2002]
§ 33-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-6
1:664
§ 33-7. Exemptions and waivers.
§ 33-8. Regulations. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
C. A license for a temporary business shall not be issued for longer than 10
days at one time, and shall not extend beyond the written consent of the
property owner where the business is to be located.
D. A license for a transient merchant shall be issued for 180 consecutive
days commencing with the date when the license is issued. [Amended
3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
E. Annual licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
All annual license fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk on or
before January 10 of each year. Any annual license issued after July 1 of
any year shall be assessed at 1/2 of the annual license fee.
A. Public events sponsored solely by the City of Millville held for the
benefit of the Millville residents at large are exempt from the payment
of the license fees contained in this article. [Amended 2-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
B. Public events sponsored by a local nonprofit organization held for the
benefit of the Millville residents at large located on private property are
exempt from the payment of the license fees contained in this article if
approved by resolution of the governing body. Any permits that may be
required from the Construction Official or other public officials for the
erection of temporary structures and amusement rides are not waived.
[Amended 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
C. Bazaars and fairs sponsored by and for the benefit of a local nonprofit
organization held on private property owned by the nonprofit
organization which land qualifies as exempt from local property tax are
exempt from the payment of the license fees contained in this article if
approved by resolution of the governing body. Any permits that may be
required from the Construction Official or other public officials for the
erection of temporary structures and amusement rides are not waived.
[Amended 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
D. Roadside produce stands used to sell fruits, vegetables and farm
products located on the property where at least 50% of the produce and
products offered for sale were grown or raised are exempt from the
payment of the license fees contained in this article.81
A. Display of license. All licensees shall prominently display their license
or produce the license upon the request of a City official.
81.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding veterans and other persons named in
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, Subsection F, Display license in lieu of individual temporary business
licenses, Subsection G, Interstate commerce, and Subsection H, State licensing, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002.
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-8
1:665
§ 33-9. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
[Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
B. Inspection of licensed premises. No person shall refuse entry to any
City official attempting to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of
an inspection, if such entry is attempted during regular business hours
or during other reasonable hours when there are employees on the
premises. Entry shall be permitted to the areas open to the public and
to other areas utilized in connection with the business.
C. Licenses not transferable. No licensee shall transfer his or her license
to another person or allow another person to operate under the license,
except an employee of the licensee.
D. Obscene material. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in retail
business to display or permit the display of any obscene material at
their place of business at a height less than five feet or without a blinder
or other covering on the front of the material displayed. Any public
display of the obscene material shall be presumptive evidence that the
retailer knowingly made or permitted the display. Obscene materials
shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.
E. Tobacco. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco to another
person under the age of 18 years. Proof of age shall be required at the
time of sale. Cigarette vending machines shall be located inside a
building in an area which can be observed at all times by the business
owner or employees working on the premises to insure that tobacco is
not sold to minors. Furthermore, the cigarette vending machine shall
have a sign posted on it which clearly indicates that the sale of tobacco
products to persons under the age of 18 years is prohibited by law.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any of
the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude in the State of New Jersey or any other
state.
§ 33-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-9
1:666
§ 33-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
Any person convicted of violating any of these regulations shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
§ 33-11. State licenses. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
No person who holds a valid state license shall be required to obtain a
municipal license for the same commercial activity where the applicable
state licensing law has preempted the exercise of municipal police power.
However, the state licensee shall be required to register with the City Clerk
and provide a copy of the state license. Furthermore, the state licensee shall
comply with all municipal regulations applicable to the commercial activity
which have not been preempted by state law.
§ 33-12. Signs. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any City official by
filing a written request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
A. The governing body of the City finds and declares that the proliferation
of signs throughout the community undermines the aesthetic beauty
and environmental quality of the City. The governing body further finds
and declares that the proliferation of signs can adversely affect
property values and traffic safety. It is the purpose and intent of this
section to regulate the manner and to provide reasonable standards for
the placement of signs to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
B. No commercial sign shall be placed at a location, in a manner, and for a
time which violates the regulations and standards set forth in Chapter
30 of the Municipal Code titled "Land Use and Development
Regulations." An application for a permit must be filed with the Zoning
Officer in accordance with those regulations.
C. No commercial sign shall be placed on a residential property within a
residential zone unless the sign is related to a use permitted within the
residential zone pursuant to Chapter 30 of the Municipal Code titled
"Land Use and Development Regulations." Examples of commercial
signs permitted in a residential zone include real estate "For Sale"
signs, and casual sale signs like "Garage Sale."
D. No commercial sign or noncommercial sign shall be placed on benches,
bridges, culverts, curbs, fences, hydrants, lamps, rocks, sidewalks,
street signs, stumps, trees or utility poles. However, this subsection
shall not be interpreted to prevent the City from erecting banners on
§ 33-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-12
1:667
§ 33-13. Temporary business license. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
the metal light standards located within the central business district,
provided the City secures written permission from the owner.
[Amended 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 33-2003]
E. No commercial sign or noncommercial sign shall be placed on public
property within the City, including property owned or leased by the City
of Millville, County of Cumberland, State of New Jersey, or Millville
Board of Education, unless specifically authorized by the governmental
entity and the primary purpose of the sign is to further a legitimate
governmental interest and public interest. Examples of permitted signs
on public property include highway directional signs providing
motorists with information concerning the location of gasoline, food
and lodging. This section shall not apply to athletic fields where
commercial signs are used to provide funding for nonprofit
organizations.
F. Signs which are placed in violation of these regulations shall be
presumed to have been placed there by the person who can be
identified by the content of the sign, or when the sign is located on
private property, by the resident owner or the resident tenant of the
property. All persons shall be jointly and severally responsible.
A. A temporary business license shall not be issued for more than 10 days
at one time, but the days need not be consecutive days. The license fee
for a temporary business license is $25 per day for each location.
B. The portable stand or vehicle utilized in the operation of the temporary
business must be removed when the business is not in operation.
C. The hours for operation of a temporary business must be designated in
the license and they shall not begin before 8:00 a.m. or continue after
10:00 p.m.
D. The location selected for the operation of the temporary business must
be approved by the Zoning Officer and the type of business must be a
permitted use within the zoning district where the business is to be
located.
E. Display license in lieu of temporary business licenses. The sponsoring
organization of any group meeting, convention, display or exhibition
using publicly owned lands or buildings which invites persons to display
goods or services for advertising, display or public exhibition may
purchase a display license, which license shall entitle those persons
who would otherwise be temporary merchants and who operate as an
adjunct and concurrent with the aforesaid sponsoring organization to
engage in temporary business, provided that the following
requirements are met:
§ 33-12 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-13
1:668
§ 33-14. Transient merchant license. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
(1) The sponsoring organization shall pay a license fee of $300 per day
for the display license; and
(2) The sponsoring organization shall supply the name and permanent
address of each temporary merchant who will attend, together with
such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
F. The applicant for a temporary business license shall provide liability
insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 which covers for the license
term of the temporary business and the sale of goods and services. The
City of Millville shall be named as an additional insured under the policy
of insurance. Proof of said insurance shall be filed with the City Clerk
before licenses are issued. [Added 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 38-2018]
A. A transient merchant license shall be issued for 180 consecutive days
beginning with the date of issuance. The license fee for a transient
merchant license is $1,000 which must be paid to the City Clerk at the
time that the application is flied.
B. This license is issued pursuant to state law, specifically N.J.S.A. 45:24-1
through 45:24-8. The applicant for the license must comply with all of
the provisions contained in the state statute.
C. The hours for operation of this type of business must be designated in
the license and it shall not begin before 8:00 a.m. or continue after
10:00 p.m.
D. The location selected by the transient merchant for operation must be
approved by the Zoning Officer and the type of merchandising business
must be a permitted use within the zoning district where the
merchandising business is to be located.
§ 33-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-14
1:669

ARTICLE II
Amusement Games, Bingo and Raffles
§ 33-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure and standards
which must be followed in order to obtain a license for a legalized game of
chance from the City of Millville pursuant to the requirements imposed by
state law. This section does not apply to the state lottery.
§ 33-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
AMUSEMENT GAME — A game of skill, chance or a combination of both
wherein a player pays a fee for an opportunity to participate, and prizes or
tickets or tokens redeemable for prizes are awarded if the player attains a
particular score or result. Amusement games can be electronic, mechanical
or manual.
AMUSEMENT GAME LICENSE — A license issued by the governing body
of the City of Millville pursuant to the Amusement Games Licensing Law,
N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
BINGO LICENSE — A license issued by the governing body of the City of
Millville pursuant to the Bingo Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
RAFFLE LICENSE — A license issued by the governing body of the City of
Millville pursuant to the Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 33-17. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, operate or conduct a game of
chance within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
A. Amusement game license. The license required to operate an
amusement game shall be known as an amusement game license.
Amusement games can only be lawfully operated at recognized
amusement parks, seashore or like resorts, or at agricultural
exhibitions when the operator has obtained both a municipal and state
license. The municipal license shall be inoperative unless the licensee
has a valid state license or procures a state license within 90 days from
the issuance of the municipal license. The fee for the municipal license
shall be $55 for each amusement game allocating $50 to the state and
$5 to the municipality.
B. Bingo license. The license required to operate bingo shall be known as a
bingo license and may be issued only to bona fide organizations
§ 33-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-17
1:671
§ 33-18. Applications.
§ 33-19. Regulations.
authorized by state law. The fee for the municipal license shall be equal
in amount to the fee required to be paid to the state pursuant to state
law. No license issued shall be valid for more than one year.
C. Raffle license. The license required to operate a raffle shall be known as
a raffle license and may be issued only to bona fide organizations
authorized by state law. The fee for the municipal license shall be equal
in amount to the fee required to be paid to the state pursuant to state
law. No license issued shall be valid for more than one year.
A. The application for a license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk on forms prescribed by the state.
The application shall contain the information required by state law and
shall be duly executed and verified by the applicant.
B. The City Clerk shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each
applicant and the merits of each application before a license is issued.
[Amended 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017]
C. No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the City
Clerk until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant. At the
hearing, the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the
qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
[Amended 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017]
D. Each license issued shall be in the form prescribed by the state and
shall contain the information required by state law. The license shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance is to be
conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
A. Minors. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to
participate in any game of chance held, operated or conducted
pursuant to a license issued under this article.
B. Frequency of game. Bingo and raffles shall not be held, operated or
conducted more often than six days in any one calendar month.
C. No alcohol. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted in
any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are sold or served
during the progress of the game.
D. Persons operating and conducting games. No person shall hold, operate
or conduct a game of chance under any license issued pursuant to this
article except an active member of the qualified organization to which
the license is issued.
§ 33-17 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-19
1:672
§ 33-20. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
§ 33-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations, shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
E. Compliance with state law. Any person holding, operating or conducting
a game of chance shall comply with all state laws applicable to the
game of chance being conducted.
A. The City Clerk shall exercise control and supervision over all licensed
games of chance. It has the authority to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any licensee related to the conduct
of a game of chance. Any applicant for a license may be denied a
license, and any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the
governing body for any of the following causes: [Amended 2-7-2017
by Ord. No. 4-2017]
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with state law
applicable to the type of license being issued.
(4) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(5) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(6) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-21
1:673

ARTICLE III
Amusement Rides
[Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
§ 33-22. Compliance with state law.
No person shall maintain or operate an amusement or carnival ride within
the City without complying with the Carnival-Amusement Rides Safety Act,
N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq., and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
N.J.A.C. 5:14-1 et seq. Proof of liability insurance, as required by state law,
shall be provided to the City Clerk.
§ 33-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-22
1:675

ARTICLE IV
Arcades and Amusement Parlors
§ 33-23. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this article as herein provided.
§ 33-24. Powers and duties.
The Millville Police Department shall have those powers and duties which
are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations
including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 33-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
arcades and amusement parlors are operated within the City of Millville to
ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 33-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A game of skill wherein a player pays a fee for
an opportunity to participate and no money, prize or other thing of value is
awarded if the player attains a particular score or result.[Added 3-5-2002
by Ord. No. 7-2002]
AMUSEMENT GAME — A game of skill, chance or a combination of both
wherein a player pays a fee for an opportunity to participate, and prizes or
tickets or tokens redeemable for prizes are awarded if the player attains a
particular score or result. Amusement games can be electronic, mechanical
or manual.
AMUSEMENT PARLOR — A room in a building open to the public
containing various devices for entertainment such as coin- or tokenoperated
amusement devices, computer games, video games or music
devices.
A. To determine which persons within the City are operating an arcade or
amusement parlor.
B. To review the amusement device license required by this article.
C. To inspect the licensed premises during regular hours of operation to
ensure compliance with these regulations.
D. To investigate potential violations of these regulations and file a
complaint with the Municipal Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction against any person violating these regulations.
§ 33-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-26
1:677
ARCADE — A building or the entire floor of a building open to the public
containing various devices for entertainment such as coin- or tokenoperated
amusement devices, computer games, video games or music
devices.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 33-27. License required.
No person shall operate an arcade or amusement parlor within the City
unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
§ 33-28. Application.
The application for the license required by this section shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than January 10 of each year.
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 33-29. Regulations.
A. The license required shall be known as an amusement device license
and shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the required fee,
compliance with these regulations, and compliance with the approval
standards contained in Article I of this chapter.
B. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the premises at all
times, and is not transferable.
C. The fee for the amusement device license shall be $50 per year for each
machine or arcade game. The annual license shall run from January 1 to
December 31 of each year.
D. Any commercial establishment with more than four devices of the type
described herein must be licensed and regulated under this article.
A. The name and address of the person who owns the premises to be
licensed.
B. The location of the business.
C. The name and address of the person who will operate the business at
that location.
D. Background information of the applicant including whether the
applicant was ever convicted of a crime, the nature of the offense and
the date and place of conviction.
E. The number of machines to be placed on the premises.
A. Amusement games. Amusement games as defined herein are gambling
devices which are not licensed under this article. They are licensed
§ 33-26 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-29
1:678
§ 33-30. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
under Article II of this chapter and the State Amusement Games
Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
B. Criminal offense. No person who has been convicted of a criminal
offense shall be eligible to receive a license under this article. No
person so convicted shall be employed by a licensee.
C. Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an
arcade or amusement parlor at any time except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between the
hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sundays.
D. No obstruction of view. All such devices shall at all times be located in
plain view of any person inspecting or visiting the licensed premises.
During the hours of operation the licensed premises shall be open at all
times.
E. Responsibility. The licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of operation.
No loud or boisterous conduct shall be permitted on the premises.
F. Structural soundness. In the event a license is sought for premises not
located on the ground floor, the licensee shall provide the Construction
Official with a report from a licensed engineer which indicates the
structural soundness of the supporting floors.
G. When school is in session. No person under the age of 16 years shall be
permitted to remain on the premises on school days during the hours
when school is in session. A notice to that effect shall be prominently
posted on the premises at all times.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Director of
Public Safety for any of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
§ 33-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-30
1:679
§ 33-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-30 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-31
1:680
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)82
§ 33-32. through § 33-38. (Reserved)
82.Editor’s Note: Former Article V, Cumberland County Fairgrounds, as amended, was
repealed 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018.
§ 33-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-32
1:681

ARTICLE VI
Dealers in Precious Metals, Gems and Secondhand Goods
[Amended 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 39-2016]
§ 33-39. Purpose and intent; license required.
§ 33-40. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Words used in
the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number shall
include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Acceptable forms of identification
include a current valid New Jersey driver's license or identification card
issued by the N.J. Motor Vehicle Commission, a current valid photo driver's
license issued by another U.S. state, other verifiable United States
government-issued photo identification with address, or valid United States
passport and evidence of current address. All of the above-listed
identification procedures require the dealer to capture/record evidence of
the person's current address.
ARTICLE — Any article of merchandise, including any portion of such
article, whether a distinct part thereof or not, including every part thereof
whether separable or not, and also including material for manufacture, and
as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Millville or his
designee/representative.
DATABASE — A computerized Internet-capable database with hardware and
software compliant with standards set by the Chief of Police.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells, receives for pawn or otherwise exchanges or trades any
A. The purpose and intent of this article is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals,
gems, gemstones and/or other articles by requiring reasonable
reporting, maintenance and distribution criteria for secondhand and
transient dealers.
B. No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or
occupation of buying, receiving, receiving for pawn or selling of any
property described in Appendix I of this chapter or operate as a dealer
of said property within the City of Millville, without having first
obtained a license from the City of Millville Clerk's office as hereinafter
provided.83
83.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-40
1:683
property as described in Appendix I of this chapter and includes anyone
advertising the purchase, sale or receipt for pawn of any of the
aforementioned items.84
GIFT CARD — A restricted monetary equivalent or scrip that is issued by
retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a nonmonetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
City of Millville or at varying locations.
PAWN — A bailment of personal property as security for any debt or
engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of
sale or default.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, partnership, joint venture,
business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation, or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.
PRECIOUS METALS — Comprised of gold, silver, sterling, platinum and/or
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq. and/
or N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of jewelry
herein contained.
PUBLIC — Individuals and other retail sellers, not to include businesses
engaged primarily in wholesale transactions.
PURCHASE — The exchange of money or other consideration for the
pledge, sale, conveyance or trade of any property described in Appendix I
of this chapter.85
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which property described in Appendix I of this chapter is purchased,
pawned or exchanged from or with the public, as that term is defined in this
section.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, but limited to scrap gold,
old gold, silver, jewelry, platinum, all other precious metals and other items
listed in Appendix I.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer who has not been in any retail business
continuously for at least six months at that address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register. The term "transient buyer" will also
include a dealer who intends to close out or discontinue all retail business
in the City of Millville within six months, or as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5
and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1. Vendors doing business during a community event
sponsored/sanctioned by the City of Millville shall not be considered a
transient buyer.
84.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-40 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-41
1:684
§ 33-41. Registration and issuance of license.
Every dealer conducting business or intending to conduct business within
the jurisdiction of the City of Millville shall first register with the Clerk's
office. He or she shall provide fingerprints in a manner determined by the
Police Chief, who shall institute such an investigation of the applicant's
moral character and business responsibility as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public welfare. In the event that the dealer is a business
entity other than a sole proprietorship, the officers in a corporation or the
partners in a partnership (or limited partnership) shall be deemed to be the
applicant(s) who shall be fingerprinted and investigated in accordance with
this article. Upon completion of the investigation, the Clerk of the City of
Millville shall either issue or deny the license based upon the results of his
investigation. Upon issuance of the license, the applicant shall be given a
copy of this article.
§ 33-42. License fees; nontransferability.
§ 33-43. Revocation of license.
A. Prior to final issuance of a license, a fee of $400 shall be paid to the
Clerk of the City of Millville.
B. A license issued under the provisions of this article shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
said license is issued, unless it is renewed pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection C below.
C. On or about November 1 of each year, the Clerk's Office shall make
available a renewal application for each licensed dealer under this
article. Upon submission of the renewal application and required
annual fee of $400, the license will be renewed unless the dealer has
violated provisions of § 33-43. In such case, the Clerk of the City of
Millville will notify the dealer, who may request a hearing as described
in § 33-43.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the Board of Commissioners of the City of Millville after a hearing, upon
notice to the applicant, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business as a dealer in property as described in
Appendix I of this chapter;86
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Conviction of any crime;
86.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-43
1:685
§ 33-44. Dealers' responsibilities, requirements and recordkeeping.
Every dealer within the City of Millville shall, upon the purchase, receiving
for pawn, or receiving for consignment, of any property described in
Appendix I of this chapter87 from the public, as this term is defined in
§ 33-40, be required to:
(5) Conviction of any disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude;
(6) Conviction of an offense under the laws of the United States or any
other state which is substantially equivalent to the offenses named
in Subsection A(4) or (5) above; or
(7) Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least 10 business days prior to
the date set for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the
Board of Commissioners.
A. Record using a unique transaction number the name, address and
telephone number of the seller or sellers; the time and date of the
transaction; the net weight in terms of pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy)
or kilograms/grams of the precious metals; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq. and any property containing a
serial number.
B. Document, through use of an electronic database software system as
designated by the Chief of Police, the information listed in Subsection
C(1) through (6) below. These records shall be subject to the inspection
of any sworn police officer acting in the performance of his or her
duties.
C. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and using
the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transactions into the electronic database within 48 hours from the date
of purchase, including the following information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth, telephone number, and
governmental identification number of the seller.
(2) A full description of property sold or numbers of gift cards.
87.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-43 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-44
1:686
(3) The price paid for the property.
(4) The entry must include the name of the clerk or the dealer who
made the transaction so as to readily identify that individual.
(5) A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
governmental photo identification scanned into the transaction
record.
(6) A color photograph or color image of all property sold scanned into
the transaction record. When photographing or imaging, all
property must be positioned in a manner that makes it readily and
easily identifiable.
D. All of the above-described property cannot be sold or disposed of and
shall be made available for inspection by any sworn police officer in the
performance of his or her duties for a period of 15 business days from
the date the information required above is received by the Chief of
Police in the prescribed electronic format. The property shall remain in
the same condition as when purchased and shall not be changed,
modified, melted or disposed of by the dealer until the three-day period
has expired. If the property is such that it would create a hardship on
the dealer by holding the property for such period, the dealer may
present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation be implemented. The Chief of Police has the authority to
grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this section.
E. In the event of a database failure or dealer's computer equipment
malfunctions, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all required
transaction information described in Subsection C(1) through (6) above
into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's equipment being
repaired or replaced or the database coming back into service. Failure
by the dealer to properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable
fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace faulty computer equipment
may result in the dealer being cited for a violation of the article and may
result in the revocation of the dealer's license under § 33-43 of this
article.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Millville Police Department or any other sworn police
officer acting in the performance of his or her duties to examine any
database, book, ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to
the purchase of property from the public as defined in § 33-40. City of
Millville police officers are empowered to take possession of any
property known by a police officer or official to be missing or to have
been stolen or where the officer or official has probable cause to believe
§ 33-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-44
1:687
§ 33-45. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to purchases made by dealers from wholesalers
or other legitimate suppliers but shall only apply to those purchases made
from the public which includes other retail sellers as defined in § 33-9.88
The dealer shall keep records of all wholesale purchases for a period of six
months from the date of such purchase, which records shall be opened to
investigation by the Millville Police Department or any sworn police officer
in the performance of his or her duties.
§ 33-46. Purchases from minors.
No dealers within the City of Millville shall purchase any property as
defined in Appendix I from any person under the age of 18 years.89
§ 33-47. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a minimum fine of $100 or a maximum of $2,000 and/or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Each and every violation shall be
considered a separate violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be
a separate violation. Each violation shall result in a ten-day suspension of
the dealer's license under this article.
§ 33-48. through § 33-50. (Reserved)
the article is missing or stolen. A receipt will be provided to the dealer
for any property seized by the Millville Police Department.
88.Editor's Note: So in original.
89.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-44 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-48
1:688
ARTICLE VII
Garage Sales
§ 33-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in
which garage sales are conducted within the City of Millville to ensure the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Furthermore, this article
is designed to generally improve the overall clean appearance of the City
and to preserve aesthetics and property values.
§ 33-52. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CASUAL SALE — The sale of tangible personal property owned by any
resident of the property where the sale is located. It shall not include
personal property owned by others specifically brought on the premises for
sale or resale.
GARAGE SALE — All sales entitled attic sale, garage sale, lawn sale,
rummage sale or yard sale, and shall include any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
GOODS — Any goods, merchandise or tangible personal property capable
of being the object of a sale.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any charitable, cultural, educational and
eleemosynary organization which has qualified as a nonprofit organization
under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 33-53. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale within the City
unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
A. The license required shall be known as a garage sale license and shall
be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the required fee and
compliance with these regulations.
B. Only four such licenses shall be issued to any one person and for any
one location within the calendar year, and no such license shall be
issued for more than two consecutive calendar days at a time.
C. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the premises
where the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
licensed sale.
§ 33-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-53
1:689
§ 33-54. Application.
The application for a garage sale license shall be made in writing and
filed with the City Clerk. Each application shall contain the following
information:
§ 33-55. Exemptions and waivers.
§ 33-56. Regulations.
D. The fee for each license issued during the calendar year shall be $5.
A. The name and address of the person conducting the sale who shall be
the applicant for the license.
B. The location where the sale will be conducted.
C. The name and address of the property owner, resident owner, or
resident tenant where the sale will be conducted if different from the
applicant for the license.
D. The relationship, if any, between the applicant for the license and the
property owner, resident owner or resident tenant where the sale will
be conducted.
E. The number of days for the sale.
F. The dates of all past sales conducted during the calendar year by the
applicant, and at the location of the proposed sale.
A. Any person selling or advertising for sale five items of personal
property or less which are specifically described in the advertisement is
exempt from the licensing requirements of this article but not § 33-56.
B. A bona fide nonprofit organization and governmental institution is
exempt from the payment of the license fee, and from the restriction on
the number of garage sales it may conduct during the calendar year.
C. Senior citizens and persons totally and permanently disabled are
exempt from the payment of the license fee, but shall otherwise comply
with these regulations.
A. Hours. All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
B. Responsibility. The licensee and the resident owner or resident tenant
of the premises where the sale is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order on the
premises during the hours of the sale. No person shall allow loud or
boisterous conduct on the premises. No person shall permit motor
vehicles to impede the free flow of traffic on the street adjacent to the
location where the sale is conducted.
§ 33-53 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-56
1:690
§ 33-57. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
C. Signs. No sign shall be attached to or painted on benches, bridges,
curbs, fences, hydrants, lamps, rocks, sidewalks, street signs, trees, or
utility poles. No sign shall be placed on public property within the City
including property owned or leased by the City of Millville, County of
Cumberland or State of New Jersey. No sign shall be placed on private
property owned by another person without the owner's consent. Signs
which are legally placed on private property shall be removed
immediately after the sale is over. Signs which are posted in violation of
this article shall be presumed to have been put there by the licensee
and the resident owner or resident tenant of the premises where the
sale was conducted, and all such persons shall be jointly and severally
responsible.
§ 33-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-57
1:691

ARTICLE VIII
Going Out of Business Sales
§ 33-58. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
going out of business sales are conducted within the City of Millville to
ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Furthermore,
this article is designed to prevent consumer fraud, false advertising and
unscrupulous business practices.
§ 33-59. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE — All sales entitled bankruptcy sale,
closing sale, fire sale, going out of business sale, liquidation sale, or other
similar types of sales or the advertising of them.
GOODS — Any goods, merchandise or tangible personal property capable
of being the object of a sale.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 33-60. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a going out of business sale
within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
§ 33-61. Application.
The application for a license required by this article shall be made in writing
and filed with the City Clerk. No license shall be issued until the required
fees have been paid, and these regulations complied with.
A. The license required shall be known as a business license (going out of
business) and shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the
required fee and compliance with these regulations.
B. No such license shall be issued to any person at one location for a
period in excess of 90 days. No more than one such sale shall take place
within a three-hundred-sixty-day period. The three-hundred-sixty-day
period shall commence on the first day of such sale.
C. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the premises
where the sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
licensed sale.
D. The fee for the business license (going out of business) shall be $10.
§ 33-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-61
1:693
§ 33-62. Exemptions and waivers.
This article shall not apply to the following sales:
§ 33-63. Regulations.
§ 33-64. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
A. Each application shall contain the name and address of the business
where the sale will take place.
B. A written inventory of the goods located on the business premises to be
sold shall be provided to the City Clerk.
C. The license shall cover all the goods set forth in the written inventory,
and no other goods.
A. Any sale conducted pursuant to an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, or the order of a receiver or trustee appointed by a
Bankruptcy Court.
B. Any sale conducted by an administrator or executor of an estate for the
purpose of winding up the affairs of a decedent's estate.
A. Inventory. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell goods during the
licensed sale which were not contained in the written inventory filed
with the City Clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring upon the
licensed premises any goods for sale which were not contained in the
written inventory filed with the City Clerk.
B. Signs. Signs which are posted in violation of § 33-14G shall be
presumed to have been put there by the licensee and the person
conducting the sale, and all persons shall be jointly and severally
responsible.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any of
the following causes.
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
§ 33-61 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-64
1:694
§ 33-65. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-65
1:695

ARTICLE IX
Handbills and Commercial Circulars
§ 33-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in
which handbills and commercial circulars are distributed within the City of
Millville to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Furthermore, this article is designed to improve the overall clean
appearance of the City, to reduce litter, and to preserve aesthetics and
property values.
§ 33-67. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
COMMERCIAL CIRCULAR — An advertisement, notice, or statement
printed or written for general distribution in connection with a business or
commercial activity.
HANDBILL — An advertisement, notice, or statement printed or written for
general distribution in connection with a noncommercial activity or event.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 33-68. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to circulate handbills or commercial
circulars within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
§ 33-69. Application.
The application for the license shall be made in writing and filed with the
City Clerk. Each application shall contain the following information:
A. The license required shall be known as a handbill license and shall be
issued by the City Clerk after payment of the required fee and
compliance with these regulations.
B. The fee for each license shall be $10 per activity or event. Nonprofit
organizations shall be exempt from the payment of the fee.
C. This article shall not apply to legal notices.
A. The name and address of the business or organization conducting the
advertisement or event.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of the distribution of
handbills or commercial circulars.
§ 33-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-69
1:697
§ 33-70. Regulations.
C. A copy of the handbill or commercial circular shall be filed with the
application.
A. Public property. No person shall deposit, place, scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any public property within
the City including public grounds, parks, sidewalks or streets. This
subsection does not prohibit the distributing, handing or transmitting of
any handbill or commercial circular to any person willing to accept it.
B. Private property. No person shall deposit, place, scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any private property within
the City including buildings, homes, mailboxes, porches, steps and
yards. This subsection does not prohibit the distributing, handing or
transmitting of any handbill or commercial circular to the owner or
occupant of any private property, who is willing to accept it. It shall be
lawful for the owner or occupant of any private property to place a sign
in a conspicuous place near the entrance indicating that no handbills or
commercial circulars are desired. In that event, no person shall go upon
the premises so posted to distribute, hand or transmit any handbill or
commercial circular.
C. Motor vehicles. No person shall deposit, place, scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any automobile or other
motor vehicle. This subsection does not prohibit the distributing,
handing, or transmitting of any handbill or commercial circular to the
occupant of any motor vehicle who is willing to accept it.
D. Public safety. No person shall distribute, hand or transmit any handbill
or commercial circular in such a manner as to impede the free flow of
motor vehicle traffic on any street or pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk.
Furthermore, no person distributing any handbill or commercial
circular shall annoy or molest any person, group or gathering.
E. No posting allowed. No person shall affix or attach any handbill or
commercial circular on benches, bridges, culverts, curbs, fences,
hydrants, lamps, public buildings, rocks, sidewalks, street signs,
stumps, trees, and utility poles. Handbills and commercial circulars
may be affixed to private buildings with the prior consent of the owner.
They must be removed immediately after the activity or event is
completed.
F. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsections A and B do not apply to the
following activities when performed in the customary manner:
messenger service, the delivery of newspapers, the delivery of the
United States mail, and the delivery of telegrams.
§ 33-69 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-71
1:698
§ 33-71. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
§ 33-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-71
1:699

ARTICLE X
Junkyards
§ 33-72. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
junkyards are maintained or operated within the City of Millville to ensure
the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Furthermore, this
article is designed to enhance and preserve the scenic beauty of the City
and to preserve property values.
§ 33-73. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — Any establishment or place of business
which is maintained, operated or used for buying, selling, keeping or storing
dismantled, ruined, scraped or wrecked motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts.
JUNK — Old or scrap aluminum, batteries, brass, cardboard, copper, glass,
iron, paper, rags, rope, rubber, steel and ferrous or nonferrous material.
JUNKYARD — An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated or used for buying, selling, keeping or storing junk or for the
maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 33-74. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a junkyard within
the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to this article.
§ 33-75. Application.
The application for the license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than January 10 of each year.
The application shall contain the following information:
A. The license required shall be known as a business license and shall be
issued by the City Clerk after payment of the required fee, compliance
with these regulations, and compliance with the approval standards
contained in Article I of this chapter.
B. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the premises at all
times, and is not transferable.
C. The fee for the business license shall be $400 per year. The annual
license shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
§ 33-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-75
1:701
§ 33-76. Regulations.
§ 33-77. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
A. The name and address of the person who owns the premises.
B. The name and address of the person maintaining, operating or using
the premises as a junkyard.
C. The location and dimensions of the premises being used as a junkyard.
The license issued shall be restricted to the dimensions of the premises
being used as a junkyard.
A. Fencing. The portion of the premises being utilized as a junkyard shall
be completely surrounded by a conventional opaque fencing material
not less than six feet in height of a quality that is compatible with the
zoning district where the property is located. The required fencing may
be located on the property line except that fencing along the street
frontage shall be set back 100 feet from the street right-of-way.
B. Fire and health hazard prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stack, pile or place motor vehicle parts or junk upon the premises in
such a manner as to create a place for the harboring or breeding of
mice, rats, or vermin.
C. Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
junkyard except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on
weekdays and Saturdays.
D. Maintenance required. No person shall accumulate debris, trash or
waste on the premises including rusted motor vehicle parts which have
no value.
E. Removal of gasoline and oil. Gasoline and oil from any motor vehicle
shall be removed within 24 hours, securely stored, and disposed of in an
environmentally safe manner.
F. Removal of rain water. No car or part of car shall be kept or stacked in
such a manner that rain water collects and remains in any of the parts
for more than 48 hours.
G. Signs. Signs which are posted in violation of § 33-14G shall be
presumed to have been put there by the licensee and the person who
owns the premises, and all persons shall be jointly and severally
responsible.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any of
the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
§ 33-75 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-77
1:702
§ 33-78. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations, shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $200 for each offense. The
maximum penalties are set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
III.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-78
1:703

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)90
§ 33-79. (Reserved)
§ 33-80. (Reserved)
§ 33-81. (Reserved)
§ 33-82. (Reserved)
§ 33-83. (Reserved)
§ 33-84. (Reserved)
§ 33-85. (Reserved)
90.Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Mobile Home Parks and Trailer Courts, which consisted of
§§ 33-79 through 33-85, was repealed 10-3-2006 by Ord. No. 32-2006. See now Ch. 65,
Taxation, Art. III, Manufactured Homes.
§ 33-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-85
1:705

ARTICLE XII
Newsracks and Street Stands
§ 33-86. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in
which newsracks and street stands are located within the City of Millville
to ensure the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the sidewalks,
streets and public places within the City and to preserve the aesthetics of
the community.
§ 33-87. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
NEWSRACK — A stand at which newspapers are displayed and offered for
sale.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust, or other legal entity.
STREET STAND — A stand at which periodicals are displayed and offered
for sale.
§ 33-88. Permit required.
No person shall display, exhibit, offer for sale, or sell any newspaper or
periodical on any street, sidewalk or public place within the City except
from a newspaper rack or street stand constructed and installed in
accordance with the provisions of this article and without first obtaining a
permit from the City Clerk.
§ 33-89. Application.
The application for the permit required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the
following information:
A. The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the
required fee and compliance with these regulations.
B. The annual fee for each newspaper rack or street stand shall be $15.
A. The name and address of the person who owns the newsrack or street
stand.
B. An exact location where the newsrack or street stand is to be located
including a diagram with relevant measurements from curbs for
intersecting streets and other objects which currently exist at the
location selected.
§ 33-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-90
1:707
§ 33-90. Regulations.
§ 33-91. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
A. Newspaper racks or street stands shall be fabricated completely of
metal but for a display window and coin mechanism, and shall contain
no advertising other than the name of the newspaper or periodical and
its publisher or other materials indicating the content of the newspaper
or periodical offered therein.
B. The measurements of the newspaper rack or street stand shall not
exceed 50 inches in height, 25 inches in width, and 20 inches in depth.
The base of the newspaper rack or street stand shall not exceed 20
inches by 25 inches.
C. No permit shall be issued for any location which would unreasonably
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, parking stalls, or cause
congestion upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place within the
City.
D. No newsrack or street stand shall be located in the following areas:
(1) Within five feet of any driveway.
(2) At a location where the clear space for pedestrian travel is reduced
to less than six feet.
(3) At a location where the newsrack or street stand would
unreasonably interfere with the display window of any building
abutting the sidewalk.
(4) At a location where the newsrack or street stand would
unreasonably interfere with the aesthetics of any landscaped area
or any streetscape.
E. No newsrack or street stand shall be attached, chained or tied to any
bench, fence, hydrant, lamppost, street sign, tree or utility pole.
F. The newsrack or street stand may be located on a sidewalk area not less
than 12 inches nor more than 20 inches from the curbline, and not less
than 25 feet from the nearest curbline of any intersecting street.
G. As an alternative location, newsracks or street stands may be located
on the sidewalk abutting the nearest building.
A. Any applicant for a permit may be denied a permit by the City Clerk or
any permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any of
the following causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
§ 33-90 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-91
1:708
§ 33-92. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations, shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $200 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.
(3) The applicant or permittee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
B. The applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days of the date when the request is filed with
the City Clerk.
§ 33-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-92
1:709

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)91
§ 33-93. through § 33-101. (Reserved)
91.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XIII, Pawnbrokers, was repealed 9-20-2016 by Ord. No.
39-2016. See now Art. VI, Dealers in Precious Metals, Gems and Secondhand Goods.
§ 33-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-93
1:711

ARTICLE XIV
Police Emergency Alarm Equipment
§ 33-102. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this article as herein provided.
§ 33-103. Powers and duties.
The Millville Police Department shall have those powers and duties which
are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations
including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 33-104. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
automatic protection devices are installed, maintained and operated within
the City of Millville to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 33-105. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person who sells, leases or installs
automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and who
have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency
message over a direct or primary trunkline to the communications center of
the Millville Police Department.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren, which is attached to
the interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible
A. To record and print out all alarms received each month during the
calendar year.
B. To identify which alarms are false alarms, where they originated, and
the date and time each false alarm occurred.
C. To serve a written notice of violation on the user of an automatic
protection device after the Millville Police Department has received
four false alarms for that user during the calendar year.
D. To investigate potential violations of these regulations and file a
complaint with the Municipal Court against any person violating these
regulations.
§ 33-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-105
1:713
outside the building, and is designed to attract attention when activated by
a criminal act or other emergency requiring police to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits an alarm or prerecorded voice message upon receipt of a stimulus
from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or condition
inherently characteristic of an intrusion.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system operated
privately for customers by a person who maintains supervisors, trained
operators and guards in attendance at a central station at all times to accept
recorded messages or signals from automatic protection devices and who
has the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a recorded message
or signal including the relaying of messages by a direct or primary trunkline
to the communications center of the Millville Police Department.
DESIGNATED TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Millville Police Department that is for the
primary purpose of handling emergency signals which originate from
automatic protection devices which are transmitted directly from the
device.
DIRECT TRUNKLINE — An unlisted telephone line leading to the
communications center of the Millville Police Department that is for the
primary purpose of handling emergency messages.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device, an
audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given the police
communications center to which police respond, which is not the result of a
burglary, robbery or similar emergency.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment to transmit an alarm,
message or signal from an automatic protection device to a particular
location.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police communications room
and other rooms which house auxiliary communications equipment.
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Millville Police Department that is for the purpose of handling
administrative and other calls on a person-to-person basis and which line
is identified by a specific listing among the white pages in the telephone
directory issued by Bell Atlantic.
RESPONDER — The person authorized to respond other than the listed
owner of the premises who can assist police with securing the premises if
necessary.
§ 33-105 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-105
1:714
SILENT ALARM — Any device designed to transmit a signal to a designated
trunkline or authorized intermediary when activated by a criminal act or
other emergency.
§ 33-106. Permits required.
No person shall install or use an automatic protection device within the
City which is directly or indirectly keyed to a designated, direct or primary
trunkline without obtaining the required permit from the City Clerk.
§ 33-107. Application.
The application for the connection permit and the user permit shall be made
in writing and filed with the City Clerk as hereinafter provided:
A. No person who installs an automatic protection device within the City
for a home or business shall directly key said device to a designated
trunkline without obtaining a connection permit from the City Clerk.
The fee for the connection permit shall be $50 and shall be paid once at
the time of connection.
B. No person shall use an automatic protection device within the City
without obtaining an annual user permit from the City Clerk. The fee for
the annual user permit is $20 which shall be paid to the City Clerk when
the application is filed. The annual permit expires on December 31 of
each year.
C. Senior citizens and persons totally and permanently disabled are
exempt from the payment of the user fee, but shall otherwise comply
with these regulations.
A. The application for the connection permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk prior to the date when the automatic protection device is directly
keyed to a designated trunkline. The application shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the device;
(2) The address where the device is installed;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
installed the equipment; and
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment.
B. The application for the initial user permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk when the automatic protection device is installed. The application
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the device;
§ 33-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-107
1:715
§ 33-108. Regulations.
(2) The address where the device is installed;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
installed the equipment;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment; and
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the responder.
C. The application for the annual user permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk each year not later than January 31. The application shall contain
the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of
the automatic protection device;
(2) The address where the device is installed;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
repair the equipment; and
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the responder.
A. Alarm prohibited. Owners or lessees must equip audible alarms with a
timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after a
maximum period of 15 minutes. The Chief of Police, or his designee, has
the authority to disconnect alarms not in compliance with this
subsection.
B. Direct keying. All automatic protection devices that transmit alarms
directly to the Millville Police Department shall be keyed to a
designated or direct trunkline. No automatic protection device shall be
keyed to a primary or secondary trunkline. No person shall install an
automatic protection device and key it to a designated trunkline except
an alarm equipment supplier who has a valid connection permit from
the City.
C. Indirect keying. Any person who has an automatic protection device
within the City may arrange to have the device keyed to an
intermediary authorized to relay emergency messages to the Millville
Police Department. The relay of messages by an authorized
intermediary shall be over a direct or primary trunkline. Automatic
protection devices keyed to an authorized intermediary may also be
keyed to another telephone which the owner or lessee of the equipment
has available to him at another location.
D. Current list of installations required.
(1) Every alarm equipment supplier who has installed an automatic
protection device within the City shall furnish a monthly report to
§ 33-107 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-108
1:716
the Chief of Police and to the City Clerk by the fifth working day
of each month containing a list of all installations made during
the preceding month. The report shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or
lessee.
(b) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protection system or any other person who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where
the device is installed.
(d) The name, address and telephone number of any person, if any,
other than the alarm equipment supplier who is responsible for
the maintenance and repair of the automatic protection device.
(2) The monthly report shall also contain any corrections or deletions
which should be made to a prior month's report including any
disconnections.
(3) All information supplied to the City pursuant to this subsection
shall remain confidential.
E. Operational requirements. Automatic protection devices installed
within the City that are keyed to designated or direct trunklines shall
meet the following standards:
(1) The type and content of recorded messages keyed to a direct
trunkline must be intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief
of Police as appropriate for the type of emergency prior to
installation.
(2) No more than one call shall be made over a designated or direct
trunkline to the Millville Police Department as a result of a single
activation of the automatic protection device.
(3) The time for transmitting each recorded message or alarm shall not
exceed 15 seconds.
(4) Recorded messages and alarms may be repeated during one call
but the interval between each recorded message or alarm shall be
no less than eight seconds and no more than 12 seconds.
(5) The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of
intrusion so that the device will not be activated by impulse due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vibrations to the premises
§ 33-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-108
1:717
§ 33-109. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; appeals.
caused by the passing of vehicles or any other force not related to
genuine alarms.
(6) All components comprising such a device must be maintained by
the owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum reliability of
operation.
F. Technical information. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells, leases
or installs an automatic protection device within the City shall furnish
operating instructions, a circuit diagram and maintenance manual to
the buyer or lessee.
G. Repair service. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells, leases or
installs an automatic protection device within the City shall provide
repair service as follows:
(1) If the supplier provides repair service itself, it shall make that
service available to a user on a twenty-four-hour per day basis for
seven days per week.
(2) If the supplier does not provide repair service itself, it shall furnish
to the user at the time that the equipment is installed written
information as to how service may be obtained at any time
including the telephone number for a person responsible for
servicing the equipment.
(3) The buyer or lessee and the service provider shall be responsible
for having a malfunctioning device disconnected or repaired as
quickly as possible after notice is received that the equipment is
not functioning properly.
H. Disconnection. When messages or alarms are received by the Millville
Police Department which evidence a failure to comply with the
operational standards contained herein, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the
equipment disconnect the device until repaired. If disconnection of the
defective device is not accomplished promptly, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, is authorized to take the steps necessary to disconnect the
defective automatic protection device until it can be repaired.
I. Testing. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an
automatic protection device which is keyed to a designated or direct
trunkline without first obtaining permission from the Millville Police
Department. Where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary no
permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to
the Millville Police Department.
A. Any applicant for a permit may be denied a permit by the City Clerk or
any permit issued may be suspended or revoked by the Director of
Public Safety for any of the following causes:
§ 33-108 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-109
1:718
§ 33-110. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
51-2018]
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the following penalties. Each day that a violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate offense.
(1) If the applicant or permit holder has had more than four false
alarms in a calendar year.
(2) If the applicant or permit holder has been convicted of an offense
under these regulations.
B. Any owner or lessee of an automatic protection device who has had the
equipment disconnected in order to relieve the Millville Police
Department of the burden of responding to false alarms may be
charged a fee of $50 for reconnection to the designated trunkline.
C. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the City
Clerk or Director of Public Safety by filing a request for a hearing
before the Board of Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days
of receiving the notice of denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
The hearing shall be held within 20 days of the date that the request is
filed with the City Clerk.
A. For a first offense a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $50.
B. For a second offense a minimum fine of $50 and a maximum fine of
$100.
C. For a third and subsequent offense a minimum fine of $100 and a
maximum fine of $500, together with a one-year disconnection of the
alarm device.
D. The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm devices on
property owned by public entities or agencies, or state, local, county or
federal governments.
§ 33-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-110
1:719

ARTICLE XV
Pool Halls and Billiard Parlors
§ 33-111. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this article as herein provided.
§ 33-112. Powers and duties.
The Millville Police Department shall have those powers and duties which
are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations
including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 33-113. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in which
pool halls and billiard parlors are operated within the City of Millville to
ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 33-114. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BILLIARD PARLOR — A room in a building open to the public containing
billiard tables, pool tables, bagatelle tables or pigeonholed tables.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
POOL HALL — A building or the entire floor of a building open to the public
containing billiard tables, pool tables, bagatelle tables or pigeonholed
tables.
§ 33-115. License required.
No person shall operate a pool hall or billiard parlor within the City unless
licensed to do so pursuant to this article. The number of licensed premises
shall be limited to two.
A. To determine which persons within the City are operating pool halls or
billiard parlors.
B. To review the amusement device license required by this article.
C. To inspect the licensed premises during regular hours of operation to
ensure compliance with these regulations.
D. To investigate potential violations of these regulations and file a
complaint with the Municipal Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction against any person violating these regulations.
§ 33-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-115
1:721
§ 33-116. Application.
The application for the license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than January 10 of each year.
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 33-117. Regulations.
A. The license required shall be known as an amusement device license
and shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the required fee,
compliance with these regulations, and compliance with the approval
standards contained in Article I of this chapter.
B. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the premises at all
times, and is not transferable.
C. The fee for the amusement device license shall be $50 per year for each
table. The annual license shall run from January 1 to December 31 of
each year.
D. Any commercial establishment with more than four tables of the type
described herein must be licensed and regulated under this article.
A. The name and address of the person who owns the premises to be
licensed.
B. The location of the business.
C. The name and address of the person who will operate the business at
that location.
D. Background information of the applicant including whether the
applicant was ever convicted of a crime, the nature of the offense and
the date and place of conviction.
E. The number of tables to be placed on the premises.
A. Criminal offense. No person who has been convicted of a criminal
offense shall be eligible to receive a license under this article. No
person so convicted shall be employed by a licensee.
B. Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool
hall or billiard parlor at any time except between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays.
C. Minors. Minors under the age of 18 years shall not play in a pool hall or
billiard parlor. They shall not frequent, loiter or remain on the premises
unless it be upon some lawful errand sent under the direction of a
parent, guardian or other person having lawful custody of the minor.
They shall immediately leave the premises when the errand is
completed.
§ 33-115 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-117
1:722
§ 33-118. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
§ 33-119. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
D. No obstruction of view. All such tables shall at all times be located in
plain view of any person inspecting or visiting the licensed premises.
During the hours of operation the licensed premises shall be open at all
times.
E. Responsibility. The licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of operation.
No loud or boisterous conduct shall be permitted on the premises. No
minor shall be permitted to remain on the premises in violation of these
regulations.
F. Structural soundness. In the event a license is sought for premises not
located on the ground floor, the licensee shall provide the construction
official with a report from a licensed engineer which indicates the
structural soundness of the supporting floors.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Director of
Public Safety for any of the following causes.
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-119
1:723

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)92
§ 33-120. through § 33-130. (Reserved)
92.Editor's Note: Former Art. XVI, Taxicabs, Limousines and Jitneys, as amended, was
repealed 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 9-2016. See now Art. XX, Taxicabs.
§ 33-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-120
1:725

ARTICLE XVII
Street Vendors
[Added 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
§ 33-131. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which street vending
is conducted within the City and to provide standards for street vendors to
insure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare and to
protect against consumer fraud and crime.
§ 33-132. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any person who travels about from house
to house or store to store without appointment taking orders for future
delivery of goods or services. The orders are not taken from a fixed location.
Solicitation by telephone is not considered canvassing or soliciting within
the context of this article.
HAWKER — Any person who moves about in the street or public places
selling goods or wares by means of public outcry. The sales are not made
from a fixed location and delivery of the goods or wares is made at the time
of the sale.
HUCKSTER or PEDDLER — Any person who travels about from house to
house or from store to store without appointment selling goods or wares.
The sales are not made from a fixed location and delivery of the goods is
made at the time of sale.
OUTSIDE SALESPERSON — Any person who travels about taking orders
for future delivery of goods or services by calling on established customers
and selected new customers by appointment at their place of business.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
STREET VENDING — The selling of beverages, foods, merchandise, goods
or wares by walking or driving about the City. It does not include selling
from a fixed or permanent location.
STREET VENDOR — A street vendor includes a canvasser, solicitor, hawker,
huckster and peddler.
VEHICULAR FOOD or BEVERAGE VENDOR — Any person traveling
through the streets of the City in a motor vehicle stopping to sell food
or beverages at retail to customers coming up to the vehicle is a "street
vendor." An example of this is an ice cream truck. This does not include
vehicles making deliveries to private residences or other locations.
§ 33-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-133
1:727
§ 33-133. License required.
No person shall engage in street vending within the City unless licensed
to do so pursuant to this article. The license required shall be known as a
"street vendor license" and shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment
of the required fee and compliance with these regulations. The fee for the
license shall be $25 per day for each licensee or $400 per year.
§ 33-134. Application.
The application for the license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk on a form provided by his office. The
application shall contain the following information:
§ 33-135. Exemptions and waivers.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant.
C. The name and address of the employer of the applicant.
D. A brief description of the merchandise or products to be sold.
E. The length of time for which the license is desired.
F. The geographical area of the City where the applicant intends to
operate.
G. If a motor vehicle is to be used, provide a description of the motor
vehicle and the tag number.
A. Interstate commerce. A canvasser or solicitor for the sale of goods or
services who is engaged in interstate commerce shall not be required to
obtain a street vendor license. However, said person shall be required
to register with the City Clerk before conducting any canvassing or
soliciting within the City. An application for a registration certificate
shall be filed which contains the following information: the name and
address of the applicant, name and address of the applicant's employer
and the nature of the business. No registration certificate shall be
issued for 48 hours after the application is filed so that the Chief of
Police or his designee has sufficient time to conduct a background
investigation on the applicant to determine whether the applicant has
been convicted of a criminal offense involving moral turpitude or any
other offense involving consumer fraud.
B. Outside salespersons are exempt from the licensing fee and the
regulations contained in this article.
C. Veterans and other persons named in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 are exempt from
the licensing fee and licensing requirements applicable to street
vendors, but they are subject to the regulations affecting them.
However, if veterans or other persons named in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 engage
§ 33-133 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-135
1:728
§ 33-136. Regulations.
§ 33-137. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
in any other activity which is required to be licensed by any other
article of this chapter, they are subject to the applicable licensing fees,
licensing requirements and regulations.
A. Fixed location. No street vendor shall sell goods or wares from a fixed
stand or fixed location within the City without obtaining a temporary
business license and complying with the applicable regulations.
B. Private residence. No street vendor shall go on private residential
property to sell goods or wares without the prior invitation or consent
of the resident property owner or resident tenant.
C. Public sidewalks. No street vendor shall set up a stand or similar facility
on the public sidewalks to sell goods or wares to pedestrians standing
or walking by.
D. Public streets. No street vendor shall park his vehicle on a public street
and use it as a business stand to sell goods or wares to occupants of
other vehicles or persons moving or standing on the sidewalks or
streets.
E. Silly String. No street vendor shall sell Silly String at public events held
within the City which are conducted on the sidewalks, streets and
public lands owned or under the control of the City.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the mayor for any of
the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The hearing
§ 33-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-137
1:729
§ 33-138. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any of these regulations shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 33-137 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-138
1:730
ARTICLE XVIII
Massage Business
[Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 21-2003]
§ 33-139. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this article as herein provided.
§ 33-140. Powers and duties.
The Millville Police Department shall have those powers and duties which
are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations,
including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 33-141. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and to regulate the
manner in which a massage business shall be operated within the City of
Millville to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Furthermore, this article is designed to deter and detect the practice of
prostitution. These regulations shall not apply to the following activities:
A. To determine which persons within the City are operating a massage
business.
B. To require proof of a background investigation from an authorized
agency be provided at time of making application for a massage
business license. [Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
C. To require proof of fingerprinting from an authorized agency be
provided at time of making application for a massage business license.
[Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
D. To inspect the premises and business records of the owner and operator
which are required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations. The
Chief of Police, or his designee, may at any time, and shall at least once
each year, investigate the business of the licensee and inspect the
books, papers and records of the licensee wherever located.
E. The Chief of Police, or his designee, is authorized to enter the business
of the licensee at reasonable times for the purpose of making
inspections and performing duties under these regulations. If entry is
refused, or not obtained, the Chief of Police, or his designee, may obtain
an order from the Municipal Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing entry.
A. Hospitals.
B. Medical clinics.
C. Nursing homes.
§ 33-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-141
1:731
§ 33-142. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
EMPLOYEE — Any person over 18 years of age, other than a masseur, who
renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business
and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial parts of the patron
for medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or any
instrument or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths of any kind
whatsoever.
MASSEUR — Any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein
defined. The use of the masculine gender shall include in all cases the
feminine gender as well.
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give any other consideration therefor.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or institution of learning which has
for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of
massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than
70 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate
of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such
course of study or learning.
§ 33-143. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a massage business or
act as a masseur within the City unless licensed pursuant to this article.
Additionally, all such persons shall have successfully completed the
required training in a recognized school.
D. The professional offices of chiropractors, osteopaths, physicians,
surgeons or other medical providers licensed by the State of New
Jersey.
E. Sanitariums.
A. The license required shall be known as a “massage business license”
and shall be issued by the City Clerk after the payment of the required
application fee and compliance with these regulations. A copy of the
license issued shall be filed by the City Clerk with the Chief of Police.
[Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
B. The annual application fee shall be $10 and shall be payable at the time
the application is filed with the City Clerk. The annual license fee shall
§ 33-141 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-143
1:732
§ 33-144. Application.
The application for the license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk on a form provided by his office. The
application shall contain the following information.
be $100 and payable at the time the license is issued. [Amended
3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014; 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
C. Annual licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
All applications for an annual license or renewal shall be filed with the
City Clerk on or before January 10 of each year. All licenses expire on
December 31 of each year.
D. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the business
premises at all times.
E. No licensee shall allow the use of his, her or its name by any person
directly or indirectly for the purpose of engaging in a massage business
in any location other than the licensed premises.
F. A license may be issued without a separate license fee for a masseur
who is employed by a licensee and performs his services exclusively for
the licensee at the licensed premises, provided all other regulations
have been satisfied.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant.
C. The place of residence of the applicant for the last two years.
D. Information as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime and where the conviction took place.
E. The names and addresses of two character references.
F. The location of the business.
G. If the applicant is a partnership, the personal information required shall
be furnished for each general partner. If the applicant is a corporation,
the personal information required shall be furnished for each officer
and each shareholder with at least a twenty-percent interest in the
corporation.
H. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted by an agency authorized to
perform fingerprinting and the prints shall be submitted to federal and
state authorities for comparison and criminal record investigation. In
the case of partnerships and corporations, those persons who are
required to provide information for the application shall submit
fingerprinting. [Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
§ 33-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-144
1:733
§ 33-145. Regulations.
I. Diploma, certificate or other written proof of graduation from a
recognized school by the person who shall be directly responsible for
the operation and management of the massage business.
A. Every person who operates a massage business shall, at all times, keep
an appointment book in which the name of each and every patron shall
be entered, together with the date, time, place of service and the
service provided. The appointment book shall be made available at all
times for inspection by the Chief of Police or his authorized
representative.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in the location available to all prospective customers.
C. The premises to be licensed shall be inspected by the Construction
Official and the subcode officials for the safety of the structure and the
adequacy of illumination, heating, plumbing and ventilation.
Inspections shall be conducted periodically to ensure continued
compliance.
D. The premises to be licensed shall be inspected by the Zoning Officer to
ensure compliance with the Land Use and Development Regulations.93
E. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable and mold-resistant
paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
F. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dirt, dust or refuse.
G. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
H. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall
be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be
used for more than one patron. Heavy white paper may be substituted
for sheets, provided such paper is changed for every patron.
I. Creams, lotions, oils or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean and closed containers or cabinets.
J. Eating in the massage work area shall not be permitted.
K. All employees, including the masseurs, shall be clean and wear clean
and nontransparent outer garments.
L. All masseurs shall wash their hands in hot running water, using the
proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to a patron.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 33-144 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-145
1:734
§ 33-146. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
M. No massage practice or service shall be carried on within any booth,
cubicle, room or any area within a massage establishment which is
fitted with a door capable of being locked.
N. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by cloths, towels
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or masseur.
O. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
knowingly place his or her hand upon or to touch with any part of his or
her body, or to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital
area of any other person.
P. No masseur, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to
perform any act which would require the touching of the patrons sexual
or genital areas.
Q. The licensee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open
for business.
R. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person who
qualifies as a masseur on the licensed premises at all times when the
services are listed as being offered and as set forth in the application
for the license.
S. The licensee shall personally supervise the business and shall not
violate, or permit others to violate, any of the regulations contained
herein.
T. The violation of any of these regulations by an agent or employee of the
licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee.
U. No persons shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come
or remain on the premises of any massage business as a masseur,
employee or patron.
A. Any applicant for a license may be denied a license by the City Clerk, or
any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Director of
Public Safety for any of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with these
regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations,
(4) The applicant or licensee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
§ 33-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-146
1:735
§ 33-147. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $200 for each offense. The
maximum penalties are set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
III.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey or any other state.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The
hearing shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the
City Clerk.
§ 33-146 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-147
1:736
ARTICLE XIX
Sexually Oriented Business
[Adopted 3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005]
§ 33-148. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this article as herein set forth.
§ 33-149. Powers and duties.
The Millville Police Department shall have those powers and duties which
are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations,
including but not limited to the following enumerated powers and duties:
§ 33-150. Preemption.
A. To determine which persons, if any, within the City are operating a
sexually oriented business.
B. To conduct criminal background investigations of applicants for a
license, including owners, operators and employees of the business.
C. To fingerprint applicants for a license, including owners and employees
of the business.
D. To inspect the premises and business records of the owner and operator
which are required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations or
state law. The Chief of Police or his designee may, at reasonable times,
and shall, at least once a year, inspect the premises of the licensee and
inspect the books, papers and records of the licensee wherever located.
E. The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to enter the business of
the licensee at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections
and performing duties under these regulations. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Chief of Police or his designee may obtain an order
authorizing entry from the Municipal Court or any other court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7 sets standards and requirements for buffer zones,
perimeter buffer and signs in connection with the location and
operation of a sexually oriented business.
B. N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 and 6 set forth definitions for certain words and
phrases which relate to the operation of a sexually oriented business.
C. N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 also authorizes a municipality to adopt a zoning
ordinance to override certain standards and other requirements set
forth in the state statutes.
D. These municipal regulations are designed to conform with the
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6 and 7, and to provide
§ 33-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-150
1:737
§ 33-151. Purpose and scope.
additional municipal requirements for the licensing of a sexually
oriented business.
E. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
municipal regulations contained in this article are not preempted by
state law. The governing body finds as follows:
(1) The municipal regulations do not conflict with state law because of
conflicting policies or operational effect;
(2) The state laws were not intended to be exclusive in the field;
(3) The subject matter does not reflect a need for absolute uniformity;
(4) The state scheme is not so comprehensive as to preclude coexistent
municipal regulations; and
(5) The municipal regulations do not stand as an obstacle to the
accomplishment and execution of the purposes and objectives of
the State Legislature.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that
sexually oriented businesses cause concrete and definite negative
secondary effects that promote juvenile delinquency, contribute to an
overall increase of crime, create an environment that leads to the
general deterioration of neighborhoods, and lowers property values.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to set forth standards and
requirements designed to prevent or reduce these negative secondary
effects and to protect the retail trade and the quality of commercial
districts, neighborhoods and urban life.
D. These regulations shall apply to all sexually oriented businesses,
including but not limited to the following:
Adult bookstores
Adult cabarets
Adult merchandise stores
Adult motion picture theaters
Adult video stores
§ 33-150 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-152
1:738
§ 33-152. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person 18 years of age or older who renders any service
in connection with the operation of the business and receives compensation
from the operator of the business or from the patrons.
EXHIBIT — The definition set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 is incorporated
herein as if the same was set forth with particularity.
MORAL TURPITUDE — Conduct that is so significant a departure from
ordinary standards of honesty, justice or morality as to be shocking to the
moral sense of the community.
OBSCENE MATERIAL — The definition set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 is
incorporated herein as if the same was set forth with particularity.
PATRON — Any person 18 years of age or older who is a customer, client or
paying guest of the business.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — The definition set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-6 is incorporated herein as if the same was set forth with
particularity.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — The definition set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-6 is incorporated herein as if the same was set forth with
particularity.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — The definition set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6
is incorporated herein as if the same was set forth with particularity.
§ 33-153. License required.
If shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business
within the City unless licensed pursuant to this article.
A. The license required shall be known as a "sexually oriented business
license" and shall be issued by the City Clerk after payment of the
required fee and compliance with these regulations. A copy of the
license issued shall be filed by the City Clerk with the Chief of Police.
B. The annual license fee shall be $400 if applied for before July 1 of any
calendar year. The annual license fee shall be $200 if applied for on or
after July 1 of any calendar year. If the business was operating prior to
July 1 of any calendar year, the annual license fee shall be $400,
regardless of when the application is filed.
C. Annual licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
All applications for an annual license or renewal shall be filed with the
City Clerk on or before January 10 of each year. All licenses expire on
December 31 of each year.
§ 33-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-153
1:739
§ 33-154. Application.
The application for the license required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk on a form provided by his office. The
application shall contain the following information:
§ 33-155. Standards.
§ 33-156. Regulations.
D. The license issued shall be prominently displayed on the business
premises at all times.
E. No licensee shall allow the use of his, her or its name by any person
directly or indirectly for the purpose of engaging in a sexually oriented
business at any location other than the licensed premises.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant.
C. The place of residence of the applicant for the last two years.
D. Information as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime and where the conviction took place.
E. The names and addresses of two character references.
F. The location of the business.
G. If the applicant is a partnership, the personal information required shall
be furnished for each general partner. If the applicant is a corporation,
the personal information required shall be furnished for each officer
and each shareholder with at least a twenty-percent interest in the
corporation.
H. Each applicant and employee shall be fingerprinted by the Millville
Police Department, and the prints shall be submitted to federal and
state authorities for comparison and criminal record investigation. In
the case of partnership and corporations, those persons who are
required to provide personal information for the application shall
submit to fingerprinting.
A. Buffer zones. The buffer zones set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7a are
incorporated herein as if the same were set forth with particularity.
B. Perimeter buffer. The perimeter buffer requirements set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7b are incorporated herein as if the same were set forth
with particularity.
C. Signs. The sign requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7c are
incorporated herein as if the same were set forth with particularity.
§ 33-153 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-156
1:740
§ 33-157. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises
of a sexually oriented business at any time for any purpose.
B. No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any capacity
on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
C. No display visible from the exterior of a sexually oriented business shall
contain material of a sexually oriented nature.
D. No owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall permit any
person convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude to participate in
the ownership, operation or be employed by the business.
E. No consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted anywhere on
the premises of a sexually oriented business.
F. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be utilized to advertise,
promote or solicit patrons for a sexually oriented business.
G. No employee of a sexually oriented business shall engage in any illegal
activities on the premises. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer
employees to engage in illegal acts on the licensed premises.
H. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any known prostitutes on the
licensed premises.
I. No sexually oriented business shall be open for business prior to 9:00
a.m. in the morning and after 12:00 midnight Monday through
Saturday. All sexually oriented businesses shall be closed on Sundays.
A. Any applicant for a license shall be denied a license by the City Clerk or
any license issued shall be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any
of the following causes:
(1) The applicant or licensee has filed an application containing false
information of a material nature.
(2) The applicant or licensee has failed, neglected or refused to comply
with these regulations.
(3) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey involving moral turpitude.
(4) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey involving public indecency under
Chapter 34 of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice.
(5) The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a criminal offense
in the State of New Jersey involving sexual offenses under Chapter
14 of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice.
§ 33-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-157
1:741
§ 33-158. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III. This does not apply to conduct that would constitute
a criminal violation of the state statutes sited herein.
§ 33-159. (Reserved)
(6) An applicant or licensee may be denied a license or a license may
be revoked or suspended for other criminal convictions in the State
of New Jersey or any other state based on the following objective
standards: a) how recent was the criminal conviction; b) how
serious was the criminal offense upon which the conviction was
based; c) how many criminal convictions does the applicant or
licensee have; and d) does any criminal conviction have a direct
connection on the type of business that is being licensed.
B. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a request for hearing before the Board of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
notice of the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The
hearing shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the
City Clerk.
§ 33-157 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-159
1:742
ARTICLE XX
Taxicabs
[Added 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 9-2016]
§ 33-160. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or association.
PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR — The Commissioner assigned by the Board
of Commissioners to be the Director of the Department of Public Safety
pursuant to § 2-5 of the Code of the City of Millville.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
TAXICAB — Any automobile, motor vehicle or other vehicle, commonly
called "taxi," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate and run or which is operated
or run over any of the streets or the public highways of this City and,
particularly, accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places to points and places.
TAXIMETER — A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab upon
which the fare is based, which measures mechanically the distance driven
and the waiting time.
WAITING TIME — The time when a taxicab is not in motion, from the time
of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but does not include
any time that a taxicab is not in motion due to any cause other than the
request, act or fault of a passenger.
§ 33-161. License requirements.
No person may cause a taxicab to be operated without first having obtained
a taxicab owner's license from the City Clerk of the City of Millville. No
person may operate a taxicab without first having obtained a taxicab
operator's license from the City Clerk.
§ 33-162. License procedure.
All applications shall be in writing on forms approved by the City Clerk. All
applications for taxicab owner's and operator's licenses shall be completed
in their entirety and filed with the City Clerk. Any application which is
deemed incomplete by the City Clerk or his/her designee shall be rejected.
All completed applications shall have the date and time that they have been
received recorded thereon.
A. Taxicab operator's license.
(1) All applications for a taxicab operator's license shall contain or be
accompanied with the following:
§ 33-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-162
1:743
(a) The name, age and residence of the applicant. A post office box
is not acceptable.
(b) The names and addresses of two references residing in the City
of Millville.
(c) The full amount of the license application fee hereinafter
prescribed.
(d) Other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police.
(2) All applicants shall have the following qualifications:
(a) An applicant shall be at least 20 years of age with three years'
driving experience.
(b) An applicant shall be a citizen or legal resident of the United
States.
(c) An applicant shall have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(d) An applicant shall be able to communicate in the English
language.
(e) An applicant shall be disqualified from operating or driving a
taxicab if a criminal history background check and/or driver's
abstract required pursuant to § 33-162A(3) revealed a record
of conviction of any of the following crimes or offenses:
[1] In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime or offense as
follows: aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape,
extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated
sexual assault, sexual assault, or endangering the welfare
of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon
enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A.
2C:39-4 or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or petty
disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use, possession
or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
[2] In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the
world, as a result of a conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection A(2)(e)[1] of this section.
[3] In New Jersey or elsewhere, the conviction of an alcohol or
drug-related traffic offense enumerated in N.J.S.A.
39:4-49.1, N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-51 et
§ 33-162 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-162
1:744
seq. or its equivalent in any other state, territory,
commonwealth or other jurisdiction of the United States,
which has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the
application being submitted.
(f) An applicant shall have further qualifications that the Director
of Public Safety may deem appropriate and necessary to
determine the fitness of the applicant to operate a taxicab.
(g) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if a person
who has been convicted of one of the crimes or offenses
enumerated in Subsection A(2)(e)[1] and [2] of this section can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside
New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall
not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete unless accompanied
by a current and complete criminal history and a current and
complete State of New Jersey Certified Motor Vehicle Abstract of
each driver employed by or otherwise associated with the taxicab
owner. If deemed necessary by the Millville Police Department,
each applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Millville Police
Department or such other agency that regularly performs
background checks for the City of Millville.
(4) An operator's license shall not be transferable.
(5) Upon submission of an application, the Millville Police Chief shall
cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications as set forth herein. The Millville
Police Chief shall submit his/her report of findings to the City Clerk.
(6) The City Clerk shall submit his/her recommendations for the
issuance of a taxicab operator's license to the Board of
Commissioners for consideration. When the Board of
Commissioners has determined to grant such license, it shall do so
by resolution. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the City Clerk
shall sign all licenses and issue to each approved operator an
operator's license in accordance herewith.
(7) Each applicant who has been approved for an operator's license as
prescribed herein shall be issued an operator's license which shall
contain a photo identification of the operator. Said license shall be
displayed conspicuously on the dashboard of the taxicab being
operated in plain view of the passenger. Said license shall be
presented at any time upon the request of any police officer, the
Code Enforcement Officer, the Director of Public Safety, any
authorized City agent or any passenger. Every operator's license
shall have affixed thereto the City license number, date of issue and
date of expiration.
§ 33-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-162
1:745
(8) Each taxicab operator licensed in accordance herewith shall be
required to comply with Subsection A(3) every year, which shall be
completed prior to the date of expiration of their current license.
B. Taxicab owner's license.
(1) All applications for a taxicab owner's license shall contain or be
accompanied by the following:
(a) The names, age and residence of the applicant. A post office
box is not acceptable.
[1] If a partnership, the names, ages and residences of all
partners along with the business address of the
partnership.
[2] If a corporation, the names, ages and residences of its
president, secretary and treasurer along with its
certificate of incorporation, certified copy of resolution
authorizing this application and a certificate of good
standing issued by the State of New Jersey not more than
30 days prior to the date of application. Application of any
corporation shall be signed by its president and attested
by its secretary.
[3] If a limited liability company, the names, ages and
residences of all of its members, name, age and residence
of managing member, certified copy of the resolution
authorizing the application, certificate of good standing
issued by the State of New Jersey not more than 30 days
prior to the date of the application.
(b) A description of the vehicle or vehicles to be licensed,
including the year, make and model, seating capacity, vehicle
identification number and license plate number thereof.
Should the applicant not have this information at the time his/
her application has been filed with the date and time of receipt
recorded thereon, then, in that event, this information must be
supplied to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of an owner's
license.
(c) The owner of such taxicab to be licensed in accordance
herewith shall file with the City Clerk for each taxicab operated
an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey,
conditioned for the payment of a sum of not less than $35,000
to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of the bodily injuries
to, or the death of, all persons on account of any such accident
by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of
such taxicab upon any public street; and conditioned for the
payment of a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy any claim for
damages to property of any one person resulting from an
§ 33-162 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-162
1:746
accident and a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy all claims
for damages to property of all persons on account of any such
accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance
or use of such taxicab upon any public street.
(d) The names and addresses of two references residing in the City
of Millville.
(e) The full amount of the application fee herein prescribed.
(f) Other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Safety.
(2) All applicants for a taxicab owner's license shall have the following
qualifications:
(a) An applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. All partners,
corporate officers or members of the limited liability company
applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) All applicants shall be a citizen or legal resident of the United
States. All partners, corporate officers or members of a limited
liability company applicant shall be a citizen or legal resident
of the United States.
(c) An applicant shall be disqualified from obtaining a taxicab
owner's license if any persons enumerated in § 33-162B(1)(a)
shall have a record of conviction of any of the following crimes
or offenses:
[1] In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows:
aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion,
homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault,
sexual assault, or endangering the welfare of a child
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or
having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4 or N.J.S.A.
2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons
offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-2.
[2] In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the
world, as a result of a conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection B(2)(c)[1] of this section.
[3] In New Jersey or elsewhere, the conviction of an alcoholor
drug-related traffic offense enumerated in Title 39-4 et
§ 33-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-162
1:747
seq., which has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the
application being submitted.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) An applicant shall have such further qualifications that the City
Clerk or Police Chief may deem appropriate and necessary to
determine the fitness of the applicant to own a taxicab.
(f) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if a person
who has been convicted of one of the crimes or offenses
enumerated in Subsection B(2)(c)[1] and [2] of this section can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside
New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall
not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
(3) Upon receipt of the completed application by the City Clerk, and
provided that an owner's license is available for distribution by the
City of Millville, the application shall be forwarded to the Director
of Public Safety or his/her designee and Chief of Police, who shall
cause an investigation to be made in accordance herewith, and
thereafter he/she shall provide his/her findings and
recommendations to the City Clerk. In the event an owner's license
is not available for distribution by the City of Millville, the
application shall be placed on file with the City Clerk with the date
and time recorded thereon in accordance herewith. As owner's
licenses become available they shall be offered to those applicants
in the order of the date and times upon which each completed
application was received and filed, the earliest having the first
option to acquire said license in accordance herewith. Notice of
availability shall be sent by certified mail and regular mail
simultaneously, requiring the applicant to respond within 20 days
of mailing by notifying the City Clerk in writing of his/her interest
to acquire the available license. Should there be no response within
said time, or should notice to the address given in the application
be undeliverable or returned, notice shall then go the next
applicant based upon the date and time of receipt of the completed
application. It shall be the applicant's obligation to notify the City
Clerk of any change of address.
(4) Upon compliance with all requirements specified herein, the City
Clerk shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing that the owner
of the taxicab or taxicabs has complied with the terms and
conditions of this chapter for each taxicab to be operated by the
owner's license holder. The certificate shall recite the name of the
insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the policy
or bond, a description of the taxicab insured thereunder and the
registration number of the same. Upon issuance of a certificate of
compliance, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the
§ 33-162 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-162
1:748
§ 33-163. License term.
Any new license issued hereunder shall be valid from its date of issuance
until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal license shall be
valid for one year from January 1 to December 31.
§ 33-164. Fees.
The nonrefundable fees shall be as follows:
§ 33-165. Insurance or bond.
adoption of a resolution authorizing the issuance of an owner's
license. The duplicate certificate shall thereafter be filed with the
Motor Vehicle Commission before any such car is licensed as a
taxicab in the City of Millville. A certificate of compliance duly filed
in accordance herewith and accompanying resolution is required
for each taxicab being operated by the owner's license holder.
(5) Each applicant who has been approved for an owner's license as
prescribed herein shall be issued an owner's license, which shall
contain a photo identification of the owner. Said license shall be
displayed conspicuously on the dashboard of the taxicab being
operated in plain view of the passenger in addition to the certificate
of compliance. Said license shall be presented at any time upon the
request of any police officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Director of Public Safety, any authorized City agent or any
passenger. Every owner's license shall have affixed thereto the City
license number, date of issue and date of expiration.
A. New owner's license application fee: $75 for each taxicab per year.
B. Renewal of owner's license: $75 per taxicab.
C. Transfer of owner's license: $75.
D. New operator's license: $75.
E. Renewal of operator's license: $75.
F. Replacement operator's license: $20.
A. No owner's license shall be issued until the owner of such taxicab shall
have filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy in accordance with
§ 33-162B(1)(c).
B. An owner's license shall become effective and operation thereunder
shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in
force to the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
C. If an owner's license holder operates more than one taxicab, he/she
may file with the City Clerk, in lieu of the insurance policy required by
§ 33-162B(1)(c) herein, a bond or insurance policy of a company duly
§ 33-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-165
1:749
§ 33-166. Power of attorney.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-5, every owner shall execute and deliver to the
City Clerk, concurrently with the filing of a policy or bond aforesaid, a
power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the City
of Millville Chief Financial Officer his/her true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed.
§ 33-167. Owner's office.
Every owner, before obtaining a license hereunder, shall have and maintain
in the City of Millville an office with telephone service for the purpose
of receiving telephone calls from prospective passengers and from where
said taxicab may be dispatched to provide taxicab service to a prospective
passenger. The owner's license shall be maintained in said office, and said
license shall be conspicuously displayed.
§ 33-168. Maximum number of owners' licenses; transfers.
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state in
the sum of $50,000, which shall be a blanket insurance covering all
taxicabs operated by the owner's license holder, which shall provide for
the payment of any final judgment involved by any person on account of
the ownership, maintenance and use of any such taxicabs or any fault
with respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of any person suffering
loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
D. Where a taxicab owner has a principal place of business other than the
City of Millville, said taxicab owner shall, prior to operating in the City
of Millville, file with the City Clerk the insurance policy or bond
required by §§ 33-162B(1)(c) and 33-165C as well as the certificate of
compliance required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-6.
E. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the taxicab or any fault in respect thereto and
shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury
as aforesaid.
A. The maximum number of owners' licenses issued hereunder shall be 28,
and no new license shall be issued to exceed this number; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent renewals or person-toperson
transfer of owners' licenses issued and outstanding.
B. No owner's license shall be transferred from one owner to another
unless said prospective owner has complied with all of the terms and
conditions contained herein and required for the issuance of an owner's
license.
§ 33-165 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-169
1:750
§ 33-169. Renewals; change of residence.
§ 33-170. Taxi stands.
§ 33-171. Operation regulations.
A. Any taxicab owner's and/or operator's license may be renewed for a
succeeding license term to replace a license which expired or is due to
expire on the last day of the immediately preceding license term;
provided, however, that said license is for the same owner or operator
as the expired or expiring license, covers the same taxicab, is issued to
the holder of the expired or expiring license and is issued pursuant to
an application therefor which shall have been filed with the City Clerk
prior to the commencement of said new license term or not later than
30 days after the commencement thereof. Taxicab owner's and/or
operator's licenses issued otherwise than aforesaid shall be deemed
new licenses.
B. A change of residence by any owner or operator shall be reported in
writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after such change.
A. The Board of Commissioners may designate by ordinance certain
locations within the City for use as taxi stands as it deems necessary for
public convenience.
B. Only taxicabs licensed hereunder shall occupy any part of said taxi
stands.
C. All taxi stands shall be used by operators on a first-come-first-served
basis. An operator entering a taxi stand in a taxicab shall join behind
any waiting taxicabs and advance forward as the preceding taxicabs
depart.
D. Taxicab owners shall maintain the sanitary condition of taxi stands and
shall provide properly screened refuse storage areas for the use of
operators and customers on lands other than the City-owned miniparks
and adjacent drives and walkways. An owner's right to use taxi stands
shall be subject to revocation by the Board of Commissioners upon
submission of documented evidence of litter/trash ordinance violations
by the Police Department or any City Code Enforcement Official.
A. Any taxicab occupying a taxi stand shall be immediately available for
hire. Upon request, no owner or operator, unless previously engaged,
shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person anywhere within the
City. No owner or operator shall leave a vehicle unattended or in any
other manner render said vehicle unready for immediate use while
occupying any taxi stand.
B. No owner or operator shall permit any person, other than a passenger
being transported for hire, in or about such taxicab when in service as a
taxicab.
§ 33-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-171
1:751
C. No operator shall cruise on streets of this City with any taxicab at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers or to bring the presence of
the taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab being
driven along the City streets for any purpose other than transporting a
passenger, going to a specified destination by the most direct route in
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger or returning
by the most direct route to the taxicab's home terminus after
discharging a passenger, or going to or from said terminus to the
operator's home by the most direct route, shall be prima facie evidence
of cruising.
D. No owner or operator shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either as to the
time or place of arrival or departure of any train or bus or as to the
location of any hotel, public or private place, nor shall any such owner
or operator deceive any person, make false representations to him or
convey any passenger to any other place or over any other route than
that indicated by the passenger.
E. No owner or operator who has accepted an order to call at any point in
the City of Millville for the purpose of conveying any person to any
other point in said City or the surrounding community shall neglect or
unreasonably delay to execute the order. Any order delivered to and
accepted by a person in charge of the garage, office or home of the
operator shall be considered as having been delivered to and accepted
by the owner or operator.
F. Transport of children.
(1) Every taxicab operator hereunder who transports a child under the
age of five years shall be responsible for the protection of the child
by properly using a state or federally approved child passenger
restraint system.
(2) No operator shall transport a child five years of age or younger
unless a child 18 months of age or younger is a rear seat passenger
secured in a state or federally approved child passenger restraint
system and a child over 18 months of age but less than five years is
a rear seat passenger secured in either a state or federally
approved child passenger restraint system or secured in a lap belt
or lap belt and shoulder harness.
G. Taxicab owners shall ensure that each taxicab:
(1) Is safe, clean and sanitary to transport passengers.
(2) Is properly equipped with an approved child passenger restraint
system as described in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard
Number 213.
(3) Carries, in such position viewable from the outside, an electric sign
not less than five inches by nine inches nor more than six inches by
§ 33-171 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-171
1:752
§ 33-172. Discontinued service; surrender of license.
An owner who discontinues taxicab service or fails, without good cause, to
operate and maintain the taxicab for more than 90 consecutive days shall
immediately surrender his taxicab license to the City Clerk for cancellation.
Failure so to do shall be sufficient cause for suspension or revocation of said
taxicab license.
§ 33-173. Taximeters.
10 inches which shall be illuminated at night and shall plainly show
the word "Taxi" and the number of the owner's license in legible
letters and figures.
(4) Has painted on each side thereof, in letters at least three inches
high, the word "taxi" or "cab" or the name of the operating owner
containing the word "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab."
(5) Does not have any visual structural or mechanical deficiencies for
which a motor vehicle registration would be denied.
(6) Complies with any and all other provisions of this chapter.
H. The Police Department shall have inspection power under this section.
I. Each taxicab licensed in accordance herewith shall have affixed in a
conspicuous location within the taxicab so that any passenger may read
the same a sign or sticker indicating: "If you have any complaints
regarding this taxicab or taxi operator, you may lodge your complaints
by filing a written notice with the City Clerk of the City of Millville, 12
South High Street, P.O. Box 609, Millville, New Jersey 08332."
J. If for any safety reason an operator believes that a customer should not
be served, said operator shall not be required to provide service to said
customer.
A. All taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the
passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night. After sundown,
the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be
operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and
construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the
front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading. Each taximeter shall
have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it
is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the operator to throw the
flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of
each trip. The Police Chief or any police officer is authorized, either on
complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any
taximeter and, upon discovering any inaccuracy therein, to notify the
taxicab operator to cease operation. Thereupon, said taxicab shall be
§ 33-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-173
1:753
§ 33-174. Fares.
§ 33-175. Issuance of receipts.
An operator shall, upon demand by a passenger, provide such passenger a
receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or
by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner,
license number or motor number, amount of meter-reading charges and
date of transaction.
§ 33-176. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in required
working condition.
B. All taximeters required in accordance herewith shall have been
properly inspected and have affixed thereto proof of compliance with
the State of New Jersey, Department of Weights and Measures. No
taxicab owner's license shall be issued nor shall any taxicab operate
without the prior compliance with this section.
A. No owner or operator of a taxicab or other vehicle for hire shall charge
a sum greater than the following fares for the use of said vehicle:
(1) A minimum fare of $3.25 is established.
(2) Mileage rates: $1.60 shall be charged upon entering the taxicab,
also known as the "drop fare," and $2 for each additional meter
mile. Fractions of each mile shall be calculated at the rate of $0.20
per 1/10 of a mile.
(3) Plus $0.50 for each article of luggage or baggage for each
passenger.
(4) Waiting time at the rate of $0.40 for each minute.
B. Every taxicab operated hereunder shall have a rate card setting forth
the authorized rates of fare displayed in plain view of all passengers.
A. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right by adoption of a
resolution to make such rules and regulations for the operation of
taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as it may determine
to be necessary and proper in the best interests of the citizens of the
City. Any violation of said rules and regulations shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, punishable as provided hereunder.
B. The Director of Public Safety, his/her designee or the Chief of Police
may, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, make reasonable
regulations not inconsistent herewith for the conduct of owners and
operators hereunder.
§ 33-173 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-177
1:754
§ 33-177. Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing.
Any owner's or operator's license may be denied, revoked or suspended
at any time for cause for the violation of any provision hereunder or any
other City ordinance. The licensee may make a written request for a hearing
within 10 days from date of denial, revocation or suspension. The hearing
shall be held before the Director of Public Safety, his/her designee. Such
denial, suspension or revocation may be in addition to or instead of
penalties prescribed by § 33-178 hereunder. A suspended or revoked license
shall not be reissued except for good and sufficient reasons shown.
§ 33-178. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
C. Unless another law is stated to the contrary, the Millville Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction over the violations and penalties set forth
in this section.
§ 33-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-178
1:755
Chapter 35
LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — Ch. 11, Art.
XIV.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 56.
§ 33-178 MILLVILLE CODE § 33-178
35:756
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 35-1. Statutory authority.
The provisions contained in this chapter are enacted pursuant to the
municipal regulatory authority conferred in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and the
municipal police power conferred in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2. They are also enacted
pursuant to Title 45 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated titled
"Professions and Occupations."
§ 35-2. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Bureau of Permits and
Inspections to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 35-3. Powers and duties.
A. The Bureau of Permits and Inspections shall have those powers which
are necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the regulations
contained in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following
enumerated powers.
(1) To investigate commercial, industrial, institutional and residential
uses within the community to determine which premises and
structures have activities or uses which are regulated by this
chapter.
(2) To inspect those premises and structures which have activities or
uses regulated by this chapter to insure compliance with the
regulations contained herein.
(3) To coordinate with and obtain information from other employees of
the City who have relevant information or overlapping duties with
respect to the activities or uses regulated by this chapter.
B. The Construction Official, subcode officials and inspectors of the
Bureau are authorized to enter the premises and structures of any
properties regulated by this chapter to inspect those premises or
structures subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable
searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code
official or inspector is authorized to pursue and obtain an order from
the Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction to
authorize entry.
§ 35-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-3
35:757

ARTICLE II
Building Contractors of New Homes
§ 35-4. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to insure that any person who
is required to be registered by state law in order to perform building
contracting for a new home within the City has the required registration
and performs the building contracting in accordance with applicable codes
and regulations.
§ 35-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUILDER — Any individual, corporation, partnership, or other business
organizations engaged in the construction of new homes.
NEW HOME — Any dwelling unit not previously occupied, excluding
dwelling units constructed solely for lease.
OWNER — Any person for whom the new home is built or to whom the home
is sold for occupation by the owner or the owner's family as a home and
the owner's successors in title to the home or mortgagee in possession. The
owner does not mean any development company, association or subsidiary
company of the builder or any person or organization to whom the home
may be sold or otherwise conveyed by the builder for subsequent resale,
letting or other purpose.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 35-6. State registration required.
No builder shall engage in the business of constructing new homes within
the City unless he is registered with the state pursuant to the New Home
Warranty and Builders' Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:3B-1 et seq.
§ 35-7. Regulations.
A. No state registration issued shall be assigned or transferred to another
person by the builder holding the certificate of registration.
B. No builder holding a certificate of registration from the state shall build
new homes within the City unless all permits required for the
construction have been obtained in accordance with the requirements
of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Any builder or person preventing the Construction Official or subcode
officials from entering the premises or structure at reasonable times to
§ 35-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-7
35:759
§ 35-8. Violations and penalties.
conduct inspections of the construction work being performed is in
violation of this article.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:3B-12, any builder who fails to register as
required by state law shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $2,000
for each offense to be enforced and collected by the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs in the name of the state in a
summary proceeding in accordance with the Penalty Enforcement Law,
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.
B. The Construction Official shall report all alleged violations of the state
regulations to the appropriate state authority for disposition in
accordance with state law.
§ 35-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 35-8
35:760
ARTICLE III
Electrical Contractors
§ 35-9. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to insure that any person who
is required to be licensed by state law in order to perform electrical
contracting within the City has the required state license and performs the
electrical contracting in accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
§ 35-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — A person who engages in the business of
contracting to install, erect, repair or alter electrical equipment for the
generation, transmission or utilization of electrical energy.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 35-11. State license required.
Except as exempted by state law, no person shall perform electrical
contracting within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to the
Electrical Contractors Licensing Act of 1962, N.J.S.A. 45:5A-1 et seq.
§ 35-12. Regulations.
§ 35-13. Violations and penalties.
A. No state license or state business permit issued shall be assigned or
transferred to another person by the licensee.
B. No licensee shall perform electrical contracting for any person within
the City unless an electrical permit is obtained in accordance with the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Any person preventing the electrical subcode official from entering the
premises or structure at reasonable times to conduct inspections of the
electrical work being performed is iii violation of this article.
A. Any person advertising or engaging in the business of electrical
contracting within the City without a state license is a disorderly
person.
B. Any person convicted of violating these regulations shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III,
General Penalties.
§ 35-9 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-13
35:761

ARTICLE IV
Landscape Irrigation Contractors
§ 35-14. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to insure that any person who is
required to be certified by state law in order to perform landscape irrigation
contracting within the City has the required state certificate and performs
the landscape irrigation contracting in accordance with applicable codes
and regulations.
§ 35-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONTRACTING — The construction, repair,
maintenance, improvement and alteration of any portion of a landscape
irrigation system, including required wiring within that system and
connection to the required power supply and the installation and connection
to a public or private water supply system under the terms and conditions
of the contract.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONTRACTOR — A person who engages in the
business of landscape irrigation contracting.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Any assemblage of components,
materials or special equipment which is designed, constructed and installed
for controlled dispersion of water from any safe and suitable source,
including properly treated wastewater, for the purpose of irrigating
landscape vegetation or the control of dust and erosion on landscaped
areas, including integral pumping systems or integral control systems for
manual, semiautomatic or automatic control of the operation of these
systems.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
§ 35-16. State certificate required.
Except as exempted by state law, no person shall perform landscape
irrigation contracting within the City unless certified to do so pursuant the
Landscape Irrigation Contractor Certification Act of 1991, N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-1
et seq.
§ 35-17. Regulations.
A. No state certificate issued shall be assigned or transferred to another
person by any certificate holder.
§ 35-14 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-17
35:763
§ 35-18. Violations and penalties.
B. No certificate holder shall perform landscape irrigation contracting for
any person within the City unless a permit is obtained in accordance
with the requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Any person preventing a subcode official from entering the premises or
structure at reasonable times to conduct inspections of the landscape
irrigation work being performed is in violation of this article.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-9, any person violating the provisions of
state law shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $2,500 for the
first offense and not more than $5,000 for the second and each
subsequent offense. In lieu of an administrative proceeding, the state
board may bring an action for the collection or enforcement of civil
penalties for the violation of state law. The action may be brought in
summary manner pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.
B. The Construction Official shall report all alleged violations of the state
regulations to the appropriate state authority for disposition in
accordance with state law.
§ 35-17 MILLVILLE CODE § 35-18
35:764
ARTICLE V
Plumbing Contractors
§ 35-19. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to insure that any person who
is required to be licensed by state law in order to perform plumbing
contracting within the City has the required state license and performs the
plumbing contracting in accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
§ 35-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
APPRENTICE PLUMBER — Any person other than a master plumber or
journeyman plumber who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in
learning and assisting in the installation of plumbing.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — Any person other than a master plumber or
apprentice plumber who installs, alters, repairs and renovates plumbing in
accordance with standards, rules and regulations established by the board
and who works under the supervision of a master plumber.
MASTER PLUMBER — A person licensed pursuant to this amendatory
and supplementary act who has the qualifications, training, experience
and technical knowledge necessary to properly plan, lay out, install and
repair plumbing apparatus and equipment and to supervise others in the
performance of such work in accordance with standards, rules and
regulations established by the state board.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership or
other legal entity.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, alteration, repair and removal of all piping,
plumbing fixtures, plumbing appliances and plumbing apparatus in
connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage, storm facilities and
building sewers to their respective final connection to an approved point
of disposal, venting systems, public and private water supply systems of
any premises to and within the property line of any building, structure
or conveyance to their final connection with an approved supply system.
Plumbing shall also mean the practice and materials used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, alteration, repair or removal of stormwater,
refrigeration and air-conditioning drains, liquid waste or sewage.
PLUMBING CONTRACTOR — Any licensed master plumber, firm,
partnership, corporation or other legal entity which undertakes or offers
to undertake for another the planning, laying out, supervising, installing or
making of additions, alterations and repairs in the installation of plumbing.
In order to act as a plumbing contractor, a licensed master plumber shall be
the holder of not less than 10% of the issued and outstanding shares of stock
§ 35-19 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-20
35:765
in the corporation, or not less than 10% of the capital of the partnership,
or not less than 10% of the ownership of any other firm or legal entity
engaging in the business of plumbing contracting in the state and shall
employ either journeymen plumbers or apprentice plumbers, or both.
§ 35-21. State license required.
Except as exempted by state law, no person shall perform plumbing
contracting within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to the State
Plumbing License Law of 1968, N.J.S.A. 45:14C-1 et seq.
§ 35-22. Regulations.
§ 35-23. Violations and penalties.
A. No state license issued shall be assigned or transferred to another
person by the licensee.
B. No licensee shall perform plumbing contracting for any person within
the City unless a plumbing permit is obtained in accordance with the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Any person preventing the plumbing subcode official from entering the
premises or structure at reasonable times to conduct inspections of the
plumbing work being performed is in violation of this article.
A. Any person advertising or engaging in the business of plumbing
contracting within the City without a state license is a disorderly
person.
B. Any person convicted of violating these regulations shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III,
General Penalties.
§ 35-20 MILLVILLE CODE § 35-23
35:766
Chapter 39
MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic safety when moving buildings — See
Ch. 11, Art. VIII.
Traffic safety at County Fair — See Ch. 33, Art.
V.
Traffic and circulation performance
standards — See Ch. 30, Art. XV.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 33, Art. XVI.
Working on motor vehicles on public streets -
See Ch. 52, Art. XVI.
§ 35-23 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 35-23
35:767

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 39-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 39-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time as may be in current
use in the City.
§ 39-3. Signage.
The effectiveness of these regulations is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law. All signs and related material shall be installed
and maintained by the City of Millville at its expense. All signage shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 and 39:4-198.
§ 39-4. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the City of Millville are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 39-5. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 39-6. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, and
except as otherwise provided herein, every person convicted of a violation
of any provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both.
§ 39-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-6
35:769

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 39-7. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, and the approval
of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT), the following streets shall have the movement of traffic controlled
by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
in violation of the regulations indicated.
§ 39-8. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule 1 of Article X, attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move as indicated.
§ 39-9. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 2 of Article X, attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the
sides indicated therein.
§ 39-10. Passing prohibited.
No person shall pass another motor vehicle in the no-passing zones
described in Schedule 3 of Article X, attached to and made a part of this
chapter. These zones are authorized by the NJDOT in accordance with the
sketch dated and numbered as indicated.
§ 39-11. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule 4 of Article X, attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 39-12. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described in Schedule 5 of Article X, attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 39-13. Turn on red traffic signal prohibited.
No person shall make a right turn on the red traffic signal at any location
listed during the times indicated in Schedule 6 of Article X, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 39-7 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-14
35:771
§ 39-14. Through streets.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule 7 of Article X, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 39-15. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule 8 of
Article X, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated
stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 39-16. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule 9 of
Article X, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated
as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 39-17. Truck routes established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, all trucks having a gross weight in excess
of four tons shall be excluded from all streets within the City except those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 10 of Article X, attached to
and made a part of this chapter. Trucks shall be permitted on all streets for
the purpose of the pickup and delivery of materials.
§ 39-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-17
35:772
ARTICLE III
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 39-18. Statutory Authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-8 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197,
the following streets shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the
type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or park a motor
vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
§ 39-19. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule 11 of Article X, attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle, other
than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be permitted
to occupy the locations between the hours indicated.
§ 39-20. Loading zones. [Amended 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 40-2016]
§ 39-21. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule 13 of Article X, attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy the locations during the times
indicated.
§ 39-22. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle except at an angle of 45º head in between the
lines designating a parking space upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule 14 of Article X, attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
A. In general. The locations described in Schedule 12 of Article X,
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in the locations listed
during the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of
goods and materials.
B. Loading zone restricted to police and other governmental vehicles.
Parking spaces shall be established at the southern terminus of High
Street adjacent to the City Police Administration Building and the City
Municipal Complex. Said spaces shall be designated solely for the
loading and unloading of police, municipal or other governmental
vehicles. Said parking spaces shall be established, marked and signed
consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197. No other person
shall park in the aforesaid spaces for loading or unloading or for any
other purpose.
§ 39-18 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-23
35:773
§ 39-23. Mid-block crosswalks.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197e, the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule 15 of Article X, attached hereto and made a part of this chapter,
shall have lines installed designating the crosswalks for pedestrian travel.
§ 39-24. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule 16 of Article X, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 39-25. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule 17 of Article X, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 39-26. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule 18 of Article X, attached hereto and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 39-27. Parking prohibited for certain class of motor vehicles.
No motor vehicle exceeding 20 feet in length, or seven feet in width, or
eight feet in height, or exceeding a gross weight in excess of four tons
shall be parked upon any alley or street within the City, except as provided
herein. This section is not intended to prohibit the parking of motor vehicles
commonly known as pickup trucks with or without cargo caps.
A. Adjacent resident exception. This parking restriction shall not apply to
vehicles actively engaged in delivering products or rendering services
requested by a property owner or resident adjacent to an alley or street.
B. Emergency vehicle exception. This parking restriction shall not apply to
vehicles actively engaged in rendering emergency services such as
ambulances, fire trucks, and vehicles plowing snow.
C. Loading and unloading exception. This parking restriction shall not
apply to vehicles actively engaged in the loading or unloading or
passengers, merchandise for a business, or materials for a job site
during the period of construction.
D. Public improvement exception. This parking restriction shall not apply
to vehicles owned, operated or authorized by the City, county, or state
which are actively engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of
public improvements or streets or the rendering of other governmental
services.
§ 39-23 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-27
35:774
§ 39-28. Parking prohibited for street cleaning.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon the
streets described between the hours specified on the days listed in Schedule
20 of Article X, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 39-29. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 22 of Article X,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 39-30. Removal of vehicles.
Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this article shall be deemed a
nuisance and a hazard to the free flow of traffic and the proper regulation of
it. Any police officer may arrange for the removal and storage of such motor
vehicle. The owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage
of the motor vehicle.
§ 39-31. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, any
person who shall be convicted of parking a vehicle in violation of this article
shall pay a fine of $12 for each offense.
E. Public utility exception. This parking restriction shall not apply to
vehicles owned or operated by a public utility company actively
engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of public utilities.
§ 39-27 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-31
35:775

ARTICLE IV
Parking Reserved for Handicapped Persons
§ 39-32. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, 39:4-197.6, 39:5A-1,
39:5A-4, and 40:48-2.46, the following regulations apply to parking spaces
reserved for handicapped persons.
§ 39-33. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this section, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 through N.J.S.A. 39:207.8
shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 39-34. Designated restricted parking spaces.
The locations described in Schedule 21 of Article X, attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are established as designated restricted parking spaces
for handicapped persons.
§ 39-35. Erection of signs.
Notice in the form of a sign containing wording and other markings
identifying the restricted parking space for handicapped persons shall be
erected in the form and at the location as required by law.
§ 39-36. Parking reserved for handicapped persons.
No person shall park a vehicle in the locations reserved for handicapped
parking except those persons who have been issued a special vehicle
identification card by the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 and then only when using a motor vehicle on which there is
displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle identification card has
been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
§ 39-37. Removal of unauthorized vehicles.
Any motor vehicle which is parked unlawfully in a parking space which is
restricted for use by a handicapped person may be removed and stored at
the request of a police officer. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may
result from the removal.
§ 39-38. Violations and penalties.
The penalties for violations of the handicapped parking section of these
regulations shall be as follows: first offense, fine of $100; second or
subsequent offense shall be a fine of $100 and up to 90 days' community
service on such terms and on such form as the Municipal Court shall deem
appropriate.
§ 39-32 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-38
35:777

ARTICLE V
Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations
§ 39-39. Legislative findings and adoption of manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when street construction, maintenance operations and utility
work are taking place on the City streets. This requires the blocking of the
street and the obstructing of the normal flow of traffic. Such obstructions
can become dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to promote
the public health, safety and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls
and regulations for the safe and efficient movement of traffic through the
construction and maintenance zones. Accordingly, the governing body of
the City hereby adopts by reference and incorporates herein the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as it controls and regulates
traffic whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility work
obstructs the normal flow of traffic.
§ 39-40. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.3, the governing body
of the City is authorized to adopt special traffic regulations by resolution
when declaring an emergent or temporary condition that warrants special
traffic regulations. These regulations may be provided for a period of time
not to exceed three months from the effective date of the resolution. Notice
of these regulations shall be given as required by N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
Approval of an emergency resolution is required from the Commissioner of
Transportation to be effective pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-202.
§ 39-41. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or public utility
desiring to conduct work on, under or above the street to contact the
traffic safety section of the Millville Police Department to arrange a
preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe and efficient
movement of traffic during the period of construction or repair. Any person,
contractor or public utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the
start of work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic Safety Section
of the Millville Police Department is in violation of these regulations.
§ 39-42. Hazardous conditions.
The person, contractor or public utility shall provide the Traffic Safety
Section of the Millville Police Department with at least two emergency
contact telephone numbers to be called in the case of emergency problems
occurring at the construction or maintenance site. These telephone
numbers shall be provided prior to the start of any work. If for any reason
the emergency contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact
§ 39-39 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-42
35:779
person does not respond to the telephone call from the Police Department to
correct a hazardous condition, the City through its personnel may respond
to correct the hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for this emergency
service provided by the City shall be charged to the person, contractor or
public utility responsible for the hazardous condition.
§ 39-43. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work
performed on any street under local jurisdiction within the City before the
hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. This time limit may be
adjusted to permit work at other times if authorized by the Chief of Police or
his designated representative. However, this time limit shall not be modified
if the Chief of Police or his designated representative determines that work
performed at other times would substantially delay traffic or cause a health
or safety hazard.
§ 39-44. Chief of Police authorized to perform certain actions.
§ 39-45. Site preparation.
No equipment, vehicles or material shall be placed on the street or the
sidewalk area until all construction devices, lights, signs and pavement
markings have been installed for the construction or maintenance area.
§ 39-46. Stop-work order.
The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall have the authority
to stop work in order to abate any nuisance and safety hazard or for any
violation of these regulations. His authority shall include the right to order
the removal of equipment, vehicles and stored material from within the
right-of-way of any street under local jurisdiction, and he may order the
backfilling of open excavations and other related work in order to abate any
nuisance and safety hazard.
§ 39-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or public utility convicted of a violation of these
regulations shall receive the following penalties. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-98.2, the Chief of Police is designated as the
official authorized to reduce the regular speed limit on streets under
local jurisdiction for up to 72 hours for the purpose of street
maintenance and repairs.
B. Traffic detours shall be permitted and traffic directors shall be posted
at all construction or maintenance sites when it is determined by the
Chief of Police or the Traffic Safety Section of the Millville Police
Department that it is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
§ 39-42 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-47
35:780
A. For a first offense: a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof
at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. For a second or subsequent offense: a fine of not less than $250 nor
more than $1,000, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days,
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 39-47 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-47
35:781

ARTICLE VI
Closing Street and Declaring Emergencies
§ 39-48. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-8, 39:4-197.3 and
40:67-16.9, the governing body of the City hereby authorizes the Director
of Public Safety to close any street under local jurisdiction for a period of
time up to 48 continuous hours and to declare an emergency under certain
conditions.
§ 39-49. Closing City streets.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to provide by regulation
for the closing of any streets or parts of streets under local jurisdiction to
motor vehicle traffic for a period of time up to 48 continuous hours if the
Director determines that it is necessary for the health, safety or welfare of
the public. Any regulation to close any street under local jurisdiction for
a period of time greater than 48 continuous hours must be approved by
the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation. The Chief of Police
shall erect proper warning signs notifying the public of the closure of the
street.
§ 39-50. Declaration of emergency.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to declare an emergency
when accidents, fires, public celebrations, road construction or weather
conditions require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Whenever the Director of Public Safety
declares an emergency, it shall remain in effect until the declaration is
removed. The Director of Public Safety may, through police agencies under
his control, determine and control the direction of the flow of traffic and the
parking of motor vehicles on streets under local jurisdiction. Traffic may be
detoured, diverted or rerouted. Parking of motor vehicles may be prohibited
on certain streets.
§ 39-51. Erection of signs and deployment of personnel.
For the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this article, the
Chief of Police is authorized to erect directional signals and temporary
"Emergency No-Parking" signs. He also may assign police officers for the
manual direction of traffic if necessary. The effectiveness of these
regulations is contingent upon signs being erected as required by law.
Notification that "Emergency No-Parking" signs are being posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which was parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
§ 39-52. Parking prohibited during emergencies and snow removal.
§ 39-48 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-52
35:783
A. During any state of emergency, no motor vehicle shall be parked on any
streets or parts of streets where "Emergency No-Parking" signs have
been erected.
B. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall be parked on
any streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 19 of Article X,
attached to and made a part of this chapter. These parking prohibitions
shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until the streets have
been plowed sufficiently so that parking will not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of these regulations shall be
deemed a nuisance and a hazard to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic. Any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage
which may result from the removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
D. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person who shall be convicted of parking a vehicle in violation of this
article shall pay a fine of $12 for each offense.
§ 39-52 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-52
35:784
ARTICLE VII
Parking and Traffic Regulations on Municipal Property and Board of
Education Property
§ 39-53. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal property and Board of Education property shall have the
movement and the parking of traffic controlled by the type of regulation
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
regulation indicated.
§ 39-54. Millville City Municipal Complex.
A. The Millville City Municipal Complex shall include the Municipal
Building (City Hall), the Police and Court Administration Building, the
Access Road, Police Way, and adjacent parking lots as shown on the site
plan approved by the NJDOT.
B. No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Street Sides Hours Location
Access Road Both All Entire length
Police Way Both All Entire length
C. Parking prohibited except in designated parking areas. No person shall
park a vehicle in this complex except in the designated parking areas
between the lines provided.
D. Parking reserved for handicapped persons. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following off-street parking spaces
are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these areas.
Property Spaces Location
Parking lot located on
west side of City Hall
Building
2 Northeast corner of parking
lot
Parking lot located on
east side of Police and
Court Adminstration
Building
1 Northeast corner of parking
lot
All stalls shall be 13 feet wide as shown on the approved site plan and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking sign and penalty
plate) in the designated parking areas for handicapped parking.
§ 39-53 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-54
35:785
E. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
complex, such as police vehicles, public employee vehicles and public
officials vehicles, must be properly identified, and the reserved parking
spaces must be shown on the approved site plan.
F. Parking time limited. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the
time limit between the hours listed on any day designated upon any of
the property described below.
Property Time Limit/Hours Location
Parking lot located on
west side of City Hall
Building
30 minutes/ 8:30 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m. (Monday
through Friday)
3 spaces located on
southwest corner of
parking lot
Parking lot located on
west side of City Hall
Building
15 minutes/ 8:30 a.m.
4:30 p.m. (Monday
through Friday)
3 spaces located on
northwest corner of
parking lot
G. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction of travel
indicated.
Street Direction Location
Drive Through Lane South Lot C to Lot D
Lot A Counter-clockwise High Street to Lot B
Lot C East Ware Avenue to Drive
Through Lane
H. Speed limits. The following described streets or parts of streets shall
have the following speed limits for both directions of traffic as
indicated.
Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
All aisles, entrances,
exits and roads
15 Entire complex
I. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through streets except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Street Limits
Access Road Entire length
J. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 39-54 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-54
35:786
§ 39-54.1. Glasstown Center Parking Facility. [Added 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 26-2006]
The Glasstown Center Parking Facility shall include all of the lands
designated on the site plan approved by the NJDOT and bounded by
Sassafras Street on the north, Route NJ 49 (Main Street) on the south, High
Street on the east, and Buck Street on the west.
Intersection Stop Signs On
Drive Through Lane and Lot
"D"
Drive Through Lane
Island Lane and Lot "C" Island Lane
Island Lane and Lot "D" Island Lane
Police Way and Lot "D" Police Way
K. Tow-away zones.
(1) Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede the
normal flow of traffic may be towed and stored by the City at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(2) Any vehicle parked or standing so as to block the entrance of
exitways, the loading zones, the oil-fill areas, and the grassy area
pedestrian walkway may be towed and stored by the City at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(3) Any vehicle parked or standing which presents a safety or traffic
hazard may be towed and stored by the City at the owner's or
operator's expense.
L. Violations and penalties. The penalties for violations of the handicapped
parking section of these regulations shall be as set forth in Article IV of
this chapter. The penalties for violations of the other parking sections of
these regulations shall be as set forth in Article III of this chapter.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in the designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets, or
parts of streets, described below except in the areas covered by
other parking restrictions.
Street Sides Hours Location
All roads All All As indicated on site plan
(3) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit upon
any of the streets, or parts of streets, described below:
§ 39-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-54.1
35:787
Street Hours Location
Road A 15 minutes As indicated on site plan
Road A 2 hours As indicated on site plan
Road B 2 hours As indicated on site plan
Road C 2 hours As indicated on site plan
(4) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the approved site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permit by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
(5) Reserved parking. Five spaces have been reserved for parking for
the Cumberland County Improvement Authority. All vehicles which
have been granted specialty parking for the Cumberland County
Improvement Authority may park in these designated spaces.
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Signs On
Road "A" and Sassafras Street Road "A"
Road "B" and Road "A" Road "B"
Road "B" and Buck Street Road "B"
C. One-way streets. The following described street, or parts of streets, are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Street Direction Limits
Road "A" North Between Route NJ49 (Main Street)
and Sassafras Street
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel in the parking lots shall
be 15 miles per hour.
(2) The speed limit for both directions of travel on all roads within the
parking facility shall be 15 miles per hour for the entire length of
the roads.
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
E. Loading zones. The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said locations during
§ 39-54.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-54.1
35:788
§ 39-55. Millville Board of Education Property.
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods and
materials.
Street Hours Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan
Road "C" All As indicated on site plan
F. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parking or standing as to obstruct or
impede the normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
G. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
for by the New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of
these regulations, or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days or both.
A. The Millville Board of Education property covered by this section shall
include Holly Heights School, Mount Pleasant School, the Senior High
School, and Silver Run School together with the adjacent entrance and
exit roads and parking areas for those schools.
B. No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
between the hours specified of any day upon any of the property
described below.
Property Sides Hours Location
Senior High
School
driveway (east
side)
West All while school is in
session
From the southerly
curbline on the north
side of the Senior
High School to the
northerly curbline on
the south side of the
Senior High School
Senior High
School
driveway (west
side)
North All while school is in
session
From the westerly
curbline on the east
side of the Senior
High School to the
easterly curbline on
the west side of the
Senior High School
Silver Run
School visitors/
staff entrance
driveway
East All while school is in
session
Entire length of
north/south driveway
§ 39-54.1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-55
35:789
Property Sides Hours Location
Silver Run
School visitor/
staff entrance
driveway
North All while school is in
session
Entire length of east/
west driveway
C. One-way streets. The streets or property described below are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Property Direction Location
Holly Heights School
circular driveway
Counter-clockwise Entire length
Mount Pleasant
School driveway
Counter-clockwise Entire length
Senior High School
north entrance
Westbound Beginning 114 feet
from the west curbline
of Wade Boulevard
extending west to the
east curbline of the
Senior High School
parking lot
Senior High School
east-to-west roadway
Westbound Beginning 142 feet
from the west curbline
of Wade Boulevard
extending west to the
east curbline of 14th
Street
Senior High School
north-to-south
roadway
Southbound From the southerly
curbline of the north
driveway extending
south to the west
curbline of Wade
Boulevard at south exit
of Senior High School
§ 39-55 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-55
35:790
ARTICLE VIII
Parking and Traffic Regulations on Municipal Park Property
§ 39-56. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
§ 39-57. Millville City Municipal Park.
A. The Millville City Municipal Park shall include Ware Avenue, Municipal
Utilities Drive, the Streets and Roads Building, the Water Utility
Building, the ballfields and the adjacent parking lots as shown on the
site plan approved by NJDOT.
B. No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Street Sides Hours Location
Municipal Utilities
Drive
Both All Entire length
Ware Avenue Both All Entire length
C. Parking prohibited except in designated parking areas. No person shall
park a vehicle in this park except in the designated parking areas
between the lines provided.
D. Parking reserved for handicapped persons. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following off-street parking locations
are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Parking lot located on
the south side of
Chiola Field
4 Northeast corner of
parking lot
All stalls shall be 13 feet wide as shown on the approved site plan and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking sign and penalty
plate) in the designated parking area reserved for handicapped
persons.
E. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
park, such as police vehicles, public employee vehicles and public
officials vehicles, must be properly identified and the reserved parking
spaces must be shown on the approved site plan.
§ 39-56 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-57
35:791
F. Mid-block crosswalks. The following locations shall be established as
mid-block crosswalks.
Street Location
Access Road Beginning 102 feet north from the northerly curbline of
Ware Avenue extending north for a distance of 6 feet
Ware Avenue Beginning 221 feet south from the southerly curbline of
Route NJ 49 (Main Street) extending south for a
distance of 6 feet
Ware Avenue Beginning 90 feet south from the southerly curbline of
Lot "E" extending south for a distance of 8 feet
Ware Avenue Beginning 92 feet west from the westerly curbline of
Access Road extending west for a distance of 6 feet
G. No passing zones. No passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts of streets.
Street Location Authorization
Ware Avenue Entire length
H. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Street Direction Location
Municipal Utilities
Drive
South From Ware Avenue extending
south for a distance of 75 feet
I. Speed limits. The following described streets or parts of streets shall
have the following speed limits for both directions of traffic as
indicated.
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All aisles, entrances,
exits and roadways
15 Entire park
Ware Avenue 15 Entire length
J. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through streets except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Street Limits
Ware Avenue Entire length
K. Tow away zones.
§ 39-57 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-57
35:792
§ 39-58. Waltman Park.
(1) Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede the
normal flow of traffic may be towed and stored by the City at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(2) Any vehicle parked or standing so as to block the entrance of
exitways, the loading zones, the oil-fill areas, and the grassy area
pedestrian walkway may be towed and stored by the City at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(3) Any vehicle parked or standing which presents a safety or traffic
hazard may be towed and stored at the owner's or operator's
expense.
L. Violations and penalties. The penalties for violations of the handicapped
parking section of these regulations shall be as set forth in Article IV of
this chapter. The penalties for violations of the other parking sections of
these regulations shall be as set forth in Article III of this chapter.
A. Waltman Park shall include City Park Drive North, City Park Drive West,
the basketball courts, tennis courts and other recreational facilities,
and the adjacent parking lots bounded by Brandriff Avenue on the
northwest and by Route NJ 49 (Main Street) on the south.
B. Speed limits. The following described streets or parts of streets shall
have the following speed limits for both directions of traffic as
indicated.
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
City Park Drive North 15 Entire length
City Park Drive West 15 Entire length
C. Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby designated
as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
City Park Drive North and City
Park Drive West
City Park Drive West
§ 39-57 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-58
35:793

ARTICLE IX
Parking and Traffic Regulations on Private Property
§ 39-59. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, are hereby made applicable to
the property listed below.
§ 39-60. Delsea Gardens and Delsea Village property.
A. The Delsea Gardens and Delsea Village property covered by this section
shall include the apartment complexes together with the adjacent
entrance and exit roads and parking area for those complexes.
B. Parking prohibited at all times. No person shall park a vehicle at any
time on the following described locations.
Property Sides Location
Delsea Gardens and
Delsea Village
entrance and exit
driveway
Both Entire length
Parking lot for Building
#1
North In Delsea Gardens beginning at the
easterly curbline adjacent to
Building #2 extending west for a
distance of 61 feet
Parking lot for Building
#2
East In Delsea Gardens beginning at the
northerly curbline of the entrance/
exit driveway extending north to its
northerly terminus at the northerly
curbline of the parking lot for
Building #1
C. Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby designated
as stop intersections within Delsea Village property. Stop signs shall be
installed as follows.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Main entrance and the exit road
between buildings numbered 4
and 8
Exit road between buildings
numbered 4 and 8
Main entrance and exit road
between buildings numbered 10
and 14
Exit road between buildings
numbered 10 and 14
§ 39-59 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-60
35:795

ARTICLE X
Schedules
LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 39-60
35:797
Chapter 43
PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Public
Property — See Ch. 2, § 2-3E.
Open space and recreation standards — See
Ch. 30, 30-117.
Public park drug-free zones — See Ch. 52, Art.
V.
§ 39-60 MILLVILLE CODE § 39-60
35:798
ARTICLE I
Curfew in Parks and Recreational Areas
§ 43-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish a curfew in the parks and
recreational areas of the City to protect the public property and to deter
illegal activity. The following parks and recreational areas are included in
this article:
American Little League Park and Fishing Pier
Babe Ruth League Park
Cedarville Road Park
Chiola Field Park
Corson Park
Fourth Street Park
Fowser Road Park
Glasstown Plaza and Parking Facilities [Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No.
20-2003]
High and Broad Park
Millville City Municipal Complex [Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No.
20-2003]
Millville City Municipal Park [Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 20-200394]
National Little League Park
Noble Street Park
North Street Park
Union Lake Park
Waltman Park
Waterfront Park
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
DAWN — The first appearance of daylight in the morning.[Added 6-3-2003
by Ord. No. 17-2003]
DUSK — The state or period of partial darkness between day and
night.[Added 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 17-2003]
94.Editor's Note: the former entry for Municipal Complex Park, which immediately followed
this entry, was repealed 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003.
§ 43-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-2
35:799
GLASSTOWN PLAZA AND PARKING FACILITIES — Includes all public
areas within Block 419 (first block) bounded by Sassafras Street to the
north, High Street to the east, Main Street to the south, and Buck Street to
the west; and also includes the three public parking areas located along the
east side of Buck Street between Sassafras Street and Pine Street (Block
416, Lots 13, 14 and 15).[Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003]
MILLVILLE CITY MUNICIPAL COMPLEX — Includes the Municipal Building
(City Hall), the Police and Court Administration Building, the access road,
police way, adjacent parking lots and related improvements as shown on
the site plan approved by the NJDOT.[Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No.
20-2003]
MILLVILLE CITY MUNICIPAL PARK — Includes Ware Avenue, Municipal
Utilities Drive, the Streets and Roads Building, the Water Utility Building,
the ballfields, adjacent parking lots and related improvements as shown on
the site plan approved by NJDOT[Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003]
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS — Those parks and recreational areas
designated in § 43-1 together with any parks or recreational areas acquired
by the City after the adoption of this article.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
WATERFRONT PARK — Includes all public areas along the Maurice River
waterfront bounded by the Maurice River to the west, Brandriff Avenue to
the north, Buck Street and Ware Avenue to the east and the Municipal Boat
docks to the south.[Added 8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003]
§ 43-3. Hours of curfew established. [Amended 6-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 17-2003]
§ 43-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
A. No person shall be or remain in the parks and recreational areas nor
shall any person be standing or stopped in the alleys, parking lots or
streets adjacent thereto between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
unless such person is in lawful employment making it necessary to be in
such place at the time specified.
B. No person shall be or remain in the following parks and recreational
areas between dusk and dawn unless such person is in lawful
employment making it necessary to be in such place at the time
specified:
Fourth Street Park
Noble Street Park
North Street Park
§ 43-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-4
35:800
§ 43-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
A. Moving vehicular traffic lawfully using the main thoroughfares of the
aforesaid parks and recreational areas without standing or stopping.
B. Persons using the parks and recreational areas on special occasions for
lawful purposes with a permit obtained in advance from the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 43-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-5
35:801

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)95
§ 43-6. through § 43-11. (Reserved)
95.Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Library Rules and Regulations, was repealed 9-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 45-2019.
§ 43-6 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-6
35:803

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)96
§ 43-12. through § 43-16. (Reserved)
96.Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Municipal Beach Fees and Regulations, was repealed
9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 44-2019.
§ 43-12 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-12
35:805

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Dock Facilities
§ 43-17. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which persons
shall conduct themselves at the municipal dock facilities to ensure the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the protection of
public property.
§ 43-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
MUNICIPAL DOCK FACILITIES — The land shown on a certain map entitled
"Plan of lots to be leased by the City of Millville on the Maurice River" dated
November 1959 and prepared by Maxwell C. Barber, City Engineer.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 43-19. Regulations.
A. Littering prohibited. No person shall discard, place or throw any
bottles, cans, debris, garbage, glass, trash or litter of any kind upon the
municipal dock facilities or the docks adjacent thereto.
B. Maintenance of dock. All docks shall be maintained in a clean and safe
condition at all times. Any alterations and repairs which require a
NJDEP permit shall be accomplished only after the permit has been
secured.
C. Maintenance of land. The municipal dock facilities shall be maintained
in a clean and safe condition at all times.
D. Maintenance of watercraft. All watercraft berthed at the municipal
dock facilities shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all
times, and shall conform to all applicable federal and state laws.
E. Pollution of river prohibited. No person shall throw any refuse or waste
into the river adjacent to the municipal dock facilities. All surplus fish
shall be properly disposed of by any person having the fish in his or her
possession.
F. Unlawful occupancy of dock. No owner, operator or any person in
charge of a watercraft shall permit the watercraft to occupy any dock
adjacent to the municipal dock facilities without having a valid lease
approved by the governing body of the City.
G. Further regulations. The Department of Parks and Public Property is
hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate such further regulations as
§ 43-17 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-19
35:807
§ 43-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
may be reasonably necessary to ensure the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare at the municipal dock facilities.
§ 43-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-20
35:808
ARTICLE V
Public Buildings and Public Lands
§ 43-21. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which persons shall
conduct themselves in public buildings and on public lands within the City
to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the
protection of public property.
§ 43-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Buildings owned or leased by the City of Millville
where governmental functions or operations are conducted, and the
adjacent grounds and parking lots owned or leased by the City.
PUBLIC LAND — Ball fields, beaches, land, parks, playgrounds and
recreational areas within the City owned or leased by the City of Millville or
the Millville Board of Education.
§ 43-23. Regulations.
A. Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume or take an alcoholic
beverage in any public building or on any public land. This subsection
shall not apply to the Fire Hall during social events.
B. Fire. No person shall build or attempt to build any fire on any public
land without permission of the Fire Official and the permission of the
owner.
C. Littering. No person shall discard, place or throw any bottles, cans,
debris, garbage, glass, trash or litter of any kind on any public lands
except in proper receptacles.
D. Malicious damage. No person shall damage, deface or destroy any
public building or public land including fences, landscaping, shrubs or
trees.
E. Motor vehicles. No person shall drive any motor vehicle on any public
lands except upon the designated parking areas, roadways and streets.
F. Picnics. No person shall conduct a picnic on any public land except at
such place and times designated by the Department of Parks and Public
Property, or the owner.
§ 43-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-23
35:809
§ 43-23.1. Skateboards and similar devices. [Added 8-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 20-2003]
§ 43-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-19-2003 by Ord. No.
20-2003]
Any person who is convicted of an offense under this article shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000, to make restitution for
property damage, to perform community service not to exceed 30 days or
to be incarcerated for a period not to exceed 30 days, or any combination of
the foregoing within the discretion of the court.
G. Pollution of waters. No person shall discard, place or throw any liquid
or solid substance into the waters of any lake, pond, river adjacent to
public land which may result in the pollution of the waters.
H. Swimming in waters. No person shall bathe, swim or wade in any
waters or waterways adjacent to public land except at such places and
times designated by the Department of Parks and Public Property.
I. Further regulations. The Department of Parks and Public Property is
hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate such further regulations as
are reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose or intent of this
article.
A. Legislative findings. The governing body of the City finds that the
regulation of bicycles, rollerblades, roller skates, skateboards and
similar devices near public buildings and on public lands is an
important public concern and is necessary to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and the protection of public property.
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use
bicycles, rollerblades, roller skates, skateboards or similar devices on
or adjacent to the following public buildings and public lands:
Glasstown Plaza and Parking Facilities
Millville City Municipal Complex
Millville City Municipal Park
Waterfront Park
C. Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a
juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such
juvenile to violate this section of the Municipal Code. The term
“knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent or guardian should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
juvenile in that parent's or guardian's control. This section is intended
to set a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility
through an objective test. It shall not be a defense that a parent or
guardian is completely indifferent to the activities, conduct or
whereabouts of the juvenile.
§ 43-23 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-24
35:810
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalks and Streets
§ 43-25. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which people shall
conduct themselves on the sidewalks and streets of the City to ensure the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, and to preserve the
aesthetic beauty of the City.
§ 43-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ALLEY — A public roadway wherein the roadway does not exceed 12 feet in
width.
HIGHWAY or STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every highway publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every road or driveway not open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK — Any walkway laid out by the City which is customarily
preserved for pedestrian travel but which does not include footpaths or
portions of private roads which are worn only by travel and are not
improved by the City or by the abutting property owners.
§ 43-27. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 43-28. Littering prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage
upon any alley, highway, roadway, street or sidewalk within the City.
B. A person shall be presumed to have consumed an alcoholic beverage in
violation of this section if an unsealed container of an alcoholic
beverage is in the possession of the person, the contents of the
alcoholic beverage have been partially consumed, and the physical
appearance or conduct of the person may be associated with the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage.
C. For purposes of this section, the term "unsealed container" shall mean a
container with its original seal broken or a container such as a glass or
cup.
§ 43-25 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-28
35:811
§ 43-29. Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the free flow of pedestrian
traffic on any sidewalk or vehicular traffic on any street without a legal
permit or a lawful purpose.
§ 43-30. Use of bicycles and skateboards on sidewalks in Central
Business District.
A. No person shall discard, place or throw any bottles, cans, debris,
garbage, glass, paper, trash, or litter of any kind upon any alley,
sidewalk, street or parking lot within the City except in proper
containers or in compliance with trash collection regulations.
B. No person shall transport garbage, junk, refuse or trash in any manner
upon the alleys, streets, or parking lots within the City in such a manner
as to allow it to be strewn about.
A. Gates and fences. No person shall allow any fence or gate to remain
open across any alley, sidewalk, street or parking lot within the City so
as to obstruct the free flow of pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic.
B. Height of wires or similar devices. No person shall erect, install or
maintain any cables, lines, wires or similar devices to be affixed to any
building, pole or other structure so that it shall be suspended at a
distance of less than eight feet above the surface of any alley, sidewalk,
street or parking lot.
C. Loitering. No persons shall congregate, without lawful purpose, upon
the alleys, sidewalks, streets or parking lots of the City so as to obstruct
the free flow of pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic.
D. Placement of objects. No person shall place any object upon the alleys,
sidewalks, streets or parking lots within the City so as to obstruct the
free flow of pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic. However, the
merchants within the Central Business District shall be permitted to
conduct sidewalk sales of merchandise on a regularly recurring basis as
has been the custom within the City.
A. Purpose. The Board of Commissioners finds that the regulation of
bicycles, roller blades, roller skates, skateboards and similar device
within the Central Business District is an important public concern and
is necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a
bicycle, roller blades, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices on
the sidewalks within the Central Business District which shall be
defined as follows:
(1) Buck Street from Main Street to Broad Street inclusive (both
sides).
§ 43-28 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-30
35:812
§ 43-31. Throwing missiles prohibited.
No person shall throw any bottle, can, stone or hard object of any type from
a moving motor vehicle or at a moving motor vehicle, or onto the alleys,
sidewalks, streets or parking lots within the City from any location.
§ 43-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
(2) High Street from Smith Street to Harrison Avenue inclusive (both
sides).
(3) Second Street from Main Street to Broad Street inclusive (both
sides).
(4) Oak Street from Buck Street to Second Street inclusive (both
sides).
(5) Vine Street from Buck Street to Second Street inclusive (both
sides).
(6) Mulberry Street from Buck Street to Second Street inclusive (both
sides).
(7) Pine Street from Buck Street to Second Street inclusive (both
sides).
(8) Sassafras Street from Buck Street to Second Street inclusive (both
sides).
C. Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian
having legal custody of a minor child to knowingly permit, or by
inefficient control to allow such minor to violate this section of the
Municipal Code. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a
parent or guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning
the whereabouts of a minor child in their legal custody. It is intended by
this subsection to keep neglectful or careless parents or legal guardians
up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility
through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent or legal
guardian was completely indifferent to the activities, conduct or
whereabouts of a minor child in their legal custody.
§ 43-30 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-32
35:813

ARTICLE VII
Special Events on Public Lands
[Added 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 8-2001]
§ 43-33. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Department of Parks and Public
Property to enforce the provisions of this article as hereinafter provided.
§ 43-34. Powers and duties.
The Department of Parks and Public Property shall have those powers and
duties which are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of these
regulations including, but not limited to, the following enumerated powers
and duties:
§ 43-35. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to license and regulate the standards and
manner in which special events shall be conducted on public lands owned
or leased by the City of Millville to ensure the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare, and to ensure the preservation of public lands
and improvements and their aesthetic character for the enjoyment of the
public at large.
A. To inspect the operation of the permittee on public lands to ensure
compliance with these regulations and the conditions imposed.
B. To investigate potential violations of these regulations or the conditions
imposed.
C. To serve a written notice of violation on the permittee when there is an
alleged violation of the regulations or conditions imposed.
D. To serve a notice of suspension or revocation of the permit when a
municipal official has suspended or revoked the permit pursuant to
these regulations.
E. To file a complaint with the Municipal Court against any person
allegedly violating these regulations or the conditions imposed.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, special events authorized by this
article shall be exempt from the licensing fees and regulations
contained in Chapter 33 of the Municipal Code.
B. Special events without alcoholic beverages may be conducted on public
lands owned or leased by the City of Millville pursuant to these
regulations.
C. Special events with alcoholic beverages may be conducted only on the
following public lands: the riverfront area east of the Maurice River
from Main Street to Brandriff Avenue in an area appropriately
§ 43-33 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-35
35:815
§ 43-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Beer, wine and wine coolers only and shall not
include liquor or distilled spirits.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE VENDOR'S PERMIT — A permit issued by the City
Clerk to an applicant authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at a special
event pursuant to these regulations. The applicant must possess a permit
obtained with the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control for
Social Affairs, Catering or Extended Premises and approved by the Chief of
Police and City Clerk.[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2-2020]
CONDITIONS IMPOSED — Any conditions contained in the permit, or
any conditions included in the resolution adopted by the governing body
approving the special event, or any conditions imposed by the Department
of Parks and Public Property for the use of public lands by the permittee for
the special event.
DISTRIBUTION AREA — An area clearly designated for the distribution
or sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with New Jersey Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations.[Amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No.
2-2020]
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, trust or other legal entity.
PUBLIC LANDS — Lands and improvements owned or leased by the City of
Millville including public alleys, highways, roads and streets.
SPECIAL EVENT — An artistic, educational, recreational or social event
sponsored, co-sponsored or authorized by the City of Millville for the benefit
of the public at large which may or may not have a charge for admission.
§ 43-37. Permits required.
No person shall conduct a special event on public lands owned or leased by
the City of Millville unless licensed to do so by the City Clerk pursuant to
these regulations.
designated by the Department of Parks and Public Property for the
special event.
A. The fee for a special events permit shall be $100 for the permit plus
$100 per day for each day that the special event is authorized to be held
by the permit.
B. The fee for a municipal alcoholic beverage vendor's permit shall be
$200 for the permit plus $100 per day for each day that the sale of
alcoholic beverages is authorized by the permit during a special event.
§ 43-35 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-37
35:816
§ 43-38. Exemptions and waivers.
C. All permit fees shall be paid to the City Clerk when the application is
filed.
D. The permit for a special event shall not be issued for longer than 10
days at one time, but it may be issued for nonconsecutive days not to
exceed 10 total days.
E. The permit for a municipal alcoholic beverage vendor's permit shall not
be issued for a period of time that is longer than the special event
permit, but it may be issued for a shorter period of time.
A. Special events sponsored solely by the City of Millville are exempt from
the payment of the fee for a special event permit. A special event
sponsored or co-sponsored by a local nonprofit organization held for the
benefit of the Millville residents at large which is open to the public free
of charge, and where no beverages, food, goods or services are sold by
vendors sponsored by the local nonprofit organization, is exempt from
the payment of the fee for a special event permit. Examples include the
following special events:
(1) An art exhibit sponsored by the Millville Development Corporation.
(2) A baby contest held by the Department of Parks and Public
Property.
(3) A Christmas parade sponsored by the Millville Chamber of
Commerce.
(4) A spirit parade and rally sponsored by the Millville Board of
Education.
(5) Youth week sponsored by the Millville Elks.
B. When the local nonprofit organization desires to sponsor vendors for
beverages, food, goods or services for the special event, the vendors'
permit fees required by Chapter 33 of the Municipal Code may be
waived by the governing body. However, the local nonprofit
organization must pay the special event permit fees to the City Clerk in
lieu of the vendors' permit fees.
C. When the local nonprofit organization desires the exclusive use of the
public lands for the special event for the time period designated in the
special event permit, the governing body may authorize this use in the
resolution approving the special event. When this occurs, the City Clerk
shall not issue licenses or permits pursuant to Chapter 33 of the
Municipal Code which allows nonsponsored vendors to sell beverages,
food, goods or services on the public lands covered by the special event
permit.
§ 43-37 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-39
35:817
§ 43-39. Applications.
The application for the permits required by this article shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Clerk. Each application shall be filed in a
timely fashion and contain the following information:
§ 43-40. Regulations.
A. The person sponsoring the special event shall file the application for a
special event permit at least 30 days before the date set for the special
event.
B. The application for a special event permit shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the sponsor and the proposed activity;
(2) A list of the names and addresses of all vendors participating in the
special event and the activity each vendor will perform;
(3) The requested date or dates for the special event and the proposed
hours of operation for each day;
(4) An estimate of the daily crowd expected at the event together with
the security measures to be utilized for crowd control and traffic
safety; and
(5) Such other information requested by the City Clerk in the
application form.
C. The application for a municipal alcoholic beverage vendor's permit shall
contain the name and address of the applicant; the requested date or
dates for the permit and the proposed hours of operation for each day; a
sketch of the distribution area which provides specific dimensions,
boundaries, entrance points, exit points, perimeter control, location of
the bar area and location where identification will be checked. The
application shall also include a copy of the applicant's NJABC retail
consumption license and either a NJABC catering permit or extension of
premises permit.
A. No special event shall be held on public lands pursuant to this article
without the approval of the governing body.
B. No special event shall be held on public lands pursuant to this article
until a special events permit has been issued by the City Clerk.
C. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or distributed on the public lands
pursuant to this article until a municipal alcoholic beverage vendor's
permit has been issued by the City Clerk.
D. The applicant for a special events permit shall provide liability
insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 which covers the special event
and the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages if applicable. The
City of Millville shall be named as an additional insured under the policy
§ 43-39 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-40
35:818
§ 43-41. Denial, suspension or revocation of permits; appeals.
of insurance. Proof of said insurance shall be filed with the City Clerk
before the permits are issued. The governing body may lower or waive
the insurance requirement in the resolution approving the special event
when the liability risks are minimal for the type of special event
approved. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 20-2018]
E. The applicant must execute an indemnification agreement with the City
of Millville which agrees to indemnify and save the City harmless from
all liability related to the special event and the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages if applicable. The form of agreement must be
approved by the City Clerk and City Attorney.
F. The permittee may charge a reasonable admission fee for the
attendance of the public at the special event, provided that the fee has
been approved by the City Clerk.
G. The hours for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages must comply
with the regulations contained in Chapter 5 of the Municipal Code.
H. The permittee shall comply with these regulations, all conditions
imposed, and all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
I. Persons shall not consume or remove alcoholic beverages from the area
designated for consumption.
J. Except as otherwise provided herein, all persons shall comply with all
applicable ordinances regulating the use of public lands including those
regulations contained in § 43-23 of this chapter.
K. A mark-out is required if erecting a structure which requires the ground
to be penetrated. [Added 7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 38-2019]
A. Any applicant for a permit maybe denied a permit by the City Clerk or
any permit may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor for any of the
following causes:
(1) The applicant or permittee has filed an application containing false
information.
(2) The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with these
regulations or the conditions imposed.
(3) The applicant or permittee has been convicted of an offense under
these regulations.
(4) The applicant or permittee has violated the Consumer Fraud Act,
N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
B. The applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of any municipal
official by filing a written request for a hearing before the Beard of
Commissioners with the City Clerk within 10 days of receiving the
§ 43-40 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-41
35:819
§ 43-42. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations, shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III.
notice of denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. The hearing
shall be held within 20 days after the request is filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 43-41 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-42
35:820
ARTICLE VIII
Maurice River Bicycle and Walking Trail
[Added 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 17-2005]
§ 43-43. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which all persons
shall conduct themselves on the Maurice River Bicycle and Walking Trail
to insure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the
protection of private and public property, including the protection of the
animal and plant environment.
§ 43-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
BICYCLE — A transportation vehicle with two wheels, one in front of the
other, steered by a handlebar and driven by pedals propelled solely by
human power.
DAWN — The first appearance of daylight in the morning.
DUSK — The state or period of partial darkness between day and night.
MAURICE RIVER BICYCLE AND WALKING TRAIL — Being within a linear
strip of public lands designated as a pedestrian and bikeway trail and
further described as being located along the westerly side of the Maurice
River running for a distance of approximately one mile from Brandriff
Avenue to Sharp Street Park including intermediate access points at
Mulford Avenue and Main Street (Mount Pleasant vicinity). Said trail facility
in its entirety also includes all public infrastructure, including but not
limited to asphalt paving, stone particle surfaces, timber bridges, timber
pilings, underdrain pipes, and vegetated edges.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust, or other legal entity.
TRICYCLE — A transportation vehicle with three wheels, steered by a
handlebar and driven by pedals propelled solely by human power.
§ 43-45. Regulations.
A. Bicycles and tricycles are vehicles permitted to be operated on the trail.
B. Every person operating a permitted vehicle on the trail shall do so at a
safe speed and in a safe manner so as not to endanger the safety of
themselves or others or to cause damage to any private or public
property including the environment.
C. No person shall operate a device or a vehicle on the trail that is
propelled in any way other than by human power.
§ 43-43 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-45
35:821
§ 43-46. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
D. Emergency vehicles and work vehicles shall be permitted on the trail,
provided the operators are engaged in the performance of official
duties.
E. No person shall litter (as defined in Chapter 60 of the Municipal Code)
on the trail or on the adjacent lands and waterways.
F. No person shall leave the trail to trespass on wetlands adjacent thereto.
G. No person shall damage or injure the asphalt trail, boardwalks, or
adjacent lands, trees and vegetation.
H. No person shall harass or harm the animal life located on the trail or the
adjacent lands or waterways.
I. No person shall camp or sleep on the trail or the adjacent lands.
J. No person shall ride a horse or other similar animal on the trail or the
adjacent lands.
K. No person shall swim in the waterways adjacent to the trail.
L. No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages on the trail or
on the adjacent lands or waterways.
M. No person shall sell or offer for sale beverages, food, merchandise, or
other tangible personal property on the trail or on the adjacent lands or
waterways.
N. No person shall move or remove any temporary or permanent barriers,
directionals, fences, gates, or signs from the trail or the adjacent lands.
O. No person shall be on the trail or the adjacent lands between dusk and
dawn.
§ 43-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-46
35:822
ARTICLE IX
Waterfront Park Marina
[Added 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 17-2005]
§ 43-47. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the manner in which all persons
shall conduct themselves on the Waterfront Park Marina to insure the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the protection of
private and public property including the environment.
§ 43-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
DOCKAGE — A charge for the use of a dock or docking accommodations.
DOCKING — To bring or maneuver a boat, vessel or yacht into a dock for
temporary layover.
FISHING — The act of catching fish, or the diversion, occupation or
technique of attempting to catch fish.
MARINA — A location adjacent to or on the water offering docking
accommodations and other services for small craft.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
WATERFRONT PARK MARINA — Being within public lands further
described as being located along the westerly side of Ware Avenue and
along the easterly bank of the Maurice River, running from Main Street
(NJ Rt. 49) to approximately 750 feet (more or less) south to a termination
point near the curve of Ware Avenue, also being the common line with
the beginning of the City boat dock lease parcels. Said public marina
facility in its entirety also includes all public infrastructure, including but
not limited to pedestrian sidewalks, bikeways, passive areas, lighting, sight
furnishings, landscaping, stabilized shoreline, and transient dock system,
complete with ramps, floats, pilings, and accessories.
§ 43-49. Regulations.
A. No person shall occupy or use a dock at the marina unless and until the
required dockage has been paid and only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
B. Dockage shall be charged for the use of the docks and marina facility as
established by resolution of the governing body of the City. Commercial
vessels shall be permitted to use the docks and marina only by special
permit after satisfying all of the requirements set forth in the resolution
of the governing body establishing dockage.
§ 43-47 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-49
35:823
§ 43-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III.
C. The City shall not be responsible for any damage or loss of hardware,
mooring, ropes or tackle or any other equipment of the owner of any
boat, vessel or yacht docked at the marina.
D. If a boat, vessel or yacht sinks or takes on water while docked at the
marina, the owner or operator shall have 48 hours to raise and remove
the vessel. If the owner or operator does not act within that time frame,
the City may raise and remove the vessel at the expense of the owner or
operator.
E. In the event that any boat, vessel or yacht is unlawfully anchored or tied
at the marina so as to obstruct the use of any other dock, then the
owner or operator may be cited for a violation of these regulations.
F. Every person operating a boat, vessel or yacht at the marina shall do so
at a safe speed and in a safe manner so as not to endanger the safety of
themselves or others or to cause damage to any private or public
property.
G. No person shall damage the docks or other facilities at the marina.
H. No person shall litter (as defined in Chapter 60 of the Municipal Code)
the docks, marina, or the adjacent lands and waterways.
I. No person shall swim from the docks or the other marina facilities.
[Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 9-2014]
J. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on a vessel while docked
at the marina or on the docks and marina facilities.
K. No person shall sell, or offer for sale, beverages, food, merchandise, or
other tangible personal property on the docks, marina, or the adjacent
lands or waterways.
L. No person shall move or remove any temporary or permanent barriers,
directionals, fences, gates, or signs from the docks, marina or the
adjacent lands.
§ 43-49 MILLVILLE CODE § 43-50
35:824
Chapter 46
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Local Government Ethics Law — See Ch. 2,
Art. XV.
Fire Department rules and regulations — See
Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
§ 43-50 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 43-50
35:825

ARTICLE I
General Personnel Policies
§ 46-1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the City to treat employees and prospective employees in
a manner consistent with all applicable employment laws and regulations.
The purpose of these policies is to establish a uniform personnel system that
provides a fair balance between managerial needs and employee protection
for the efficient delivery of public services to the residents of the City of
Millville.
§ 46-2. Scope.
The personnel policies and procedures of the City shall apply to all
appointed officials, employees, independent contractors and volunteers. In
the event there is a conflict between these policies and any collective
bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or federal or state law,
including the Attorney General's guidelines with respect to Police
Department personnel matters and the New Jersey Civil Service Act, the
terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases,
these policies and procedures shall prevail.
§ 46-3. Disclaimer.
The governing body of the City reserves the right to amend or repeal
these policies, together with the standard operating procedures, rules and
regulations, at any time with or without notice to the employees. None of
these policies and procedures or rules and regulations shall be deemed to
create a vested contractual right in any employee nor to limit the power of
the governing body to amend or repeal them. Nothing contained herein in
these personnel policies and procedures is intended to restrict, eliminate,
or interfere with an employee's rights under a collective negotiation
agreement, civil service laws and regulations, the New Jersey Employer-
Employee Relations Act, or other statutory entitlements and provisions.
§ 46-4. Appointment and promotion.
All employees, officers and department heads shall be appointed and
promoted by the commissioner in charge of the department where they
work or will work. No person shall be employed or promoted unless there
exists a position created by the Salary Ordinance adopted by the governing
body as well as the necessary budget appropriation.
§ 46-5. Responsibility.
The commissioner in charge of a department shall be authorized and
responsible for the enforcement of the personnel policies and procedures.
That commissioner, however, shall consult with the City Administrator and/
or the Personnel Officer for guidance.
§ 46-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-6
35:827
§ 46-6. No tolerance policy.
As a general principle, the City has a no-tolerance policy towards workplace
wrongdoing. City employees, officials and independent contractors are to
report anything perceived to be improper to the City Administrator. The
City encourages employees to talk with their supervisor, department head
or City Administrator concerning any problem.
§ 46-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-6
35:828
ARTICLE II
Civil Service and Unclassified Services
§ 46-7. Classified civil service defined.
The classified civil service of the City of Millville shall consist of all fulltime
officers and employees of the City except employees not classified by
this chapter, elected officers and such others as may be defined by other
ordinances of the City.
§ 46-8. Classifications, grades and salaries.
The full-time officers and employees in the classified civil service shall be
classified and graded and be paid an annual or hourly rate of pay, as the
case may be, within the limits or ranges as established by ordinance.
§ 46-9. Appointments.
Appointments and reappointments to positions in the classified City service
shall normally be within the salary range fixed for the applicable class
grade. The City Commission may, however, make an exception based upon
the appointee's service with the City, character, experience or ability.
§ 46-10. Pay periods per year.
All rates of pay for positions in the classified City service shall be computed
on a biweekly basis.
§ 46-11. Advancement.
All increases in salary or persons in the classified City service shall be
granted by the City Commission on the basis of exceptional merit. Such
increases shall be within the ranges set forth in § 46-8.
§ 46-12. Salary following promotion.
Unless otherwise provided by contract, whenever an individual in the
classified City service is promoted to a new position, his or her new salary
shall be fixed by the City Commission but, in no case, shall it be fixed at less
than the amount received in his or her former position.
§ 46-13. Salary following demotion.
Demotions or reduction in salaries shall be made according to the personnel
policies and the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission
pursuant to Title 4A of the New Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 46-14. Salary following authorized leave of absence.
Whenever an individual is reinstated to his or her former position after an
authorized leave of absence, his or her salary shall be fixed by the City
§ 46-7 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-14
35:829
Commission but shall not be fixed in a range below that held by him or her
prior to his or her leave.
§ 46-15. Salaries of unclassified personnel.
Salaries for unclassified personnel shall be established in the Salary
Ordinance annually.
§ 46-16. Job title and job description.
Each position with the City shall be assigned to a job title. A job description,
including qualifications, shall be maintained for each job title pursuant to
New Jersey Civil Service Commission guidelines if the position is subject to
civil service. All job descriptions must be approved by the commissioner in
charge of the department. The Personnel Officer shall make copies available
upon request.
§ 46-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-16
35:830
ARTICLE III
Policies and Procedures; Rules and Regulations
§ 46-17. Adoption.
The governing body of the City shall adopt the personnel policies by
ordinance.
§ 46-18. Amendments.
The standard operating procedures and the various employee manuals may
be amended by resolution of the governing body of the City from time to
time as hereinafter provided.
§ 46-19. Amendatory procedure.
Any commissioner seeking to amend the standard operating procedures or
any of the employee manuals may do so by circulating a draft copy of the
proposed amendments to the City Administrator, City Attorney, and other
commissioners at least five days in advance of the commission meeting
when the amendment resolution is to be considered.
§ 46-20. Copies and acknowledgment.
Copies of these documents shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk. Copies of these documents shall be disseminated to all employees
covered by them and an acknowledgment shall be signed by the employee
receiving them. Additional copies of these documents shall be made
available to any employee upon request.
A. The City of Millville Personnel Policies shall apply to all employees
unless otherwise provided in the Millville Police Department Rules and
Regulations or the Millville Fire Department Rules and Regulations.
B. The Fire Department Rules and Regulations contains specific rules and
regulations applicable to all Fire Department personnel.
C. The Police Department Rules and Regulations contains specific rules
and regulations applicable to all Police Department personnel.
§ 46-17 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-20
35:831

ARTICLE IV
Alcohol and Drugs
§ 46-21. Policy.
In compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, the City of
Millville has a longstanding commitment to providing a safe and productive
work environment consistent with the standards of the community we serve.
Alcohol and drug abuse pose a threat to the health and safety of City
employees and to the security of our equipment and facilities. For these
reasons, the City of Millville is committed to the elimination of drug and/
or alcohol use and abuse in the workplace. This policy outlines the practice
and procedure designed to correct instances of identified alcohol and/or
drug use in the workplace. This policy continues to apply to all employees
and all applicants for employment of the City.
A. Employee assistance and drug-free awareness.
(1) Illegal drug use and alcohol misuse have a number of adverse
health and safety consequences. Information about those
consequences and sources of help for drug/alcohol problems is
available from the City.
(2) The City will assist and support employees who voluntarily seek
help for such problems before becoming subject to discipline and/
or termination under this or other City policies. Such employees
will be allowed to use accrued paid time off, placed on leaves of
absence, referred to treatment providers and otherwise
accommodated as required by law. Such employees may be
required to document that they are successfully following
prescribed treatment and to take and pass follow-up tests if they
hold jobs that are safety-sensitive or require driving, or have
violated this policy previously. Once a drug test has been
scheduled, the employee will have forfeited their right to be
granted a leave of absence for treatment and possible discipline, up
to and including discharge, will be unavoidable.
(3) Employees should report to work fit for duty and free of any
adverse effects of illegal drugs or alcohol. This policy does not
prohibit employees from the lawful use and possession of
prescribed medications. Employees must, however, consult with
their doctors about the medications' effect on their fitness for duty
and ability to work safely and promptly disclose any work
restrictions to their supervisor. Employees should not, however,
disclose underlying medical conditions unless directed to do so by
their supervisor.
B. Work rules.
§ 46-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-21
35:833
(1) Whenever employees are working, are operating any City vehicle,
are present on City premises, or are conducting City related work
off site, they are prohibited from:
(a) Using, possessing, buying, selling, manufacturing or
dispensing an illegal drug (to include possession of drug
paraphernalia);
(b) Being under the influence of alcohol or an illegal drug as
defined in this policy; and
(c) Possessing or consuming alcohol.
(2) The presence of any detectable amount of any illegal drug or illegal
controlled substance in an employee's body system, while
performing City business or while in a City facility, is prohibited.
(3) The City will also not allow any employee to perform their duties
while taking prescribed drugs that are adversely affecting the
employee's ability to safely and effectively perform their job duties.
Employees taking a prescribed medication must carry it in the
container labeled by a licensed pharmacist or be prepared to
produce this if asked. Employees possessing prescription
medication in child-care centers must secure it behind lock and key.
(4) Any illegal drugs or drug paraphernalia will be turned over to an
appropriate law enforcement officer and may result in criminal
prosecution.
C. Required testing.
(1) Pre-employment. All applicants must pass a drug test before
beginning work or receiving an offer of employment. Refusal to
submit to testing will result in disqualification of further
employment consideration.
(2) Reasonable suspicion. Employees are subject to testing based upon
(hut not limited to) observations by supervision or management of
apparent workplace use, possession or impairment. The City
Personnel Officer shall be consulted before sending an employee
for testing. All levels of supervision or management making this
decision must utilize the Reasonable Suspicion Checklist to
document specific observations and behaviors that create a
reasonable suspicion that the person is under the influence of
illegal drugs and/or alcohol. Reasonable suspicion may include (but
are not limited to) where the employee:
(a) Is unable to coordinate their actions;
(b) Has red or bloodshot eyes, or dilated pupils;
(c) Smells of alcohol;
§ 46-21 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-21
35:834
(d) Acts contrary to their normal behavior;
(e) Exceeds alcohol concentration limits applicable to the task
they perform or may be called on to perform;
(f) Is not behaving in a professional and competent manner and in
accordance with City policy standards; or
(g) Otherwise appears to be impaired or affected by drugs or
alcohol; or
(h) Returns a positive alcohol or drug test. If the results of the
Reasonable Suspicion Checklist indicate further action is
justified, the manager/supervisor should confront the
employee with the documentation and with a union
representative present (for all unionized employees) and/or
with another member of management (for all nonunionized
employees). Under no circumstances will the employee be
allowed to drive himself or herself to the testing facility. A
member of supervision/management and a union
representative (if appropriate) must escort the employee; the
supervisor/manager will make arrangements for the employee
to be transported home.
(3) Post-accident. Employees are subject to testing when they are
involved in an accident that damages a City vehicle, machinery,
equipment, or property and/or result in an injury to themselves,
another employee, or client requiring off-site medical attention. A
probable belief circumstance will be presumed to arise in any
instance involving a work-related accident or injury in which an
employee who was operating a motorized vehicle (including, but
not limited to, forklifts, pallet jacks, automobiles, pickups, vans, or
trucks) is found to be responsible for causing the accident. In any of
these instances, the investigation and subsequent testing must take
place within two hours following the accident, if not sooner. Under
no circumstances will the employee be allowed to drive himself or
herself to the testing facility.
(4) Follow-up. Employees who have tested positive, or otherwise
violated this policy, are subject to discipline, up to and including
discharge. Depending upon the circumstances and the employee's
work history/record, the City may offer an employee who violates
this policy or tests positive the opportunity to return to work on a
last-chance basis pursuant to mutually agreeable terms, which
could include follow-up drug testing at times and frequencies
determined by the City for a minimum of one year but not more
than two years as well as a waiver of the right to contest any
termination resulting from a subsequent positive test. If the
employee either does not complete their rehabilitation program or
tests positive after completing the rehabilitation program, they will
be subject to immediate discharge from employment.
§ 46-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-21
35:835
D. Responsibilities of management.
(1) Management is responsible for ensuring that this policy is
implemented in their area.
(2) The Human Resources Department will be the point of contact for
the testing provider.
(3) This includes ensuring that:
(a) All workers are made aware and understand this policy;
(b) Risk assessments are undertaken on work tasks in consultation
workers and/or work health and safety representatives;
(c) The behavior of workers is observed to ensure adherence with
the policy;
(d) Any concerns or issues are addressed proactively and
expediently to ensure the health and safety of all workers;
(e) Support is provided to workers where appropriate; and
(f) Any suspected breaches of this policy are acted on promptly
and in accordance with this policy.
E. Consequences.
(1) Applicants who refuse to cooperate in a drug test or who test
positive will not be hired and will not be allowed to reapply/retest
in the future.
(2) Employees who refuse to cooperate in required tests or who use,
possess, buy, sell, manufacture or dispense an illegal drug in
violation of this policy will be terminated. If the employee refuses to
be tested yet we believe they are impaired, under no circumstances
will the employee be allowed to drive himself or herself home.
(3) The first time an employee tests positive for alcohol or illegal drug
use under this policy, the result will be discipline up to and
including discharge.
(4) Employees will be paid for time spent in alcohol/drug testing and
then suspended pending the results of the drug/alcohol test.
F. Confidentiality. Information and records relating to positive test results,
drug and alcohol dependencies and legitimate medical explanations
provided to the MRO shall be kept confidential to the extent required by
law and maintained in secure files separate from normal personnel files.
Such records and information may be disclosed among managers and
supervisors on a need-to-know basis and may also be disclosed where
relevant to a grievance, charge, claim or other legal proceeding
initiated by or on behalf of an employee or applicant.
§ 46-21 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-21
35:836
G. Inspections. The City reserves the right to inspect all portions of its
premises for drugs, alcohol or other contraband; affected employees
may retain representation during this process, including union
representation for unionized employees. Inspections are to be
conducted by authorized personnel; a member of the senior
management team and/or a supervisor. All employees, contract
employees and visitors may be asked to cooperate in inspections of
their persons, work areas, and property that might conceal a drug,
alcohol, or other contraband. Employees who possess such contraband
or refuse to cooperate in such inspections are subject to appropriate
discipline, up to and including discharge.
H. Crime involving drugs.
(1) The City prohibits all employees from manufacturing, distributing,
dispensing, possessing or using an illegal drug in or on the City
premises or while conducting City business. City employees are
also prohibited from misusing legally prescribed or OTC drugs.
Law enforcement personnel shall be notified, as appropriate, where
criminal activity is suspected.
(2) The City does not desire to intrude into the private lives of its
employees, but recognizes that employee's off-the-job involvement
with drugs and alcohol may have an impact on the workplace.
Therefore, the City reserves the right to take appropriate
disciplinary action for drug usage/sale/distribution or driving while
under the influence of drugs or alcohol (DWI) while off company
premises. All employees who are convicted of, plead guilty to, or
arc sentenced for a crime involving an illegal drug or conviction of
DWI are required to report the conviction, plea or sentence to the
commissioner overseeing their department within five days. Failure
to comply will result in automatic discharge. Cooperation in
complying may result in suspension without pay to allow
management to review the nature of the charges and the
employee's past record with the City.
I. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CITY PREMISES — Includes, but is not limited to, all buildings, offices,
facilities, grounds, parking lots, lockers, places and vehicles owned,
leased or managed by the City of Millville or on any site on which the
City is conducting business.
ILLEGAL DRUG — A substance whose use or possession is controlled
by federal law but that is not being used or possessed under the
supervision of a licensed health care professional. (Controlled
substances are listed in Schedules I-V of 21 CFR Part 1308.)
REFUSE TO COOPERATE — To obstruct the collection or testing
process; to submit an altered, adulterated, or substitute sample; to fail
to show up for a scheduled test; to refuse to complete the requested
§ 46-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-21
35:837
drug testing forms; or fail to promptly provide specimen(s) for testing
when directed to do so, without a valid medical basis for the failure.
Employees who leave the scene of an accident without justifiable
explanation prior to submission to drug and alcohol testing will also
be considered to have refused to cooperate and will automatically be
subject to discharge.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL — An alcohol concentration
equal to or greater than 0.04, or actions, appearance, speech or bodily
odors that reasonably cause a supervisor to conclude that an employee
is impaired because of alcohol use.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS — A confirmed positive test
result for illegal drug use per this policy. In addition, it means the
misuse of legal drugs (prescription and possibly over-the-counter)
where there is not a valid prescription from a physician for the lawful
use of a drug in the course of medical treatment (containers must
include the patient's name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount
to be taken, and the period of authorization).
J. Reasonable suspicion and post-accident testing protocol.
(1) The employee will be advised that the City believes that there is
reasonable suspicion to believe that he/she is affected by illegal
drugs or alcohol (or due to the nature of the accident the policy
mandates this) and that this test is being offered to confirm or deny
this suspicion.
(2) The employee will be transported to a testing facility. One member
of management/designated attendant will accompany the
employee. Under no circumstances will the employee be allowed to
drive himself or herself to the testing facility. In cases where the
supervisor and employee are of the opposite sex, the employee may
request the management staff to arrange for a third management
staff employee to accompany the supervisor and employee to the
testing site.
(3) Prior to leaving for the testing facility, supervision/management
will contact the testing facility to inform them that staff from the
City of Millville will be arriving and will need a drug and/or alcohol
test completed.
(4) The employee to be tested must present a photo ID (i.e., a driver's
license or state ID card) to the testing facility staff before the
specimen can be obtained. Ensure that the employee brings this
with them when leaving the City premises.
(5) The employee to be tested must sign a consent form provided by/at
the testing facility. Refusal to sign is addressed under the
"'Consequences" section of this document.
(6) When leaving the testing facility, the supervisor/manager must
make arrangements to transport the person home, unless testing
§ 46-21 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-21
35:838
results are immediate and negative. Under no other circumstances
will the tested employee be allowed to drive himself or herself
home.
§ 46-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-21
35:839

ARTICLE V
Bulletin Board Policy
§ 46-22. Official business.
The bulletin boards located in the City administrative buildings and other
facilities are intended for official notices regarding policies, procedures,
meetings and special events. Only personnel authorized by the City
Administrator may post, remove or alter any notice.
§ 46-23. Union business.
In accordance with the collective bargaining agreements, bulletin board
space shall be made available by the City at permanent work locations
for the use of the various unions for the purpose of posting union
announcements and other information of a noncontroversial nature. The
City maintains the right to review and approve all material posted on the
bulletin board.
§ 46-22 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-23
35:841

ARTICLE VI
Conflict of Interest
§ 46-24. Policy.
Employees, including City officials, must conduct business according to
the highest ethical standards of public service. Employees are expected
to devote their best efforts to the interest of the City. Violations of this
policy will result in appropriate disciplinary action. The City also recognizes
nepotism as a conflict of interest within the confines of this policy and
includes same to ensure faith and consistency of the highest standards
within City government. See § 46-89.
§ 46-25. Stale-mandated disclosure form.
The City recognizes the right of employees to engage in outside activities
that are private in nature and unrelated to City business. However, business
dealings that appear to create a conflict between the employee and the
City's interests are unlawful under the New Jersey Local Government Ethics
Act.97 Under the Act, certain employees and officials are required to
annually file with the City Clerk a state-mandated disclosure form. The
City Clerk shall notify employees and officials who are subject to this
requirement.
§ 46-26. Disclosure of possible conflicts.
A. An actual or potential conflict of interest occurs whenever an employee,
including a City official, is in a position to influence a City decision that
may result in a personal gain for the employee or an immediate relative
including a spouse or significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling,
grandparent, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchild, niece, nephew,
uncle, aunt or any person related by blood or marriage residing in the
household of an employee. Employees are required to disclose possible
conflicts so that the City may assess and prevent potential conflicts. If
there are any questions whether an action or proposed course of
conduct would create a conflict of interest, immediately contact the City
Administrator or the City Solicitor to obtain clarification.
B. Since it is impossible to describe all of the situations that may cause or
give the appearance of a conflict of interest, the prohibitions included in
this policy are not intended to be exhaustive and include only some of
the more clear-cut examples.
(1) Employees are expected to represent the City in a positive and
ethical manner. Thus, employees have an obligation to avoid
conflicts of interest and to refer questions and concerns about
potential conflicts to the City Administrator or the City Attorney.
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40a:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 46-24 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-26
35:843
§ 46-27. Outside employment.
Employees are allowed to hold outside employment in accordance with
City policy. Employees are prohibited from engaging in outside employment
activities while on the job or using City time, equipment or supplies in
the outside employment activities. The City Administrator may request
employees to restrict outside employment if the quality of City work
diminishes. Any employee who holds an interest in, or is employed by, any
business doing business with the City must submit a written notice of these
outside interests to the City Administrator.
§ 46-28. Gifts or gratuities.
Employees may not accept contributions, donations, gifts or gratuities that
could be interpreted to affect their City duties. Under no circumstances
shall a City employee accept contributions, donations, gifts or gratuities
from a vendor doing business with or seeking to do business with the City
or any person or firm seeking to influence City decisions. Meals and other
entertainment valued in excess of $100 also are prohibited. Employees are
required to report to the City Administrator any offer of a contribution,
(2) Employees may not engage in, directly or indirectly either on or off
the job, any conduct which is disloyal, disruptive, competitive, or
damaging to the City. Prohibited activity also includes any illegal
acts in restraint of trade.
(3) Employees may not accept any employment relationship with any
organization that does business with the City. This prohibition on
employment includes serving as an advisor or consultant to any
organization of that type, unless the activity is conducted as a
representative of the City.
(4) Employees must disclose any financial interest they or their
immediate family have that does business with the City. The City
may require divestiture of the interest if it considers the financial
interest to be in conflict with its best interests.
(5) Employees and their immediate family may not accept gifts, or any
special discounts or loans from any person doing, seeking to do,
business with the City. The meaning of gifts for purposes of this
policy includes the acceptance of lavish entertainment and travel
and lodging, and any gift of any nominal value. See § 46-28, Gifts or
gratuities.
(6) No person shall hold a job over which a member of his or her
immediate family exercises supervisory authority.
(7) As stated previously, any conflict or potential conflict of interest
must be disclosed to the City and failure to do so will result in
discipline, up to and including termination.
§ 46-26 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-28
35:844
donation, gift or gratuity, including meals or entertainment that is in
violation of this policy.
§ 46-28 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-28
35:845

ARTICLE VII
Contagious and Life Threatening Illnesses
§ 46-29. Reasonable accommodation.
§ 46-30. Confidentiality.
A. The City encourages employees with contagious and/or communicable
diseases or life-threatening illnesses to continue their normal pursuits,
including work, to the extent allowed by their condition. The City shall
make reasonable accommodations to known physical and mental
limitations of all employees, provided that the individual is otherwise
qualified to safely perform the essential functions of the job and also
provided that the accommodation does not impose an unreasonable
hardship on the City.
B. Communicable diseases include, but are not limited to, measles,
influenza, viral hepatitis-A (infectious hepatitis), viral hepatitis-B
(serum hepatitis), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV infection), AIDS,
AIDS-Related Complex (ARC), leprosy, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) and tuberculosis. The City may choose to broaden
this definition within its best interest and in accordance with
information received through the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC).
C. The City will not discriminate against any job applicant or employee
based on the individual having a communicable disease. Applicants and
employees shall not be denied access to the workplace solely on the
grounds that they have a communicable disease. The City reserves the
right to exclude a person with a communicable disease from the
workplace facilities, programs and functions if the organization finds
that, based on a medical determination, such restriction is necessary
for the welfare of the person who has the communicable disease and/or
the welfare of others within the workplace.
A. The City will take reasonable precautions to protect such information
from inappropriate disclosure, including the following:
(1) Medical information may be disclosed with the prior written
informed consent of the person who is the subject of the
information.
(2) Information may be disclosed without the prior written consent to
qualified individuals for the purpose of conducting management
audits, financial audits, and program evaluations, but these
individuals shall not identify, either directly or indirectly, the
person who is the subject of the record in a report or evaluation, or
otherwise disclose the person's identity in any manner. Information
shall not be released to these individuals unless it is vital to the
audit or evaluation.
§ 46-29 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-30
35:847
(3) Information may be disclosed to the Department of Health as
required by state or federal law.
(4) Managers and other employees have a responsibility to maintain
the confidentiality of employee medical information. Anyone
inappropriately disclosing such information shall be subject to
disciplinary action.
B. Employees with questions or concerns about contagious or lifethreatening
illnesses are encouraged to contact the City Administrator.
§ 46-30 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-30
35:848
ARTICLE VIII
Defense and Indemnification
§ 46-31. Policy and definitions.
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide standards and to regulate
the manner in which the City shall provide for the defense and
indemnification of appointees, employees and officials in connection with
legal actions filed against them, including cross-claims and counterclaims.
The definition of an appointee, employee and official shall be liberally
interpreted in order to effectuate the purpose and intent of this policy,
except that these terms shall not mean:
§ 46-32. Standards for defense and indemnification.
§ 46-33. Exceptions.
A. Any legal entity which is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the City except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing engineering or legal services for
compensation unless that person is a full-time employee of the City; and
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to defend and indemnify the City or secure liability insurance.
A. The City shall provide for the defense and indemnification of any
present or former appointee, employee or official who becomes a
defendant in a civil action arising from any act or omission falling
within the scope of their public duties.
B. The City shall provide for the defense and indemnification of any
present or former appointee, employee or official who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law;
(2) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the City has or had an
interest; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
C. The City may provide for the defense of a present or former appointee,
employee or official in any other action or proceeding, including
criminal proceedings, if the governing body of the City concludes that
such representation is in the best interest of the City and the person to
be defended acted or failed to act in accordance with the standards set
forth herein.
§ 46-31 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-33
35:849
§ 46-34. Assignment of counsel; cooperation.
A. The City shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal defense of
such claims in accordance with the standards set forth herein.
B. The City may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of
any civil action referred to herein if the governing body of the City
determines that:
(1) The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty
authorized or imposed by law;
(2) The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding by the City would create a
conflict of interest between the City and the person involved.
A. The City may provide for the defense pursuant to this policy by
authorizing its Attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended
or by employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right
of the City under any appropriate insurance policy that required the
insurer to provide a defense.
B. Whenever the City provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the City may assume
exclusive control over the representation of the person defended, and
the person defended shall cooperate fully with the assigned counsel and
the City.
§ 46-33 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-34
35:850
ARTICLE IX
Employment Procedures
§ 46-35. Recruitment and offers of employment.
A. Recruitment. The City Administrator along with the City Attorney will
coordinate the employment recruitment process for all vacancies in fulltime
permanent employment to ensure compliance with civil service,
contractual, legal, and equal opportunity requirements. When a
vacancy occurs, it is the responsibility of the department head to notify
the City Administrator who will distribute notification of the vacancy to
all applicable departments. The City Administrator will undertake to
recruit qualified applicants in accordance with the applicable federal
and state law, including the New Jersey Civil Service Commission
regulations if the position is subject to civil service. Where positions are
advertised, the media or other periodical utilized must have as wide a
circulation as possible to encourage applications from candidates from
diverse backgrounds and must prominently state that the City is an
equal opportunity employer.
B. Applications. All candidates must fully complete an application form. A
resume will not be considered as a substitute for this form. The
application is a confidential document and will not be available to
anyone who is not directly involved in the hiring process.
C. Interviews. The City Administrator or designee will coordinate the
interview process including the scheduling of applicants, development
of interview questions and standards to measure candidate responses.
All questions must be in accordance with the New Jersey Division on
Civil Rights Guidelines for Pre-Employment Inquiries. Reasonable
accommodations must be made for disabled applicants.
D. Physical examination. The City Administrator may require applicants,
prior to employment, to successfully pass a pre-employment drug/
alcohol screening and a physical examination consistent with the
Americans with Disabilities Act to assure that the work required by the
position will not cause injury to the employee or co-employees and that
the person is fit to meet the requirements of the position. The City
Administrator may require periodic physical examinations to determine
the employee's continued ability to perform the duties of the position.
All physical examinations must be performed by a physician chosen by
the City at the expense of the City. All medical records of employees and
prospective employees are confidential and are to be maintained by the
City Administrator separate from the employee's official personnel file.
E. Criminal background check. In accordance with state and local law, all
applicants will be required to undergo a pre-employment background
screening.
(1) Background checks required: Background checks are required of
all candidates, volunteers, or if applicable, existing employees.
§ 46-35 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-35
35:851
(2) Background check procedure: The City Administrator or his/her
designee will perform or initiate background checks and be the
recipient of reports from outside agencies or contractors. The City
Administrator or his/her designee will discuss disqualifying
information received with the employee's or volunteer's
department head. Written information received as a result of a
"Request for Criminal History Record Information For A
Noncriminal Justice Purpose" will be destroyed immediately after it
has served its authorized purpose, as required by the State Police.
Such information will be kept confidential and will not be published
or disclosed in any manner not consistent with the procedures
listed herein. Such information will not be deemed a public record
under P.L. 1963, c.73 (C:47:1A-1, et seq.) as amended and
supplemented by P.L. 2001, c.404 (C:47:1A-5, et seq.).
(3) Existing employees or volunteers will be placed on immediate
suspension pending the outcome of a hearing or appeal. Employee
suspensions may be with or without pay at the discretion of the City
Administrator.
(4) When a disqualification decision has been made as a result of the
employer's targeted screening process described above, the City
Administrator will inform the candidate, volunteer, or employee, in
writing, of any information that would disqualify the person from
working with children/youth. In addition, the individual shall be
advised that he/she has the opportunity to explain the criminal
record and to demonstrate why the exclusion based on the
employer's targeted screening process should not apply to him/her
under the circumstances. This information may include evidence of
an error in the criminal record; facts surrounding the conviction;
age at the time of the conviction and/or release from prison;
evidence of a clean criminal and employment record since release;
rehabilitation efforts; positive references; and evidence that he/she
is bondable. Thereafter, the employer shall give the individual
further consideration.
F. Job offers. The final decision will be made by the commissioner in
charge of the department after all references and other information has
been verified. Every effort shall be made to offer reasonable
accommodations pursuant to federal and state law. The employment
offer must be made in a letter to the candidate outlining all terms and
conditions of the offer. The letter shall also establish a deadline for
acceptance.
G. Acceptances and rejections. If the first offer is rejected, the
commissioner in charge of the department will decide to hire another
employment or reopen the position. Once a candidate accepts the
employment offer, all other candidates will be notified in writing that
they were not accepted for the position.
§ 46-35 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-35
35:852
§ 46-36. Initial employment period procedure.
Except where state requirements direct otherwise, new employees or
present employees transferring to new positions shall be hired subject to
an initial employment period of not less than 90 days. During this initial
employment period, the new employee or transferee shall be provided with
training and guidance from the supervisor. During this initial employment
period, department heads shall evaluate probationary employees a
minimum of three times and provide a written report to the commissioner
in charge of the department concerning the progress of the employee and
the quality of their performance. New employees may be discharged at any
time during this period if the commissioner in charge of the department
concludes that the employee is not progressing or performing satisfactorily.
§ 46-37. New employee orientation and processing procedure.
All new regular full-time and regular part-time employees shall be
scheduled to meet with the City Administrator, or designee on their first
day of employment for a general orientation. Copies of all forms and
acknowledgments must be returned to the City Administrator for inclusion
in the employee's official personnel file. The orientation shall include:
§ 46-38. Open Public Meetings Act procedure concerning personnel
matters.
H. Record retention. All applications, notes made during interviews and
reference checks, job offers and other documents created during the
hiring process must be returned to the City Clerk. Documents related to
the successful candidate shall be placed in the employee's official
personnel file, except that medical records including physical
examination must be maintained in a separate file. All records and
documents related to other candidates must be retained in accordance
with record retention statute. Records and documents created during
the hiring process are confidential and must be retained in a locked
cabinet.
A. A tour of the appropriate facilities to acquaint the new employee with
overall operations as they relate to the specific position;
B. The completion of all pertinent personnel, payroll, insurance and
pension forms;
C. A review of the employee handbook and acknowledgment of receipt;
D. The employee complaint policy letter and acknowledgment;
E. A safety orientation and acknowledgment; and
F. Arrangements to complete required PEOSHA safety training.
A. Pursuant to the Supreme Court Decision in Kean Federation of Teachers
v. Morrell, discussions by the governing body of the City concerning
§ 46-35 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-38
35:853
§ 46-39. Requests for employment verification and reference
procedure.
§ 46-40. Workplace accommodations and medical leave procedure.
appointment, promotion, or terms and conditions of employment of
any current or prospective officer or employee that will not have an
adverse effect on the individual's employment/potential employment
shall be held in closed session. Discussions by the governing body of
the City concerning demotion, termination, performance evaluation,
discipline, or terms and conditions of employment of any current or
prospective officer or employee that will have an adverse effect on the
individual's employment/potential employment shall be held in closed
session unless the individual requests in writing that the discussion be
held in open session. Such request must be granted.
B. Prior to the discussion by the governing body of the City concerning any
matter that may impose an adverse employment action, the City Clerk
shall notify the affected person of the meeting date, time and place
when and where the matters will be discussed and the person's right to
request that discussion occur in open session ("rice notice"). In the case
where public discussion is already planned, a rice notice does not have
to be provided. If the individual does not request that the discussion be
held in open session, the governing body of the City may, at its sole
discretion, invite the affected individual to attend the applicable portion
of the closed session.
C. In the event more than one person is affected by the discussion and one
of the affected persons does not request that the discussion be held in
open session, then the discussion shall be held in closed session.
A. Inquiries and written requests for references or employment
verification regarding a current or former employee must be referred to
the City Administrator. No City official, department head or employee
may issue a reference letter without the permission of the City
Administrator. Under no circumstances should any information be
released over the telephone.
B. In response to a request for information, the City Administrator or
designee will verify only an employee's name, dates of employment, job
title, department and final salary. No other data or information will be
furnished unless the City is required to release the information by law
or the employee or former employee authorizes the City, in writing, to
furnish this information and releases the City from liability.
A. The City has no light-duty policy. The City does have a temporarymodified-
duty policy for work-related incidents. Requests to
accommodate medical restrictions, both mental and physical, will be
handled on an individual basis in accordance with the federal
Americans with Disability Act (ADA) and the state Law Against
Discrimination (LAD). In the case of an employee breastfeeding her
§ 46-38 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-40
35:854
infant child, the accommodation shall include reasonable break time
each day to the employee and a suitable room or other location with
privacy, other than a toilet stall, in close proximity to work area for
the employee to express breast milk for the child. To be protected by
the ADA, one must have a disability, which is defined by the ADA as
a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities, a person who has a history or record of such an
impairment, or a person who is perceived by others as having such an
impairment. The ADA does not specifically name all of the impairments
that are covered.
B. This procedure for handling requests for accommodating medical
restrictions will be managed by the City Administrator or designee. The
administrator will ensure that the appropriate commissioner,
department head, and the employee making the request are involved in
this process.
C. The federal Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and the state Family
Leave Act (FLA) authorize an employer to require a medical
certification from an employee requesting medical leave to curb
possible employee abuse of medical leave. Accordingly, the City
requires that a request for leave based on an employee's own serious
health condition, or the serious health condition of the employee's child,
parent or spouse be supported by a medical certification from the
appropriate health care provider which the employee shall file with the
City Administrator or designee. If the leave is foreseeable and at least
30 days' notice has been provided, the employee shall provide the
medical certification before the leave commences. In all other
circumstances, except emergencies, the medical certification shall be
provided within at least 15 calendar days following the request for
certification from the City Administrator.
D. Type of medical certification required.
(1) When an employee makes a request for an accommodation, the
request must be supported by a medical certification which lists all
of the medical restrictions that affects the employee's ability to
perform his or her job or duties and the projected duration of these
restrictions. The City Administrator or designee may provide a copy
of the employee's job description to the health care provider so that
the medical certification is accurate and comprehensive.
(2) When an employee makes a request for medical leave, the request
must be supported by a medical certification from a health care
provider which includes the following information:
(a) The medical facts that support the criteria of a serious medical
condition;
(b) The date the medical condition began and the expected
duration of the condition;
§ 46-40 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-40
35:855
(c) Whether leave will be intermittent or on a reduced leave
schedule;
(d) The duration of the leave;
(e) If the serious medical condition is pregnancy or a chronic
condition, whether the patient is presently incapacitated and
the duration and frequency of episodes of incapacity; and
(f) If additional treatments are required, an estimate of the
probable number of such treatments.
(3) If the medical leave is requested because of the employee's own
serious health condition, the medical certification also must state
whether the employee:
(a) Is unable to perform work of any kind;
(b) Is unable to perform any one or more of the essential functions
of the job identifying each; or
(c) Must be absent from work for treatment.
(4) lithe medical leave is requested to care for a child, parent, or
spouse with a serious health condition, the medical certification
also most state whether the patient required assistance for basic
medical needs, personal needs, safety or transportation; or, if not,
whether the employee is needed to provide psychological comfort
to the patient or to assist in the patient's recovery.
(5) The United States Department of Labor has issued regulations and
a model certification form (Form WH-380) for implementing the
FMLA medical certification requirement. Under the statute, an
employer may not acquire the employee's medical records or a
summary medical report that contains any information beyond that
which is set out in the sample certification form.
E. Second opinions and disputes.
(1) Where the City Administrator or designee has reason to question
the original medical certification submitted on behalf of an
employee, the City Administrator may require the employee to
obtain a second certification from a different health care provider
chosen by the City at the City's expense. If there is a conflict
between the first and second medical opinions, the City
Administrator may require the employee to obtain a third
certification from a health care provider jointly approved by the
City Administrator and the employee. The City shall pay for the cost
of the third opinion. The third opinion will be final and binding on
both the City and the employee. The City Administrator and
employee must each act in good faith to reach an agreement on the
third provider. Failure to act in good faith will result in either the
§ 46-40 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-40
35:856
first opinion (City's failure), or second opinion (employee's failure)
binding the parties.
(2) Pending the ultimate resolution of an employee's entitlement to a
reasonable accommodation, the City is not obligated to provide a
reasonable accommodation under federal or state law.
(3) Pending the ultimate resolution of an employee's entitlement to
medical leave, the employee is provisionally entitled to all the
benefits of the federal and state laws including maintenance of
group health benefits. If the certifications ultimately establish that
an employee is not entitled to medical leave, the leave may be
treated as either paid or unpaid leave in accordance with the City's
existing leave policies.
F. Medical privacy.
(1) The City Administrator or designee must take reasonable steps to
safeguard an employee's medical records from any intentional or
unintentional use or disclosure that is in violation of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All medical certifications,
recertifications or medical histories of employees or family
members of employees shall be maintained in a separate file from
the official personnel file and stored in a locked cabinet during
periods of the day and night when access is not required.
(2) The medical records must be maintained as confidential according
to privacy requirements and disclosure of the medical information
is restricted as follows:
(a) Managers and supervisors may be informed about necessary
restrictions on the work or duties of an employee and any
necessary accommodations;
(b) First aid and safety personnel may be informed when
appropriate if the employee's mental or physical condition
might require emergency treatment; and
(c) Government officials investigating compliance with federal or
state laws must be provided relevant information upon
request.
(3) Pursuant to United States Department of Labor regulations an
employer may not seek a broad listing of the dates on which the
employee was seen by the health care provider, or a description of
the nature of the treatment provided in most circumstances or
allow the disclosure of a diagnosis.
(4) The ADA and the FMLA authorizes employers to obtain medical
information about their employees for medical certifications and
fitness-for-duty examinations. HIPAA requires the City
§ 46-40 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-40
35:857
Administrator to obtain a written authorization from the employee
to obtain the medical information for these purposes. The employee
is encouraged to cooperate with the City Administrator in providing
this authorization.
(5) If the City Administrator or designee questions the original medical
certification submitted by the employee, a health care provider
acting on behalf of the City may contact the employee's health care
provider to clarify and confirm the authenticity of the submitted
medical certification. However, this inquiry generally is limited to
those circumstances where the employee consents to such
contacts.
G. Subsequent recertifications. If the minimum duration of the employee's
incapacity specified on a medical certification is more than 30 days, the
City Administrator or designee may not request a recertification until
the minimum duration is past except as hereinafter provided in
Subsection G(1) through (3). If the leave is for a chronic medical
condition, a long-term medical condition, pregnancy, or a serious health
condition, the City Administrator or designee may request a
recertification not more often than every 30 days unless:
(1) Circumstances described by the previous certification have
changed significantly, for example, the duration of the absence has
changed, the frequency of the absences have changed or the
severity of the medical condition has changed.
(2) The City receives information casting doubt upon the employee's
stated reason for the absence.
(3) The employee requests a leave extension.
H. Return to work certification or examination.
(1) As a condition of returning to work after injury leave, medical
leave, or sick leave, the City Administrator or designee may require
a medical certification from the employee's health care provider
that the employee is fit for duty. The City Administrator or designee
also may require that an employee take a fitness-for-duty
examination. The policy regarding return to work certifications and
examinations must be uniformly applied and be based on objective
factors such as:
(a) The chronic nature of the medical condition;
(b) The duration of the absence from work;
(c) The serious nature of the medical condition; and
(d) The job title and job description of the employee.
(2) If the City Administrator or designee requires a fitness-for-duty
certification, the City Administrator or designee must provide the
§ 46-40 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-40
35:858
employee requesting leave with written notice of this requirement
at the time that the leave commences or immediately thereafter.
According to the U.S. Department of Labor regulations, the medical
certification need only be a simple statement that the employee is
able to return to work without restrictions.
(3) With the employee's permission, a health care provider engaged by
the City may contact the health care provider of the employee to
verify the employee's fitness to return to work. If this provision is
invoked, the City may not delay the employee's return to work
while this contact is being made.
I. Failure to satisfy medical certification requirements.
(1) If an employee fails to provide a medical certification which
accurately and comprehensively lists the medical restrictions, the
City shall not be obligated to provide a reasonable accommodation
pursuant to federal and state law.
(2) If an employee's medical leave is foreseeable. failure to provide a
timely medical certification shall result in the City Administrator
delaying the medical leave until the certification is provided. If the
medical leave is not foreseeable, an employee must provide the
certification within 15 calendar days after requested to do so by the
City Administrator, or as soon as reasonably possible under the
particular facts and circumstances. For example, a medical
emergency may prevent the employee from providing the medical
certification within the allotted time. However, if the employee fails
to provide the medical certification within a reasonable time, the
City Administrator shall delay the continuation of the leave. If an
employee never provides the requested medical certification, the
leave shall not be considered an authorized medical leave under
federal or state law.
J. Worker's compensation. Worker's compensation patients are exempt
from the federal HIPAA regulations and all disclosure and handling of
medical records defaults to the state Workers Compensation Act.
Worker's compensation patients do not have the right to restrict access
to their medical records based on HIPAA regulations, where those
medical records are required for handling any aspect of the worker's
compensation case or the injury leave connected with it. This includes
the right of the City to request a return-to-work certification or a
return-to-work examination to determine fitness for duty.
§ 46-40 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-40
35:859

ARTICLE X
Discipline
§ 46-41. Systems of progressive discipline.
A. Employees are expected to devote themselves to the mission of the City,
meet all work standards, and conduct themselves appropriately. Failure
to do so can result in disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.
B. Employees shall be subject to disciplinary action according to the
nature of the offense. A system of progressive discipline shall be utilized
for second and subsequent offenses of a similar or greater gravity.
C. Any infraction of the City's work rules or poor work performance is
investigated. Employees may have another worker present as a witness
during a discussion with management officials who are investigating an
incident of misconduct or a possible serious rule violation. If the results
of the investigation demonstrate that discipline is appropriate, the
appointing authority shall decide on the appropriate penalty, based on
the progressive discipline criteria set forth below.
(1) Under normal circumstances, the City endorses a policy of
progressive discipline in which it attempts to provide employees
with notice of deficiencies and an opportunity to improve. It does,
however, retain the right to administer discipline in any manner it
sees fit. This policy does not modify the status of employees as
employees-at-will or in any way restrict the City's right to bypass
the disciplinary procedures suggested.
(2) The normal application of progressive discipline should be:
(a) Step 1. Counseling and verbal warning.
[1] Step 1 creates an opportunity for the department head to
schedule a meeting with an employee to bring attention to
the existing performance, conduct or attendance issue.
The department head should discuss with the employee
the nature of the problem or the violation of company
policies and procedures. The department head is expected
to clearly describe expectations and steps the employee
must take to improve performance or resolve the problem.
A corrective action plan must be implemented. Should the
department head consider the offense sufficiently serious
to warrant consideration by the City Administrator and/or
the commissioner of the department, the employee will be
so advised and a meeting arranged with the City
Administrator at the earliest possible date. All facts should
be detailed at this meeting and, if possible, a
determination shall be made at that time if disciplinary
action is warranted.
§ 46-41 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-41
35:861
[2] This meeting should be documented to ensure that the
employee is clear on what the expectations are. The
department head shall prepare written documentation of a
Step 1 meeting. The written documentation shall be filed
with the Personnel Officer as well as with the
commissioner in charge of the department. The employee
will be asked to sign this document to demonstrate his or
her understanding of the issues and the corrective action.
(b) Step 2. Written warning.
[1] Although the City hopes that the employee will promptly
correct any performance, conduct or attendance issues
that were identified in Step 1, the City recognizes that this
may not always occur. The Step 2 written warning involves
more detailed documentation of the performance, conduct
or attendance issues and consequences. When a
department head determines that a written reprimand is
appropriate, the situation must be discussed with the City
Administrator or designee.
[2] During Step 2, the department head and City
Commissioner will meet with the employee to review any
additional incidents or information about the performance,
conduct or attendance issues as well as any prior relevant
corrective action plans. Management will outline the
consequences for the employee of his or her continued
failure to meet performance or conduct expectations.
[3] A formal performance improvement plan (PIP) requiring
the employee's immediate and sustained corrective action
will be issued within five business days of a Step 2
meeting. A warning outlining that the employee may be
subject to additional discipline up to and including
termination if immediate and sustained corrective action is
not taken may also be included in the written warning.
Supervisors/managers are to refer to the PIP document.
(c) Step 3. Suspension and final written warning.
[1] There may be performance, conduct or safety incidents so
problematic and harmful that the most effective action
may be the temporary removal of the employee from the
workplace. When immediate action is necessary to ensure
the safety of the employee or others, the department head
may suspend the employee pending the results of an
investigation as per the rules of the New Jersey Civil
Service Commission.
[2] However, when suspension is recommended it is the City
Administrator and/or the commissioner of the department
that will make the decision and may seek the advice of the
§ 46-41 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-41
35:862
City Attorney, if appropriate, prior to such an action taking
place. Suspensions that are recommended as part of the
normal progression of this progressive discipline policy
and procedure are subject to approval from the appointing
authority. Suspended employees may request a hearing
under the applicable grievance procedure and civil service
procedure.
[3] Depending on the seriousness of the infraction, the
employee may be suspended without pay in full-day
increments consistent with federal, state and local wageand-
hour employment laws. Nonexempt/hourly employees
may not substitute or use an accrued paid vacation or sick
day in lieu of the unpaid suspension. Due to Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) compliance issues, unpaid
suspension of salaried/exempt employees is reserved for
serious workplace safety or conduct issues. The City
Attorney will provide guidance so that the discipline is
administered without jeopardizing the FLSA exemption
status.
[4] Pay may be restored to the employee if an investigation of
the incident or infraction absolves the employee.
(d) Step 4. Recommendation for termination of employment.
[1] The last and most serious step in the progressive discipline
procedure is a recommendation to terminate employment.
Generally, the City will try to exercise the progressive
nature of this policy by first providing warnings, a final
written warning or suspension from the workplace before
proceeding to a recommendation to terminate
employment. However, the City reserves the right to
combine and skip steps depending on the circumstances of
each situation and the nature of the offense. Furthermore,
employees may be terminated without prior notice or
disciplinary action.
[2] Whenever an employee is recommended for dismissal, the
City Administrator and/or the commissioner of the
department will make the decision only after seeking the
advice of the City Attorney. There must be a complete
review of the employee's personnel file and all other facts
to determine if there is sufficient cause for the dismissal.
Terminated employees may request a hearing under the
applicable grievance procedure and civil service
procedure. The City's recommendation to terminate
employment must be approved by the appointing
authority.
D. Performance and conduct issues not subject to progressive discipline.
§ 46-41 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-41
35:863
§ 46-42. General causes.
(1) Behavior that is illegal is not subject to progressive discipline, and
such behavior may be reported to local law enforcement
authorities. Typically, the City should suspend the employee
immediately (with or without pay) and an investigation of the
incidents leading up to the suspension should be conducted to
determine if any further action, such as termination, should be
taken.
(2) Similarly, theft, substance abuse, intoxication, fighting, behavior
that puts staff, children, parents or the program at risk, and other
acts of violence at work may also not be subject to progressive
discipline and may be grounds for immediate termination.
E. Documentation. The employee will be provided copies of all progressive
discipline documentation, including all PIPs. The employee will be
asked to sign copies of this documentation attesting to his or her
receipt of the corrective action outlined in these documents.
F. All supervisory and managerial employees must follow the progressive
discipline policy set forth in this handbook.
G. Employees can appeal disciplinary actions pursuant to the rules of the
New Jersey Civil Service Commission, with notification to the City
Commissioner.
A. An employee may be subject to discipline for any one or more of the
following general causes:
(1) Falsification of public records, including attendance and other
personnel records; theft of time.
(2) Failure to report absence.
(3) Harassment of coworkers and/or volunteers and/or visitors.
(4) Theft or attempted theft of property belonging to the City, fellow
employees, volunteers or visitors.
(5) Failure to report to workday or days prior to or following a
vacation, holiday and/or leave, and/or any other unauthorized day
of absence.
(6) Fighting on City property at any time.
(7) Being under the influence of intoxicants (e.g., liquor) or illegal
drugs (e.g., cocaine or marijuana) on City property and at any time
during work hours.
(8) Possession, sale, transfer or use of intoxicants or illegal drugs on
City property and at any time during work hours.
§ 46-41 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-42
35:864
(9) Entering the building without permission during nonscheduled
work hours.
(10) Soliciting on the City's premises during work time. This includes
but is not limited to distribution of literature or products or
soliciting membership in fraternal, religious, social or political
organizations, and/or sales of products, such as those from Avon,
Amway, etc.
(11) Careless waste of materials or abuse of tools, equipment or
supplies.
(12) Deliberate destruction or damage to City property.
(13) Sleeping on the job.
(14) Carrying weapons of any kind on the City premises and/or during
work hours, unless carrying a weapon is a function of your job
duties.
(15) Violation of established safety and fire regulations.
(16) Unauthorized absence from work area, and/or roaming or loitering
on the premises, during scheduled work hours.
(17) Defacing walls, bulletin boards or any other City property.
(18) Failure to perform duties, inefficiency or substandard performance.
(19) Unauthorized disclosure of confidential City information.
(20) Gambling on the City premises.
(21) Horseplay, disorderly conduct and use of abusive and/or obscene
language on the City premises, and off premises when engaged in
City-related business.
(22) Deliberate delay or restriction of your work effort, and/or
incitement of others to delay or restrict their work effort.
(23) Conviction of a crime or disorderly person's offense.
(24) Violation of City policies, procedures and regulations.
(25) Unauthorized use of computers, Internet, and email.
(26) Disparagement of the company or any company official whether
this occurs on or off company property.
(27) Incompetency, inefficiency or failure to perform duties.
(28) Insubordination.
(29) Inability to perform duties.
(30) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness.
§ 46-42 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-42
35:865
§ 46-43. Types of discipline.
(31) Conviction of a crime.
(32) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
(33) Neglect of duty.
(34) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles.
(35) Discrimination that affects equal employment opportunity (as
defined in N.J.A.C. 4A:7-1.1), including sexual harassment.
(36) Violation of federal regulations concerning drug and alcohol use by
and testing of employees who perform functions related to the
operation of commercial motor vehicles, and state and local
policies issued thereunder.
(37) Personal cell phone use that is disruptive to City operations.
(38) Other sufficient cause.
B. Other sufficient cause shall include but not be limited to violations of
municipal ordinances, rules and regulations, written policies,
department directives or lawful orders of a superior.
A. Discipline may be in the form of major discipline or minor discipline and
may include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Oral reprimand;
(2) Formal written reprimand;
(3) Counseling;
(4) Suspension with pay;
(5) Suspension without pay;
(6) Monetary fine;
(7) Disciplinary demotion;
(8) Removal.
B. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion or
suspension or fine exceeding five working days. Minor discipline
includes a formal, written reprimand or a suspension or fine of five
working days or less. Employees who object to the terms or conditions
of the discipline are entitled to a hearing under their applicable
collective bargaining agreements and/or New Jersey Civil Service Act.
In every case involving employee discipline, employees will be provided
with an opportunity to respond to charges either verbally or in writing.
§ 46-42 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-43
35:866
§ 46-44. Termination of employment.
An employee may be terminated depending upon the circumstances
including but not limited to the following offenses. All discharges will be
in accordance with federal and state laws, including the New Jersey Civil
Service Act as well as applicable collective bargaining agreements.
§ 46-45. Motor vehicle accidents.
C. In cases of employee misconduct, the City believes in corrective action
for the purpose of correcting undesirable behavior and preventing a
recurrence of that behavior. The corrective action taken will be related
to the gravity of the situation, the number and kind of previous
infractions and other circumstances. In every case, employees will be
given an opportunity to state the situation from their point of view.
A. Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
B. Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
C. Conviction of a crime;
D. Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
E. Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles;
F. Violation of federal, state or City regulations concerning alcohol and
drug use and possession;
G. Repeated violations of City policies and procedures or rules and
regulations;
H. Falsification of public records including personnel records;
I. Other sufficient cause.
A. It is the responsibility of all City employees to exercise the utmost care
and caution in the operation of City motor vehicles. When an employee
is involved in a motor vehicle accident with a motor vehicle owned,
leased, or under the control of the City, the employee shall be subject to
discipline up to and including discharge if it is determined that the
employee was negligent in the operation of the motor vehicle and the
employee's negligence was the proximate cause of the accident.
B. Employees who drive a vehicle on City business must, in addition to
meeting the approval requirements above, exercise due diligence to
drive safely and to maintain the security of the vehicle and its contents.
Drivers also must make sure that the vehicle meets any City or legal
standards for insurance, maintenance, and safety. Employees are
responsible for any driving infractions or fines that result from their
driving and must report them to their supervisors. The improper,
careless, negligent, destructive, or unsafe use or operation of
equipment or vehicles, abuse of fuel privileges, as well as excessive or
§ 46-43 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-45
35:867
avoidable traffic and parking violations, can result in disciplinary
action, up to and including discharge. Further, if an employee operating
a City vehicle is charged with any serious moving violation, driving
while intoxicated, or any other related offense, they may be disciplined
up to and including discharge.
§ 46-45 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-45
35:868
ARTICLE XI
Driver's License
§ 46-46. Work requirements; privacy
A. Any employee whose work requires the operation of City vehicles must
hold a valid New Jersey State driver's license.
B. All new employees who will be assigned work entailing the operating of
a City vehicle will be required to submit to a Department of Motor
Vehicles driving records check as a condition of employment. A report
indicating a suspended or revoked license status may be cause to deny
or terminate employment.
C. Periodic checks of employee's driver's licenses through visual and
formal Department of Motor Vehicles review checks shall be made by
department heads or division supervisors. Any employee who does not
hold a valid driver's license will not be allowed to operate a City vehicle
until such time as a valid license is obtained. Any driver who continues
to drive on City business after refusing to authorize an MVR check or
after authorization to drive on City business has been suspended will be
subject to disciplinary action and/or termination as contained in the
City's personnel policies. Such drivers will be deemed to be acting
outside the scope of their employment and will not be covered by the
City's Defense and Indemnification Policies. In the event of a claim or
suit arising while driving on the City business under these
circumstances, the driver will not be indemnified.
D. Any employee performing work which requires the operation of a City
vehicle must notify the immediate supervisor in those cases where a
license is expired, suspended or revoked and/or who is unable to obtain
an occupational permit from the State Department of Licensing. An
employee that fails to report such an instance is subject to disciplinary
action, including demotion or termination. An employee who fails to
immediately report such revocation or suspension to his/her supervisor
and continues to operate a City vehicle shall be subject to possible
termination.
E. Any information obtained by the City in accordance with this section
shall be used by the City only for carrying out its lawful functions and
for other lawful purposes in accordance with the Driver's Privacy
Protection Act (18 U.S.C. § 2721 et seq.).
§ 46-46 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-46
35:869

ARTICLE XII
Education and Training
§ 46-47. Reimbursement for educational expenses.
The City values the experience that each employee brings to City
government. The City recognizes that continuing education is vital to the
growth of the individual and the changing dynamics of the public sector.
Collective bargaining agreements generally provide for reimbursement of
educational expenses when the course is relevant to City business and the
present or probable future duties of the employee. Courses must be outside
the employee's scheduled work hours.
§ 46-48. Training. [Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 51-2019]
A. The City recognizes that it has a responsibility to train its employees to
perform the work required of them. The City provides funds through its
budget so that employees can attend conferences, seminars, training
and certification classes which will benefit the employee and the City.
The department head may authorize said training after consultation
with the City Administrator and Commissioner in charge of the
department when funds are available and such training will benefit the
City. The department head, to the extent possible, shall authorize such
training on an equitable basis within the department consistent with
the mission of the department.
(1) All certification coursework will be required to be preapproved by
the department head and the City Administrator utilizing the
Training Request/Requirement Form.
(2) All efforts shall be made for continuing certification classes to be
taken on nonworking hours. In the event a certification course is
not available during nonworking hours, the employee shall utilize
their PTO time unless preapproved by the department head and
City Administrator utilizing the Training Request/Requirement
Form.
(3) All employees requesting to attend nonrequired conferences,
training, seminars and/or certification classes shall use their PTO
time to attend same. All nonrequired requests are to be made
utilizing the Training Request/Requirement Form.
(4) All conferences, seminars, training and certification classes shall
be requested through the department head utilizing the Training
Request/Requirement Form.
(5) All Training Request/Requirement Forms must be executed by both
the department head and the City Administrator.
(6) The City, in conjunction with the City Attorney, will arrange for
employment practice seminars at least annually to train all
managerial and supervisory personnel. The City also will offer
§ 46-47 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-48
35:871
§ 46-49. Cross-training.
Employees shall be cross-trained to the degree practical to provide for
coverage of work activities when employees arc absent due to sickness,
vacation or other reasons. Cross-training between departments is
encouraged to provide a manpower reserve according to workload levels.
If a department is in need of additional staff to work through an unusual
backlog of work, the department heads shall cooperate in providing
adequate manpower.
nonmandatory training to all other employees with special
emphasis on employee rights and protections under various federal
and state laws as well as the employment practices of the City.
Records shall be maintained in the official personnel files of all
employees trained under the procedure.
(7) Managerial and supervisory personnel also will update employees
periodically by department meetings and memos that should
address specific problems and concerns that may arise. Every
effort shall be made to encourage employee suggestions about
ways to avoid employer-employee disputes and violations of
employment rights.
B. Members of Public Safety and Fire will defer to their own policy on
training.
§ 46-48 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-49
35:872
ARTICLE XIII
Communications Media Policy
§ 46-50. Purpose.
§ 46-51. Use of communication media.
A. Whether or not an employee chooses to create or participate in a blog,
wiki, online social network or any other form of online publishing or
discussion is his or her own decision. However, the City recognizes that
emerging online collaboration platforms are fundamentally changing
the way individuals and organizations communicate, and this policy is
designed to offer practical guidance for responsible, constructive
communications via social media channels for employees. The same
principles and guidelines that apply to the activities of employees in
general, as found in the City's policies and procedures, apply to
employee activities in social media channels and any other form of
online publishing.
B. The City's communication media are the property of the City and, as
such, are to be used for legitimate business purposes only. For purposes
of this communication media policy, "communication media" includes
all electronic media forms provided by the City, such as cell phones,
smart phones, computers, electronic tablets, access to the Internet,
voicemail, e-mail, and fax.
C. All data stored on and/or transmitted through communication media is
the property of the City. For purposes of this policy, "data" includes
electronically stored files, programs, tables, databases, audio and video
objects, spreadsheets, reports and printed or microfiche materials
which serve a City business purpose, regardless of who creates,
processes or maintains the data, or whether the data is processed
manually or through any of the City's mainframe or midrange systems
or workstations; servers, routers, gateways, bridges, hubs, switches
and other hardware components of the City's local- or wide-area
networks.
A. The City respects the individual privacy of its employees. However,
employee communications transmitted by the City's communication
media are not private to the individual. All communication media and all
communications and stored information transmitted, received, or
contained in or through such media may be monitored by the City. The
City reserves the absolute right to access, review, audit and disclose all
matters entered into, sent over or placed in storage in the City's
communication media. By using the City's equipment and/or
communication media, employees consent to have such use monitored
at any time, with or without notice, by City personnel. The existence of
passwords does not restrict or eliminate the City's ability or right to
access electronic communications. However, the City cannot require
the employee to provide his/her password to his/her personal account.
§ 46-50 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-51
35:873
B. All e-mail, voicemail and Internet messages (including any technologybased
messaging) are official documents subject to the provisions of the
Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). If employees
conduct work-related business on their personal e-mails, cell phones, or
other personal communication media, it is also subject to the provisions
of the Open Public Records Act. Employees of the City are required to
use the assigned municipal e-mail account for all City business and
correspondence. The use of private e-mail accounts for any City
business or during business hours is strictly prohibited. The City
reserves the right to remove employee e-mail access including, but not
limited to, family medical leave.
C. Employees can only use the City's communication media for legitimate
business purposes. Employees are restricted from accessing or using
the company's communication media for personal purposes during
company time on company equipment without prior authorization from
the Administration to do so. Employees may not use the City's
communication media in any way that is defamatory, obscene, or
harassing or in violation of any City rules or policy. Examples of
forbidden transmissions or downloads include sexually explicit
messages; unwelcome propositions; ethnic or racial slurs; or any other
message that can be construed to be harassment or disparaging to
others based on their actual or perceived age, race, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information,
disability, national origin, ethnicity, citizenship, marital status or any
other legally recognized protected basis under federal, state or local,
laws, regulations or ordinances. Further, discriminatory remarks,
harassment, bullying, threats of violence and similar behavior that is
not tolerated in the workplace are also not acceptable through
communication media, whether same is performed on the City's
equipment or on the employee's own personal communication media.
D. All employees who have been granted access to electronically stored
data must use a logon ID assigned by the City. Certain data, or
applications that process data, may require additional security
measures as determined by the City. Employees must not share their
passwords, and each employee is responsible for all activity that occurs
in connection with his or her password. Information security is
necessary to protect the City's information (data and software) from
accidental or intentional unauthorized disclosure, modification, or loss.
Information security is managed under guidelines dealing with
identification, authentication, authorization, production environment,
and ability to audit. All employees should be familiar with such security
measures adopted by the City.
E. All employees may access only data for which the City has given
permission. All employees must take appropriate actions to ensure that
City data is protected from unauthorized access, use or distribution
consistent with these policies. Employees may not access or retrieve
any information technology resource or store information other than
§ 46-51 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-51
35:874
where authorized. All City data must be stored centrally as required by
the City. This provides greater security and ensures backup of all City
data is performed.
F. Employees must not disable antivirus and other implemented security
software for any reason, in order to minimize the risk of introducing
computer viruses into the City's computing environment.
G. Employees may not install, remove, or modify any hardware device,
software application, program code, either active or passive, or a
portion thereof, without the express written permission from the City.
Employees may not upload, download, or otherwise transmit
commercial software or any copyrighted materials belonging to parties
outside of the City or licensed to the City. Employees shall observe the
copyright and licensing restrictions of all software applications and
shall not copy software from internal or external sources unless legally
authorized. Workstation settings and configurations and network
settings must not be modified by unauthorized employees. Internet
security settings (where applicable) must not be changed. The
foregoing includes but is not limited to the systems network ID (or
computer name), IP address, gateway and DNS addresses, etc.
H. Social media and its uses in government and daily life are expanding
each year, however, only those employees directly authorized by City
Administrator may engage in social media activity during work time
through the use of the City's communication media as it directly relates
to their work and it is in compliance with this policy.
I. Employees must not reveal or publicize confidential City information.
Confidential proprietary or sensitive information may be disseminated
only to individuals with a need and a right to know and where there is
sufficient assurance that appropriate security of such information will
be maintained. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the
transmittal of personnel information such as medical records or related
information. In law enforcement operations, confidential, proprietary or
sensitive information also includes criminal history information,
confidential informant identification, and intelligence and tactical
operations files.
J. No City employee shall post internal working documents to social
media sites. This includes, but is not limited to, screenshots of
computer stations, pictures of monitors and/or actual documents
themselves without the prior approval of the City Administrator; in
addition, photographs, pictures or digital images of any crime scenes,
traffic crashes. arrestees, detainees, people or job-related incidents or
occurrences taken with the City's communication media to any person,
entity, business or media or Internet outlet, whether on or off duty,
without the express written permission of the City Administrator.
Except in emergency situations, employees are prohibited from taking
digital images or photographs with media and equipment not owned by
the City. For purposes of this section, an "emergency situation" involves
§ 46-51 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-51
35:875
a sudden and unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action, assistance or relief, and may
include accidents, crimes and flights from accidents or crimes and the
employee does riot have access to the City's communication media. If
such situation occurs, the employee agrees that any images belong to
the City and agrees to release the image to the City and ensure its
permanent deletion from media device upon direction from the City.
K. No media advertisement, electronic bulletin board posting, or any other
communication accessible via the Internet about the City or on behalf of
the City, whether through the use of the City's communication media or
otherwise, may be issued unless it has first been approved by the City
Administrator. Under no circumstances may information of a
confidential, sensitive or otherwise proprietary nature be placed or
posted on the Internet or otherwise disclosed to anyone outside the
City. Such authorized communications may result in disciplinary action.
L. Because authorized postings placed on the Internet through use of the
City's communication media will display on the City's return address,
any information posted on the Internet must reflect and adhere to all of
the City's standards and policies.
M. All users are personally accountable for messages that they originate or
forward using the City's communication media. Misrepresenting,
obscuring, suppressing, or replacing a user's identity on any
communication media is prohibited. "Spoofing" (constructing electronic
communication so that it appears to be from someone else without a
legitimate authorized purpose and authorized by the City
Administrator) is prohibited.
N. Employees must respect the laws regarding copyrights, trademarks,
rights of the public and the City and other third-party rights. Any use of
the City's name, logos. service marks or trademarks outside the course
of the employee's employment, without the express consent of the City,
is strictly prohibited. To minimize the risk of a copyright violation,
employees should provide references to the source(s) of information
used and cite copyrighted works identified in online communications.
O. Use of Internet. The City provides Internet access to its employees in
order to make available a vast array of information resources and to
allow participation in and access to increasing county and state
resources.
(1) Employees must comply with all policies adopted by the City
including but not limited to policies regarding prohibition of
discrimination and harassment and all applicable federal, state and
local laws, including laws governing the transmission and
dissemination of information while accessing the Internet.
(2) Employees who are using Internet may not:
§ 46-51 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-51
35:876
§ 46-52. Social media.
The City fully respects the legal rights of the employees, including their
rights under the National Labor Relations Board to engage in concerted
and protected activities, and any part of this policy which interferes with or
"chills" the legal rights of the employees will not be enforced. In general,
what you do on your own time is your affair. However, activities in or outside
of work that affect job performance, the performance of others, or the City's
business interests are a proper focus for the City's policy. To the extent that
employees use social media outside of their employment and, in so doing.
employees identify themselves as the City's employees, or if they discuss
matters related to the City on a social media site, employees must:
(a) Use the network to make unauthorized entry into other
computational, informational or communication services or
resources;
(b) Distribute unsolicited advertising;
(c) Invade the privacy of others;
(d) Make any attempt to damage computer equipment or software;
(e) Engage in any activity that is harassing or defamatory;
(f) Use the Internet for any illegal activity, including violation of
copyright or other rights of third parties, or in a manner
inconsistent with the Township's tax-exempt status or its
proper operation; and/or
(g) Download unauthorized software. fonts, templates or scripts.
(3) The City reserves the right to monitor the employee's Internet
usage. In addition, the City has the right to restrict access to
specific types of prohibited content through the use of a content
filtering system.
A. Employees should not represent themselves as a spokesperson of the
City. Nothing in these policies are designed to interfere with, restrain or
prevent employee communications regarding wages, hours or other
terms and conditions of employment. City employees have the right to
engage in or refrain from such activities. Further, discriminatory
remarks, harassment, bullying, threats of violence and similar behavior
that is not tolerated in the workplace are also not acceptable through
communication media, whether same is performed on the City's
equipment or on the employee's own personal communication media.
B. Employees that maintain personal web pages and web sites, including
but not limited to Facebook, YouTube, Myspace, Twitter etc., shall not
post information on such sites that would constitute a violation of the
personnel policies of the City if expressed or published using any other
medium or in any other manner. The posting of words, phrases,
§ 46-51 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-52
35:877
§ 46-53. Employee rights of communication.
Nothing in these policies is designed to interfere with, restrain or prevent
employee communications regarding wages, hours or other terms and
conditions of employment. City employees have the right to engage in or
refrain from such activities.
§ 46-54. Electronic surveillance prohibited.
photographs, images or any kind of information on a personal web site
may be grounds for the imposition of disciplinary action against the
employee if the words, phrases, photographs, images or information
adversely reflects on the employee's fitness for duty or constitutes a
violation of the personnel policies of the City. However, nothing in
this social media policy prevents employees from using his/her own
personal communication media during the employee's non-working
hours to engage or participate in protected concerted activities
pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act. Protected concerted
activities include when an employee addresses group concerns with the
employer; forms, joins or helps a labor organization; initiates, induces
or prepares for group action; or speaks on behalf of or represents
other employees. Nevertheless, employees are encouraged to resolve
workplace grievances internally by discussing issues with their
supervisor and/or the Administration, and are asked to refrain from
posting comments or materials on communication media that can be
viewed as malicious, obscene, threatening, intimidating, or that could
create a hostile work environment on the basis of race, sex, disability,
religion or any other status protected by law if the employee chooses to
address their grievances using communication media.
C. Maintain the confidentiality of the City's private or confidential
information. Do not post internal reports, policies, procedures or other
internal business-related confidential communications.
D. Not create a link from your blog, website or other social networking site
to the City's website without identifying yourself as a City associate.
E. Express only your personal opinions. Never represent yourself as a
spokesperson for the City. If the City is a subject of the content you are
creating, be clear and open about the fact that you are an associate and
make it clear that your views do not represent those of the City, fellow
associates or people working on behalf of the City. If you do publish a
blog or post online related to the work you do or subjects associated
with the City, make it clear that you are not speaking on behalf of the
City.
A. The unauthorized electronic surveillance of employees is disruptive to
employee morale and inconsistent with the respectful treatment
required of our employees. For this reason, no employee may record the
conversation of another employee or the public without his or her full
knowledge and consent.
§ 46-52 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-54
35:878
§ 46-55. through § 46-60. (Reserved)
B. No employee may record, by any means, a conversation with another
employee or member of the public unless all of the following criteria are
met:
(1) A legitimate purpose for the recording.
(2) A recording device in plain view
(3) Written authorization from the supervisor of the employee who
wishes to record the conversation, or member of the public who is
being recorded.
C. Surreptitious recordings are strictly prohibited unless authorized in
writing by legal counsel. A violation of this provision may result in
disciplinary action, including termination.
§ 46-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-55
35:879

ARTICLE XIV
Employee Complaint Policy
§ 46-61. Reporting requirement.
§ 46-62. Confidentiality and retaliation.
§ 46-63. Procedure for processing complaints.
A. Employees who wish to complain of harassment or any other
wrongdoing in the workplace are requested to immediately report the
matter to their supervisor or, if they prefer, to their department head, or
the City Administrator. The supervisor, department head, City Clerk or
City Attorney must report all written or verbal complaints to the City
Administrator unless the complaint is against the City Administrator.
Employees are encouraged to complain in writing using the employee
complaint form and the formal complaint system, but they may make a
verbal complaint at their discretion.
B. Complaints will be handled and investigated under the City's
procedures outlined in § 46-63, unless special procedures are
considered appropriate. All complaints will be investigated promptly
and in as impartial and confidential manner as possible; and a timely
resolution of each complaint should be reached and communicated to
the parties involved.
A. An individual who reports incidents, which, in good faith, he or she
believes to be violation of these policies, or who is involved in the
investigation of the complaint, will not be subject to reprisal or
retaliation. The City prohibits any form of retaliation against filed
complaints or providing information in support of a complaint.
Retaliation is a serious violation of this policy and should be reported
immediately. The report and investigation of allegations of retaliation
will follow the procedures set forth in this policy. Any person found to
have retaliated against an individual for reporting discriminatory
harassment or for participating in an investigation of allegations of
such conduct will be subject to an appropriate disciplinary penalty.
B. The City will, to the maximum extent feasible, maintain the
confidentiality of such complaints on a need-to-know basis. However,
investigation of such complaints may require disclosure to the accused
party and other witnesses in order to gather pertinent facts.
C. Only in the event that an employee's complaint is unreasonable, without
merit, and appears to have been motivated by bad faith, will the City
consider disciplining an employee who has filed a complaint.
A. An employee who believes that he or she has been subjected to or is
aware of wrongdoing in the workplace shall submit a complaint to the
City Administrator within 20 days from the date of the alleged incident.
However, all suspicious individuals or activities should also be reported
§ 46-61 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-63
35:881
as soon as possible to the City Administrator. Do not place yourself in
peril. If you see or hear a commotion or disturbance near your work
station, do not try to intercede or see what is happening. All threats of
(or actual) violence, both direct and indirect, should also be reported
as soon as possible to the City Administrator. This includes threats by
employees, as well as threats by customers, vendors, solicitors, or other
members of the public. When reporting a threat of violence, you should
be as specific and detailed as possible. The complaint shall set forth the
following information:
(1) Date of the incident;
(2) Specific acts complained of;
(3) Parties involved;
(4) Names of any witnesses; and
(5) Location of the incident.
B. Upon receipt of the complaint, the City Administrator shall advise the
commissioner in charge of the department where the complainant is
employed. The City Administrator will seek the advice of the City
Attorney when planning the investigation. The investigation shall be
conducted by the person appointed by the commissioner in charge of
the department, or by the county prosecutor, if it involves potential
criminal charges. The person designated to investigate the complaint
shall be employed outside the department where the complainant and
accused are employed. In the event, however, the complaint contains
allegations of harassment or any other wrongdoing against a
commissioner, the commissioner who is the subject of the complaint
shall recuse himself or herself from any involvement in the selection or
designation of the person to do the investigation. The Affirmative Action
Officer may be designated by the Board of Commissioners to investigate
the complaint.
C. The investigator shall review the complaint and conduct interviews of
the complainant, other parties involved in the incident having relevant
knowledge, individual(s) accused of wrongdoing, and if necessary, with
individuals who may have observed the incident or conduct. The
investigator also may conduct interviews of all persons who may have
knowledge of relevant information about the matter. Every effort shall
be made to complete the investigation within a reasonable period of
time from the date when the complaint was submitted to the City
Administrator.
D. A confidential written report shall be prepared by the investigator and
submitted to the City Administrator, the City Attorney, and the
commissioner in charge of the department where the employee or
officer who is the subject of the complainant is employed. The report
shall contain the investigator's findings as to whether the complaint is
justified and substantiated. If a finding is made by the investigator that
§ 46-63 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-63
35:882
§ 46-64. Action to be taken on complaint.
the complaint is justified and substantiated, the investigator shall
submit any recommendations he or she has in the report. In the event,
however, the complaint contains allegations of harassment or any other
wrongdoing against a commissioner, then the report shall instead be
submitted to the City Administrator, the City Attorney and the Board
of Commissioners sitting in closed session. In all cases said report
shall remain in the custody of the City Administrator and the persons
permitted to view said document as provided in this section as well
as § 46-64 below may not copy, scan, remove, reproduce or otherwise
receive a hard or electronic copy thereof or any portion thereof from
the Office of the City Administrator.
A. The commissioner in charge of the department where the complainant
is employed shall discuss the conclusions contained in the investigator's
report with the City Administrator and the City Attorney and render a
final decision within 14 days after the receipt of the report.
(1) Response plan, no corrective action required. If the validity of the
complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is groundless, the
City Administrator or City Attorney shall notify the complaining
employee, in writing, of the results of the investigation.
(2) Response plan, corrective action required. If the investigation
reveals that the complaint is justified and substantiated. the
commissioner in charge of the department where the complainant
is employed shall formulate, with the advice of the City
Administrator and the City Attorney, a corrective action plan as
well as possible disciplinary action. The City Administrator or City
Attorney shall notify the complaining party, in writing, of the results
of the investigation.
B. In the event, however, the complaint contains allegations of harassment
or any other wrongdoing against a commissioner, then the Board of
Commissioners shall discuss the conclusions contained in the
investigator's report with the City Administrator and the City Attorney
and render a final decision within 14 days after the receipt of the
report. The commissioner who is the subject of the complaint shall
recuse himself or herself from any involvement in the hearing on the
complaint and shall not be given access to the complaint or the
investigator's report.
(1) Response plan, no corrective action required. If the validity of the
complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is groundless, the
City Administrator or City Attorney shall notify the complaining
employee, in writing, of the results of the investigation.
(2) Response plan, corrective action required. If the investigation
reveals that the complaint is justified and substantiated, the Board
of Commissioners shall formulate, with the advice of the City
§ 46-63 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-64
35:883
Attorney, a corrective action plan. The City Administrator or City
Attorney shall notify the complaining party, in writing, of the results
of the investigation. Corrective action may include, but is not
limited to, oral or written reprimand, referral to formal counseling,
disciplinary suspension or probation, or termination of
employment.
§ 46-64 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-64
35:884
ARTICLE XV
Employment Protection
§ 46-65. Policy.
The City maintains a policy of complying with federal and state laws which
provide employment protection for public employees and applicants seeking
employment with the City. All officers and employees of the City shall act
in accordance with the provisions of the following federal and state laws
which provide employment protection in the workplace because a person
falls within a protected class or which prohibits retaliatory actions in public
employment.
§ 46-66. Antidiscrimination Policy.
A. The City is committed to the principle of equal employment opportunity
and antidiscrimination pursuant to Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act
as amended by the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972 and the New Jersey
Law Against Discrimination98 as amended by the New Jersey Pregnant
Worker's Fairness Act (LAD) and Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act ("Equal
Pay Act").
B. Under no circumstances will the City discriminate on the basis of sex,
race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, marital or
political status, affectional or sexual orientation, domestic partnership
status, civil union status, atypical heredity, cellular or blood trait,
genetic information, disability (including AIDS or HIV infection),
liability for service in the United States Armed Forces, gender identity
or expression, and/or any other characteristic protected by law.
C. Decisions regarding the hiring, promotion, transfer, demotion or
termination are based solely on the qualifications and performance of
the employee or prospective employee. If any employee or prospective
employee feels he/she has been treated unfairly, he/she has the right to
address his/her concern with his/her supervisor, or if he/she prefers his/
her department head, City Administrator, or Personnel Administrator.
D. The Equal Pay Act prohibits pay disparities based upon characteristics
protected by the LAD and makes it an unlawful employment practice for
an employer to pay any of its employees who is a member of a protected
class at a rate of compensation, including benefits, which is less than
the rate paid by the employer to employees who are not members of the
protected class for substantially similar work, when viewed as a
composite of skill, effort and responsibility. The Equal Pay Act further
provides that, other than instances where a seniority or merit-based
system is utilized, employers may only pay employees a different rate of
compensation for substantially similar work if the employer can show
that:
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
§ 46-65 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-66
35:885
(1) The pay differential is based on one or more legitimate, bona fide
factors, such as training, education or experience, or the quantity
or quality of production;
(2) The bona fide factors are not based on, and do not perpetuate a
differential in compensation based on sex, or any other protected
characteristic;
(3) Each of the bona fide factors are applied reasonably;
(4) One or more of the bona fide factors account for the entire wage
differential; and
(5) The bona fide factors are job-related with respect to the position in
question and based on legitimate business necessities. However, a
bona fide factor based on business necessity would not apply if it is
demonstrated that there are alternative business practices that
would serve the same business purpose without producing the
wage differential.
E. An employer who is paying a rate of compensation in violation of the
Equal Pay Act cannot reduce the rate of compensation of any employee
in order to comply with the Equal Pay Act.
F. The Equal Pay Act also extends LAD's anti-retaliation provisions to
equal pay claims. Specifically, the Equal Pay Act prohibits retaliation
against employees for "requesting from, discussing with, or disclosing
to, any other employee or former employee of the employer, a lawyer
from whom the employee seeks legal advice, or any government
agency" equity pay information. Such equity pay information includes
job title, occupational category, rate of compensation, including
benefits, and the gender, race, ethnicity, military status, or national
origin of the employee or any other employee or former employee,
regardless of whether the employee receives a response.
G. The Equal Pay Act also includes new reporting requirements to the
Division of Labor and Workforce Development. Any employer,
regardless of the location of the employer, who enters into a contract
with a public body to provide qualifying services to the public body shall
provide a report to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, information regarding the compensation and hours
worked by employees categorized by gender, race, job title ethnicity,
occupational and job category, and total compensation of every
employee of the employer employed in the state in connection with the
contract. The employer shall provide the commissioner, throughout the
duration of the contract or contracts, with an update to the report each
time there is a significant change in any of the information that the
employer is required to report, or other significant change in
employment status, including, but not limited to, medical leave of 12
weeks or more, hiring, termination for any reason, a change in parttime
or full-time status, or a change in "employee" or "contractor"
status. Data regarding compensation and hours worked by employees
§ 46-66 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-66
35:886
§ 46-67. Anti-Disability Discrimination Policy: New Jersey Pregnant
Worker's Fairness Act.
shall be reported in the form by pay bands to be established by
regulation promulgated by the commissioner. The commissioner may
establish a standard presumption for the number of hours worked by a
full-time employee or by a part-time employee for whom an employer
does not track actual hours worked. An employer shall provide a report
for each establishment of the employer.
A. In compliance with the Americans with Disability Act, the ADA
Amendments Act and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, as
amended by the New Jersey Pregnant Worker's Fairness Act (LAD), the
City does not discriminate based on disability, pregnancy, pregnancyrelated
medical condition, childbirth or breastfeeding. The City will
endeavor to make every work environment accessible for individuals
with disabilities, and all future construction and renovation of facilities
will be in accordance with applicable barrier-free federal and state
regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act accessibility
guidelines, as well as the ADA Amendments Act. The ADA makes it
unlawful to discriminate in all employment practices such as:
(1) Recruitment.
(2) Pay.
(3) Hiring.
(4) Firing.
(5) Promotion.
(6) Job assignments.
(7) Training.
(8) Leave.
(9) Lay off.
(10) Benefits.
(11) All other employment-related activities.
B. It is the policy of the City to comply with all relevant and applicable
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the ADA Amendments
Act and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination. The City will not
discriminate against any employee or job applicant with respect to any
terms, conditions, or privileges of employment on the basis of a known
or perceived disability, pregnancy, childbirth or pregnancy-related
medical condition. The City will also make reasonable accommodations
to known physical or mental limitations of all employees and applicants
with disabilities, provided that the individual is otherwise qualified to
§ 46-66 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-67
35:887
safely perform the essential functions of the job and also provided that
the accommodation does not impose undue hardship on the City.
C. Reasonable accommodation.
(1) The City Administrator or designee shall engage in an interactive
dialogue with disabled/pregnant employees and prospective
disabled/pregnant employees to identify reasonable
accommodations or their respective physician. In the case of an
employee breastfeeding her infant child, the accommodation shall
include reasonable break time each day to the employee and a
suitable room or other location with privacy, other than a toilet
stall, in close proximity to work area for the employee to express
breast milk for the child. All decisions with regard to reasonable
accommodation shall be made by the City Administrator.
Reasonable accommodation is any change or adjustment to a job or
work environment that permits a qualified applicant or employee
with a disability to participate in the job application process, to
perform the essential functions of a job, or to enjoy benefits and
privileges of employment equal to those enjoyed by employees
without disabilities. For example, reasonable accommodation may
include:
(a) Acquiring or modifying equipment or devices;
(b) Job restructuring;
(c) Part-time or modified work schedules;
(d) Reassignment to a vacant position;
(e) Adjusting or modifying examinations, training materials or
policies;
(f) Providing readers and interpreters; and
(g) Making the workplace readily accessible to and usable by
people with disabilities.
(2) Employees who are assigned to a new position as a reasonable
accommodation will receive the salary for their new position. The
Americans with Disabilities Act and the New Jersey Law Against
Discrimination does not require the City to offer permanent light
duty, relocate essential job functions, or provide personal use items
such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, wheelchairs, etc.
D. Employees should also offer assistance, to the extent possible, to any
member of the public who requests or needs an accommodation when
visiting City facilities. Any questions concerning proper assistance
should be directed to the City Administrator.
E. The ADA and the New Jersey I.aw Against Discrimination prohibits an
employer from retaliating against an applicant or employee for
§ 46-67 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-67
35:888
§ 46-68. Anti-harassment general policy.
asserting his or her rights under the ADA and the New Jersey Law
Against Discrimination. The act also makes it unlawful to discriminate
against an applicant or employee, whether disabled or not, because
of the individual's family, business, social or other relationship or
association with an individual with a disability.
A. It is the City's policy to prohibit harassment of an employee by another
employee, management representative, supplier, volunteer, or business
invitee on the basis of actual or perceived sex, race, creed, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, age, marital or political status,
affectional or sexual orientation, domestic partnership status, civil
union status, atypical heredity, cellular or blood trait, genetic
information, disability (including AIDS or HIV infection), gender
identity or expression, liability for service in the United States Armed
Forces, and/or any other characteristic protected by law. Harassment of
nonemployees by our employees is also prohibited. While it is not easy
to define precisely what harassment is, it includes slurs, epithets,
threats, derogatory comments, unwelcome jokes, teasing, caricatures
or representations of persons using electronically or physically altered
photos, drawings or images, and other similar verbal, written, printed
or physical conduct.
B. If an employee is witness to or believes to have experienced
harassment, immediate notification of the supervisor or other
appropriate person should take place. See the employee complaint
policy.
C. Harassment of any employees, in connection with their work, by
nonemployees may also be a violation of this policy. Any employee who
experiences harassment by a nonemployee, or who observes
harassment of an employee by a nonemployee should report such
harassment to the supervisor. Appropriate action will be taken against
any nonemployee.
D. Notification of appropriate personnel of any harassment problem is
essential to the success of this policy and the City generally. The City
cannot resolve a harassment problem unless it knows about it.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of all employees to bring those kinds
of problems to the attention of the appropriate officials so that steps are
taken to correct them. An individual who reports incidents, which, in
good faith, he or she believes to be violation of this policy, or who is
involved in the investigation of discriminatory harassment, will not be
subject to reprisal or retaliation. Retaliation is a serious violation of this
policy and should be reported immediately. The report and investigation
of allegations of retaliation will follow the procedures set forth in this
policy. Any person found to have retaliated against an individual for
reporting discriminatory harassment or for participating in an
investigation of allegations of such conduct will be subject to an
appropriate disciplinary penalty.
§ 46-67 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-68
35:889
§ 46-69. Anti-sexual-harassment policy.
E. Violation of this harassment policy will subject employees to
disciplinary action, up to and including immediate discharge.
F. Discriminatory harassment defined.
(1) For purposes of this policy, discriminatory harassment is defined as
verbal or physical conduct that denigrates or shows hostility or
aversion toward an individual because of his or her race, color,
gender, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran status or
any other characteristic protected by law, and that:
(a) Creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment; or
(b) Unreasonably interferes with an individual's work
performance.
(2) Some examples of such harassment are: using epithets or slurs;
mocking, ridiculing or mimicking another's culture, accent,
appearance or customs; threatening, intimidating or engaging in
hostile or offensive acts based on an individual's race, color,
gender, religion, national origin, disability, veteran status or any
other characteristic protected by law; displaying on walls, bulletin
boards, or elsewhere in the City, or circulating in the workplace,
written or graphic material that denigrates or shows hostility
toward a person or group because of an individual's race, color,
gender, age, religion, national origin, disability, veteran status or
any other characteristic protected by law. The above list of
examples is not intended to be all-inclusive.
A. It is the City's policy to prohibit sexual harassment of an employee by
another employee, management representative, supplier, volunteer, or
business invitee. The City prohibits sexual harassment from occurring
in the workplace or at any other location at which a City-sponsored
activity takes place. Sexual harassment of nonemployees by the City's
employees is also prohibited. The purpose of this policy is not to
regulate personal morality or to encroach upon one's personal life, but
to demonstrate a strong commitment to maintaining a workplace free of
sexual harassment.
B. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other
verbal, physical or visual conduct of a sexual nature constitute
harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for an employment decision affecting the individual; or
§ 46-68 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-69
35:890
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive work environment.
C. Regarding unwelcome sexual advances toward nonemployees, requests
for sexual favors and other verbal, physical or visual conduct of a sexual
nature constitute harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly in
exchange for a benefit;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for a decision affecting the individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's activities or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive environment.
D. Sexual harassment may include threatening or taking adverse
employment action, such as discharge or demotion, if sexual favors are
not granted, unwanted sexual advances; offering employment benefits
in exchange for sexual favors; visual conduct (leering, making sexual
gestures, displaying of sexually suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons
or posters); verbal sexual advances, propositions or requests; verbal
abuse of a sexual nature; graphic verbal commentaries about an
individual's body; sexually degrading words used to describe an
individual; suggestive or obscene letters, caricatures or
representations of persons using electronically or physically altered
photos, drawings, or images; notes or invitations; and/or physical
conduct (touching, assault, impeding or blocking movements). The
above list of examples is not intended to be all-inclusive.
E. If an employee is witness to or believes that the employee has
experienced sexual harassment, he/she must immediately notify his/her
supervisor or other appropriate person. See the employee complaint
policy. An individual who reports incidents, which, in good faith, he or
she believes to be violation of this policy, or who is involved in the
investigation of discriminatory harassment, will not be subject to
reprisal or retaliation. Retaliation is a serious violation of this policy and
should be reported immediately. The report and investigation of
allegations of retaliation will follow the procedures set forth in this
policy. Any person found to have retaliated against an individual for
reporting discriminatory harassment or for participating in an
investigation of allegations of such conduct will be subject to an
appropriate disciplinary penalty.
F. Harassment of City employees, in connection with their work, by
nonemployees may also be a violation of this policy. Any employee who
experiences harassment by a nonemployee or who observes
harassment of an employee by a nonemployee should report such
harassment to his/her supervisor. Appropriate action will be taken
against any nonemployee.
§ 46-69 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-69
35:891
§ 46-70. Conscientious Employee Protection Act (CEPA) complaints.
G. Notification by the employee to appropriate personnel of any
harassment problem is essential to the success of this policy and the
City generally. The City cannot resolve a harassment problem unless it
is reported. Therefore, it is the responsibility of all employees to bring
those kinds of problems to the attention of management so that the
steps necessary to correct them can be taken.
H. Violation of this sexual harassment policy will subject employees to
disciplinary action up to and including immediate discharge.
I. Consensual romantic and/or sexual relationships between a manager or
supervisor, and nonmanagers or supervisors, or between an employee
with supervisory authority and his or her subordinate, will compromise
the City's ability to enforce its policy against sexual harassment.
Consequently, if such relationships arise they will be considered
carefully by the City, and appropriate action will be taken. Such action
may include a change in the responsibilities of the individuals involved
in such relationships or transfer of location within the facility to
diminish or eliminate the supervisory relationship and workplace
contact that may exist. Any manager or supervisory employee involved
in such a relationship is required to report the relationship to the City
Administrator.
A. Employees have the right under the Conscientious Employee Protection
Act (CEPA) to complain about any activity, policy or practice that the
employees reasonably believe is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation
promulgated pursuant to law without fear of retaliation or reprisal. This
right shall be communicated to all employees in an annual letter
outlining the specific employee complaint procedure and in a posted
notice. A written acknowledgment that the employee received, read,
and understood this letter will be included in the employee's official
personnel file. The annual notice shall be in English and Spanish and
must contain the name of the person who is designated to receive
written notification of policies or practices that might violate CEPA.
This right will also be communicated in the employee handbook. All
complaints will be taken seriously and promptly investigated.
B. Retaliatory action prohibited.
(1) The City shall not take any retaliatory action or tolerate any
reprisal against an employee for any of the following:
(a) Disclosing or threatening to disclose to a supervisor,
department head, the City Administrator, other official or to a
public body, as defined in the Conscientious Employee
Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19-1 et seq.) an activity, policy or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of
a law, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law.
§ 46-69 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-70
35:892
(b) Providing information to, or testifying before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, an inquiry into any
violation of law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
to law.
(c) Objecting to, or refusing to participate in any activity, policy or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is a violation of
a law, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is
fraudulent or criminal; or is incompatible with a clear public
policy mandate concerning the public health, safety, or
welfare. Before an employee can disclose or threaten to
disclose an unlawful activity, policy or practice to a public body,
the employee must serve written notification of the activity,
policy or practice upon the employer, and allow the employer a
reasonable opportunity to take corrective action. An employee
shall serve such written notification upon the following
individual: City Administrator.
(2) "Retaliatory action" is broadly defined under CEPA as "discharge,
suspension or demotion of an employee, or other adverse
employment action taken against an employee in the terms and
conditions of employment." Simply put, this means any adverse
action affecting the employee's ability to work. Termination and
discipline are easy to understand. The last part of the definition is a
wide-encompassing provision that allows adverse actions to be
decided on a case-by-case analysis depending on multiple factors
that can make up an adverse action.
C. In accordance with the statute, the employee must bring the violation to
the attention of the City Administrator, or other person designated by
the City.
(1) However, disclosure is not required where:
(a) The employee is reasonably certain that the violation is known
to one or more officials;
(b) Where the employee reasonably fears physical harm; or
(c) The situation is emergent in nature.
(2) Employees are encouraged to complain in writing using the
employee complaint form. See employee complaint policy.
D. Under the law, the employee must give the City a reasonable
opportunity to correct the activity, policy or practice. The
administration of whistleblower complaints is not subject to the
limitations in the Grievance Policy.
§ 46-70 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-70
35:893

ARTICLE XVI
Leaves of Absence
§ 46-71. Administrative leave.
§ 46-72. Athletic competition leave.
Employees are entitled to athletic competition leave with pay in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-7.1. Requests for such leave must be made in writing to
the City Administrator and approved by the commissioner in charge of the
department. The request for leave must be accompanied with a letter from
the coach indicating that the employee has qualified for the team and the
dates when training and competition will take place. The request for leave
must be submitted within a reasonable time after the employee learns he or
she has qualified for the team and before the time when the leave is to be
taken.
§ 46-73. Bereavement leave.
Employees are entitled to bereavement leave in accordance with the
collective bargaining agreement and the rules and regulations applicable to
them. Employees shall immediately notify their department head, or his or
her designee, when a death has occurred and the date set for the funeral.
§ 46-74. Compensatory leave.
A. Employees are entitled to personal days off each calendar year in
accordance with the collective bargaining agreement and the rules and
regulations applicable to them. Requests for administrative leave must
be approved by the department head, or his or her designee. Except in
the case of an emergency, requests for leave must be submitted at least
24 hours in advance of the time when the leave is to be taken. Use of
administrative leave shall not be unreasonably denied. Priority in
granting such leave requests shall be:
(1) Emergencies.
(2) Religious holidays.
(3) Personal matters.
B. Administrative leave shall be credited at the beginning of each calendar
year in anticipation of continued employment. Administrative leave that
is not used during the calendar year shall be forfeited. An employee
who leaves employment with the City shall not be required to reimburse
the City for days already used. However, administrative leave shall not
accrue after the last day of employment, nor shall it accrue during a
leave of absence without pay or a suspension without pay.
A. Employees are entitled to overtime compensation in accordance with
the collective bargaining agreement and the rules and regulations
applicable to them. Requests for compensatory time off must be
§ 46-71 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-74
35:895
§ 46-75. Convention leave.
approved by the department head, or his or her designee. Except in the
case of an emergency, requests for leave must be submitted at least
24 hours in advance of the time when the leave is to be taken. Use of
compensatory leave shall not be unreasonably denied.
B. Employees engaged in a public safety activity or an emergency
response activity may accrue not more than 480 hours of compensatory
time. Employees engaged in any other work may accrue not more than
240 hours of compensatory time. An employee shall, upon the
termination of employment, be paid for the unused compensatory time.
C. Overtime work shall be kept to a minimum, and except in cases of
emergency, must be authorized in advance by the department head.
Department heads shall rotate overtime assignments on an equitable
basis among those qualified to perform the necessary work. It is the
policy of the City to approve compensatory time off rather than to pay
cash overtime compensation whenever possible, unless the collective
bargaining agreement provides otherwise.
A. Employees are entitled to convention leave in accordance with N.J.A.C.
4A:6-1.13. Requests for convention leave must be approved by the
commissioner in charge of the department. Requests for such leave
must be made at least 30 days in advance of the time when the leave is
to be taken.
B. Permanent employees. A permanent employee who is a duly authorized
representative of one of the established veterans organizations listed in
N.J.S.A. 38:23-2 or of the New Jersey Civil Service Association shall,
upon request, be granted a leave of absence with pay of up to five days
in any calendar year to attend the State and National Convention. The
leave of absence shall be for a period inclusive of the duration of the
convention with a reasonable time allowed for travel to and from the
convention, but shall not exceed five days. Proof of attendance shall be
submitted to the commissioner in charge of the department after the
convention, and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
C. Police and fire. N.J.S.A. 11A:6-10 provides for a leave of absence with
full pay to public employees who are duly authorized representatives of
an employee organization and affiliated with the New Jersey
Policemen's Benevolent Association, Inc., Fraternal Order of Police,
Firemen's Mutual Benevolent Association, Inc., or the Professional
Firefighters Association of New Jersey to attend any state or national
convention of the organization subject to the limitations contained in
the statute. The leave of absence shall be for a period inclusive of the
duration of the convention with a reasonable time allowed for travel to
and from the convention, provided that such leave shall be for no more
than seven days. Proof of attendance shall be submitted to the
commissioner in charge of the department after the convention, and
filed in the office of the City Administrator.
§ 46-74 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-75
35:896
§ 46-76. Elected office leave.
Employees are entitled to elective office leave in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-7.2 and N.J.A.C. 4A:6-1.17. Requests for such leave must be made in
writing to the City Clerk and approved by the commissioner in charge of the
department. The request for leave must be submitted within a reasonable
time before the time when the leave is to be taken.
§ 46-77. Family Medical Leave Act.
D. Other convention leave. Except as may be mandated by state law,
request for a leave of absence with pay to attend a convention dealing
with subject matter directly related to the employee's official duties
may be approved in the sole discretion of the commissioner in charge of
the department. If the leave of absence is granted, proof of attendance
shall be submitted to the commissioner in charge of the department
after the convention and filed in the office of the City Administrator.
A. Employees may be eligible for an unpaid family and medical leave
under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"). Employees
also may be eligible for family and/or medical leave pursuant to the
New Jersey Family Leave Act99 ("FLA"). In order to be eligible for such
leave, employees must have one year of service with the City, and at
least 1,000 hours of work (for New Jersey leave) and 1,250 hours of
work (for federal leave) during the previous 12 months and be
employed at a worksite where 50 or more employees are employed by
the employer within 75 miles of the worksite (for federal leave). Eligible
employees may receive up to 12 weeks of leave per year (FMLA) and up
to 26 weeks of leave in any twelve-month period in compliance with the
expansion of FMLA under The Support for Injured Service Members Act
of 2007, or 12 weeks every 24 months (FLA).
B. During the leave period, the employee's health benefits will be
continued on the same conditions as coverage would have been
provided had the employee been employed continuously during the
entire leave. The employee will not continue to accrue vacation, sick or
personal days for the period of the leave. The employee will receive
seniority credit for the time that the employee has been on leave under
this section. At the conclusion of the leave period, an eligible employee
is entitled to reinstatement to the position the employee previously held
or to an equivalent one with the same terms and benefits that existed
prior to the exercise of leave.
C. Upon written notice, eligible employees are entitled to a family or
medical leave for up to 12 weeks to care for a newly born or adopted
child or a seriously ill immediate family member, including a civil union
partner, or for the employee's own serious health condition that makes
the employee unable to perform the functions of the employee's
position. A serious health condition is defined as a condition that
99.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11b-1 et seq.
§ 46-75 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-77
35:897
requires inpatient care at a hospital, hospice or residential medical care
facility, including any period of incapacity or any subsequent treatment
in connection with such inpatient care or a condition that requires
continuing care by a licensed health care provider. This policy covers
illnesses of a serious and long-term nature, resulting in recurring or
lengthy absences. Generally, a chronic or long-term health condition,
which, if left untreated, would result in a period of incapacity of more
than three days, would be considered a serious health condition.
Employees with questions about what illnesses are covered under this
FMLA policy are encouraged to consult with the Personnel Officer.
Eligible employees who take leave under this policy must use all
accrued available sick, vacation and/or personal days during the leave.
The use of accrued time will not extend the leave period. After
exhausting accrued time, the employee will no longer be paid for the
remainder of the leave.
D. The period of leave must be supported by a physician's certificate. The
employee must respond to such a request within 15 days or provide a
reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification
may result in a denial of continuation of leave. Medical certification may
be provided by using the medical certification form through the New
Jersey Department of Labor. Request for a medical certificate must be
made in writing as part of the employer response to employee request
for leave. Certification of the serious health condition shall include the
date when the condition began, its expected duration and a brief
statement of treatment. For medical leave for the employee's own
medical condition, the certification must also include a statement that
the employee is unable to perform work of any kind or a statement that
the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the
employee's position. For a family member who is seriously ill, the
certification must include a statement that the patient, the family
member, requires assistance and that the employee's presence would
be beneficial or desirable. If the employee plans to take intermittent
leave or work a reduced schedule, the certification must also include
dates and the duration of treatment as well as a statement of medical
necessity for taking intermittent leave or working a reduced schedule.
(1) The City has the right to ask for a second opinion if it has reason to
doubt the certification. The City will pay for the employee to get a
certification from a second doctor, which the City will select. If
necessary to resolve a conflict between the original certification
and the second opinion, the City will require the opinion of a third
doctor. The City and the employee will mutually select the third
doctor, and the City will pay for the opinion. This third opinion will
be considered final. The employee will be provisionally entitled to
leave and benefits under the FMLA pending the second and/or third
opinion.
(2) An extension past 12 weeks can be requested, but a medical
verification explaining the need for such an extension must be
§ 46-77 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-77
35:898
submitted prior to the expiration of the leave. The City reserves the
right to deny any request for extended leave.
(3) Additional information concerning the family leave policy and
eligibility requirements are available from the City's Personnel
Officer.
E. Commencing July 1, 2009, family temporary disability ("FTD")
payments for up to six weeks in a twelve-month period will become
available for eligible employees who are caring for a seriously ill
immediate family member who is incapable of self-care or care of a
newborn or adopted child. To be eligible, the employee must have
worked at least 20 weeks at minimum wage within the last 52 weeks or
earned 1,000 times the minimum wage. The weekly benefit is 2/3 of
weekly compensation up to a maximum of $524 per week. (This amount
is subject to change.) FTD will run concurrently with FMLA and/or FLA
leaves, and there is a one-week waiting period. Employees shall also be
required to use accrued sick, vacation or personal leave for up to two
weeks.
F. Employees taking paid family leave in connection with a family
member's serious health condition may take leave intermittently or
consecutively. Intermittent leave is not available for the care of a
newborn or adopted child. Intermittent leave may be taken in
increments necessary to address the circumstances that precipitated
the need for leave. An employee seeking intermittent paid family leave
is required to provide the City with 15 days' notice unless an emergency
or other unforeseen circumstance precludes prior notice. The employee
seeking intermittent leave shall make a reasonable attempt to schedule
leave in a nondisruptive manner. Employees requesting such leave
shall, if possible, provide the City with a regular schedule of days for
intermittent leave.
G. Employees may also be eligible for an unpaid leave for up to 26
workweeks in a year to care for a family member on active duty in the
military or a covered veteran (A covered veteran is an individual who
was discharged or released under conditions other than a dishonorable
discharge at any time during the five-year period prior to the first date
the eligible employee takes FMLA leave to care for the covered
veteran.) with a serious injury or illness incurred in the line of duty on
active duty for which the service member is undergoing medical
treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status,
or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, or up to 12
weeks in a year for a qualifying exigency. A qualifying exigency occurs
when a military member is called to covered active duty (requires
deployment to a foreign country) and a close member of his/her family
must attend official ceremonies or family support or assistance
meetings, there is a short-notice deployment, a close member of his/her
family must attend to child-care matters or attend to financial and/or
legal matters or counseling. A "serious injury or illness" means an injury
or illness incurred by a covered service member in the line of duty on
§ 46-77 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-77
35:899
active duty that may render the service member medically unfit to
perform the duties of his or her office, grade, rank, or rating. Employees
requesting this type of service-member FMLA leave must provide
documentation of the family member's or next-of-kin's injury, recovery
or need for care. This documentation may be a copy of the military
medical information, orders for treatment, or other official armed
forces communication pertaining to the service member's injury or
illness incurred on active military duty that renders the member
medically unfit to perform his or her military duties.
H. Serious injury or illness.
(1) A "serious injury or illness" also means an injury or illness that was
incurred by the covered veteran in the line of duty on active duty in
the armed forces or that existed before the veteran's active duty
and was aggravated by service in the line of duty on active duty,
and that is either:
(a) A continuation of a serious injury or illness that was incurred
or aggravated when the veteran was a member of the armed
forces and rendered the service member unable to perform the
duties of the service member's office, grade, rank, or rating;
(b) A physical or mental condition for which the veteran has
received a United States Department of Veterans Affairs
service-related disability rating (VASRD) of 50% or greater,
and the need for military caregiver leave is related to that
condition;
(c) A physical or mental condition that substantially impairs the
veteran's ability to work because of a disability or disabilities
related to military service, or would do so absent treatment; or
(d) An injury that is the basis for the veteran's enrollment in the
Department of Veterans Affairs Program of Comprehensive
Assistance for Family Caregivers.
(2) Any one of these definitions meets the FMLA's definition of a
serious injury or illness for a covered veteran regardless of whether
the injury or illness manifested before or after the individual
became a veteran.
I. Upon an employer's request, an employee must provide a copy of the
covered military member's active duty orders to support the request for
qualifying exigency leave. In addition, upon an employer's request,
certification for qualifying exigency leave must be supported by a
certification containing the following information:
(1) A statement or description of appropriate facts regarding the
qualifying exigency for which leave is needed;
§ 46-77 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-77
35:900
(2) The approximate date on which the qualifying exigency
commenced or will commence;
(3) Beginning and end dates for leave to be taken for a single
continuous period of time;
(4) An estimate of the frequency and duration of the qualifying
exigency if leave is needed on a reduced-schedule basis or
intermittently; and
(5) If the qualifying exigency requires meeting with a third party, the
contact information for the third party and a description of the
purpose of the meeting.
J. Eligible employees may also take leave to care for a military member's
parent who is incapable of self-care when the care is necessitated by
the member's covered active duty. Such care may include arranging for
alternative care, providing care on an immediate basis, admitting or
transferring the parent to a care facility, or attending meetings with
staff at a care facility.
K. Employees who request qualifying exigency leave to spend time with a
military member on rest and recuperation may take up to a maximum of
15 calendar days. Upon an employer's request, an employee must
provide a copy of the military member's rest and recuperation leave
orders or other documentation issued by the military setting forth the
dates of the military member's leave.
L. Domestic violence leave. The New Jersey Security and Financial
Entitlement Act,100 also known as the "NJ SAFE Act" provides
protection for employees and their family members who have been the
victims of domestic violence or sexual assault. Employees are entitled
to 20 days of unpaid protected leave from work to:
(1) Seek medical attention for physical or psychological injuries;
(2) Obtain services from a victim services organization; pursue
psychological or other counseling;
(3) Participate in safety planning for temporary or permanent
relocation;
(4) Seek legal assistance to ensure health and safety of the employee
or the employee's relative; or
(5) Attend, participate in, or prepare for a criminal or civil court
proceeding relating to an incident of domestic or sexual violence.
M. To be eligible for the leave, an employee must meet the following
criteria:
100. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11c-1 et seq.
§ 46-77 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-77
35:901
§ 46-78. Gubernatorial appointment leave.
Employees are entitled to gubernatorial appointment leave without pay in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 4A:6-1.12. Requests for such leave must be made
in writing to the City Administrator and approved by the commissioner in
charge of the department. The request for leave must be submitted within a
reasonable time before the time when the leave is to be taken.
§ 46-79. Holiday leave.
(1) The employee or his or her child, parent, spouse or domestic
partner must be a victim of domestic violence or a sexually violent
offense;
(2) The employee must have worked for the employer for at least 12
months and for at least 1,000 hours during the twelve-month period
immediately preceding the requested leave; and
(3) The twenty-day leave must be taken within one year of the
qualifying event.
N. Employees may take leave on an intermittent basis, but such leave
cannot be shorter than one full day. To the extent the leave is
foreseeable, employees must provide advance notice. In addition,
employees seeking leave must provide proof that they qualify for the
leave. Such proof may include a restraining order, letter from a
prosecutor, proof of conviction, medical documentation or a
certification from an agency or professional involved in assisting the
employee.
O. In certain circumstances, the basis for the leave may also qualify under
the federal Family and Medical Leave Act and/or the New Jersey Family
Leave Act.101 If so, the City will treat the leave concurrently with the
leave under those statutes. Employees may be required to use accrued
paid vacation leave, personal time or sick leave concurrently.
P. The City shall protect the privacy of employees who seek leave by
holding the request for leave, the leave itself or the failure to return to
work "in the strictest confidence."
Q. The City shall not retaliate, harass or discriminate against any
employee exercising his/her right to take the leave provided by this
policy.
A. Employees are entitled to holiday leave in accordance with the
collective bargaining agreement and the rules and regulations
applicable to them. Any department head who finds it necessary to do
so may require some or all employees of his or her department to report
for work on any legal holiday.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11b-1 et seq.
§ 46-77 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-79
35:902
§ 46-80. Injury leave.
§ 46-81. Jury duty leave.
B. Holiday leave shall not be paid for holidays occurring before the first
day of employment with the City, nor for holidays occurring after the
last day of employment with the City. An employee ceases employment
with the City upon death, retirement, resignation or termination.
Holiday leave shall not be paid for holidays occurring during a leave of
absence without pay or during a suspension without pay.
C. If an employee is in a "no pay" status the day before or the day after a
holiday, the employee is not eligible to receive holiday pay.
A. An employee who is disabled due to a compensable work-connected
injury or illness shall be entitled to a leave of absence with pay for the
period of time that he or she is unable to return to work and is eligible
for workers' compensation temporary disability benefits subject to the
maximum time authorized in the collective bargaining agreement and
permitted by state law. The examining physician designated and
compensated by the City must certify to the disability and the injury or
illness as required by state law.
B. The City provides workers' compensation insurance as required by
state law for employees sustaining injuries or illnesses arising out of
and during the course of employment.
C. When an employee receives workers' compensation checks for
temporary disability benefits for the period of time he or she is paid
injury leave, he or she shall sign over the workers' compensation checks
to the City upon receipt, or the employee shall be liable to the City for
the payment of those moneys.
A. The City encourages employees to fulfill their civic responsibilities by
serving jury duty when required. Employees who receive a summons to
report for jury duty must notify their supervisor immediately so that
arrangements may be made to cover your absence from work. In some
cases the City may provide a letter to the court requesting that jury
service be postponed. Of course, employees are expected to report for
work whenever the court schedule permits.
B. Either the City or the employee may request an excuse from jury duty if,
in the City's judgment the employee's absence would create serious
operational difficulties. It is the decision of the courts to excuse or not
excuse the request.
C. Employees who are required to serve jury duty that is scheduled during
work hours shall be paid their regular rate of pay by the City.
Employees who are summoned for service as grand or petit jurors are
required to submit a copy of the summons to the City Administrator.
Employees who attend jury service shall provide written verification of
§ 46-79 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-81
35:903
§ 46-82. Military leave.
attendance signed by a representative of the Court to the City
Administrator. Employees must report for work for any reasonable time
the court is not in session during normal work hours.
A. The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
("USERRA"), 38 U.S.C. § 4301 et seq., applies to all employers,
regardless of size, including foreign employers doing business in the
United States. USERRA requires all employers to grant a leave of
absence for up to five years to any person who is absent from a job
because of uniformed service. USERRA applies to leaves of absence for
all categories of military duty except state active duty or Governor call
ups, which are protected under N.J.S.A. 38:23C-20a. USERRA only
requires the leave of absence; pay for military members is discretionary
with each public and private entity. Requests for military leave must be
approved by the commissioner in charge of the department. Such
requests shall be accompanied with the documents required by state
regulations which include the military orders received by the employee.
B. N.J.S.A. 38A:4-4 provides for a leave of absence with full pay to a public
employee who is a state reservist as follows: for the entire time while
engaged in state active duty; and for up to 90 workdays each calendar
year while engaged in active duty for training or federal active duty.
Thereafter, the leave of absence shall be without pay but without loss of
time.
C. N.J.S.A. 38:23-1 provides for a leave of absence with full pay to a public
employee who is a federal reservist for up to 30 workdays each
calendar year when engaged in any period of federal active duty.
Thereafter, the leave of absence shall be without pay but without loss of
time.
D. N.J.S.A. 38:23-3 authorizes a municipality, but does not require it, to
provide a leave of absence with differential pay to a public employee
during the time that the employee is engaged in a branch of the military
or naval service of the national or state government. If the leave of
absence is authorized by the governing body of the City, the public
employee must provide copies of his or her military pay stubs or other
written documentation which provides clear and convincing proof of
the military pay he or she will receive or is receiving. This
documentation shall be provided to the City Administrator and to the
chief executive officer of the department where the employee works
before any differential pay will be paid by the City.
E. N.J.S.A. 38:23-4 provides for a leave of absence without pay to a public
employee who enters military service in time of war or emergency, or
for any period of training, or pursuant to any selective service system.
The employee shall be entitled to the leave for the period of the service
and three months after honorable discharge. If the employee is
incapacitated, an extended period is authorized by state law.
§ 46-81 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-83
35:904
§ 46-83. Sick leave.
A. Employees are entitled to sick leave in accordance with the collective
bargaining agreement and the rules and regulations applicable to them.
Requests for sick leave must be reported to the department head, or his
or her designee, on a daily basis. If not already specified in a collective
bargaining agreement or other rule or regulation, pursuant to New
Jersey's Sick Leave Law, effective October 29, 2018, or on employee's
date of hire, whichever is later, the City shall provide an employee with
one hour of sick time for every 30 hours worked.
B. Annual paid sick leave is credited at the beginning of each calendar
year in anticipation of continued employment. Continued employment
shall mean employment without interruption due to death, resignation,
retirement or removal. Paid sick leave shall not accrue after the last day
of employment with the City, nor shall it accrue during a leave of
absence without pay or a suspension without pay. Unused sick leave
shall accumulate from year to year without limit.
C. Sick leave may be used by employees who are unable to work because
of personal illness or injury, exposure to contagious disease, care for a
reasonable period of time for a seriously ill member of the employee's
immediate family, or death in the employee's immediate family for a
reasonable period of time. Employees may use paid sick time for the
diagnosis, care, treatment of, or recovery from, a mental or physical
illness, injury or other adverse health condition, or for preventative
medical care of: 1) the employee; 2) the employee's family member;
and/or 3) an individual whose close association with the employee is the
equivalent of a family relationship. The state's Sick Leave Law also
covers:
(1) Care for covered individuals that were the victim of domestic
violence (under limited circumstances);
(2) Time needed because of a closure of the employee's workplace or
the school or place of care of a child of the employee by order of a
public official due to an epidemic or other public health emergency;
and
(3) Attendance at school-related functions and meetings concerning a
child's mental health condition or disability.
D. The department head shall certify to the City Administrator any sick
leave allowance made in each month.
E. A department head, or the commissioner in charge of the department,
may require proof of illness or injury when there is a reason to believe
that an employee is abusing sick leave, an employee has been absent on
sick leave for five or more consecutive workdays, or an employee has
been absent on sick leave for an aggregate of more than 15 days in a
twelve-month period. Proof of illness or injury shall consist of a note,
letter or report from the treating doctor which indicates the nature of
§ 46-83 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-83
35:905
§ 46-84. Temporary leave of absence without pay.
The commissioner in charge of the department may grant a permanent
employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed one
year. Requests for such leave must be submitted at least 30 days in advance
of the time set for taking it and shall not be approved for a period longer
the medical condition, the date of first treatment, and the date when
the employee is expected to return to work. The City reserves the right
to obtain a medical report from the treating physician, at its expense,
which indicates the nature and extent of the employee's medical
condition, the prognosis for partial or complete recovery, the
limitations, if any, on the performance of employment duties, and any
other information relevant to employment. The employee shall
cooperate in securing the report.
F. When an illness is of a chronic or recurring nature causing occasional
absences of one day or less, one proof of illness shall be required for
every six-month period. The proof of illness must specify the nature of
the illness and that it is likely to cause periodic absences from
employment.
G. In the case of sick leave due to exposure to a contagious disease, death
in the employee's immediate family, or the care of a seriously ill
member of the employee's immediate family, reasonable proof may be
required by the department head or the commissioner in charge of the
department.
H. The department head, or the commissioner in charge of the
department, may require an employee who has been on sick leave to be
examined by a physician designated and compensated by the City as a
condition of the employee's continuation of sick leave or return to work.
Such an examination shall establish whether the employee is capable of
performing his or her work duties and whether return to employment
would jeopardize the health of the employee or that of other employees.
I. Failure to follow the sick leave notification and verification procedures
shall result in a denial of sick leave for the specific absence from work,
may be considered an abuse of sick leave, and may constitute cause for
disciplinary action.
(1) An employee reporting off from work requesting sick leave shall
notify his or her department head, or their designee, before the
scheduled workday begins.
(2) An employee requesting sick leave must have accumulated sick
leave on the books of the City to be eligible for authorized sick
leave.
(3) When an employee fails to comply with the sick leave notification
and verification procedures, the absence from work shall constitute
an unauthorized leave of absence without pay.
§ 46-83 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-84
35:906
than six months at one time. The commissioner may extend the leave for an
additional six months or any portion thereof. The commissioner may permit
an employee to return from a leave of absence without pay prior to its
conclusion. Such leave will be granted only after the employee has used
all of his or her accumulated administrative leave, compensatory leave,
sick leave and vacation leave in the case of illness, or all of his or her
accumulated administrative leave, compensatory leave and vacation leave
if the requested leave is for other than illness. If such leave is related to
an illness, medical verification is required to request such leave and any
extensions thereto. During any leave of absence without pay, in excess of 29
days, administrative leave, holiday leave, sick leave, vacation leave, annual
clothing allowance and annual clothing maintenance allowance shall be
prorated on the basis of the number of 30 day periods of leave taken.
§ 46-85. Union leave; restrictions on union meetings.
A permanent employee who has been elected or appointed an official of
the employee's union may be granted a leave of absence without pay to
conduct union business for the maximum period authorized in the collective
bargaining agreement and as per the Workplace Democracy Enhancement
Act ("WDEA"). Requests for union leave must be approved by the
commissioner in charge of the department and filed in the office of the City
Administrator. Requests for such leave must be submitted at least 30 days
in advance of the time set for taking it.
§ 46-86. Vacation leave.
A. Employees are entitled to vacation leave in accordance with the
collective bargaining agreement and the rules and regulations
applicable to them. Requests for vacation leave must be approved by
the commissioner or his or her designee. Requests for leave in excess of
three days but less than six days shall be submitted at least 10 working
days in advance of the time when the leave is to be taken. Requests for
leaves in excess of five days shall be submitted at least 15 working days
in advance of the time when the leave is to be taken.
B. Annual paid vacation leave is credited at the beginning of each calendar
year in anticipation of continued employment based on the employee's
years of continuous service. Continued employment shall mean
employment without actual interruption due to death, resignation,
retirement or removal. Paid vacation leave shall not accrue after the
last day of employment with the City, nor shall it accrue during a leave
of absence without pay or a suspension without pay.
C. Vacations shall be scheduled for the period requested by the employee,
provided such arrangements are consistent with work requirements.
Preference and assignment of vacations shall be on the basis of
seniority insofar as it is practicable. Vacation leave may be approved for
1/2 of a workday or a full workday, but not for an hour or other
fractional time periods.
§ 46-84 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-86
35:907
§ 46-87. Witness appearance leave.
§ 46-88. Abuse of leaves of absence.
D. Vacation leave not used in a calendar year because of business
necessity shall be used during the next succeeding calendar year only
and shall be scheduled to avoid loss of leave.
E. Vacation schedules shall be arranged to maintain essential City
services. This shall be the responsibility of the department head or his
or her designee. Factors such as staff size and work load must be
considered when scheduling vacations.
F. Every effort shall be made to insure that manpower requirements are
met and that the two senior supervisors of the department are not
scheduled for vacation leave at the same time in order to maintain the
continuity of leadership and the operational efficiency of the
department.
A. Permanent employees are entitled to a leave of absence with pay to
appear as a party or a witness before an administrative or judicial body,
or a legislative committee when such appearance is directly related to
his or her official duties with the City. If an employee appears as a party
or witness on his or her normal day off, the employee shall be
compensated as required by the terms of the collective bargaining
agreement.
B. When the appearance before an administrative or judicial body is not
directly related to the employee's official duties with the City, the
employee shall be granted a leave of absence without pay when
subpoenaed as a witness in a legal proceeding, or when an employee is
a party to the litigation.
C. An employee is entitled to a leave of absence with pay to attend his or
her workers' compensation proceeding.
D. Requests for such leave must be made in writing to the City
Administrator and approved by the department head in charge of the
department. If the request is being made by a department head, the
requested leave must be approved by the commissioner in charge of the
department.
A. An employee shall not abuse paid leaves of absence. A department
head, or his or her designee, shall not knowingly approve a paid leave of
absence which will result in its abuse.
B. An employee shall not utilize a paid leave of absence and then perform
duties for the City during the same time period for which the employee
receives monetary compensation.
C. Except in the case of a personal emergency, a department head, or his
or her designee, shall not knowingly approve a paid leave of absence
§ 46-86 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-88
35:908
such as administrative leave, compensatory leave or vacation leave
for an employee when business necessity requires those job
responsibilities to be performed by another employee who will receive
overtime compensation.
D. This section does not restrict the right of a department head, or his or
her designee, from requiring an employee who is on a paid leave of
absence to report for work to perform essential services which are
required because of an emergency or business necessity. However, the
paid leave of absence stops at the time when the employee reports for
work and does not resume until the essential services are completed.
§ 46-88 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-88
35:909

ARTICLE XVII
Nepotism
§ 46-89. Purpose.
It is the intent of this policy to avoid the appearance of a conflict of
interest either on the part of a member of the Board of Commissioners or
a member of the administrative staff. Unless otherwise provided by law or
New Jersey Civil Service Commission rule, immediate relatives shall not be
hired, promoted or transferred to a regular full-time or regular part-time
position where:
§ 46-90. "Relative" defined.
For purposes of this policy, a relative by blood or marriage is defined as a
spouse, father, father-in-law, stepfather, mother, mother-in-law, stepmother,
son, son-in-law, stepson, daughter, daughter-in-law, stepdaughter, brother,
brother-in-law, stepbrother, sister, sister-in-law, stepsister. Additionally,
members of the immediate household shall be considered a relative even
though not related by blood or marriage.
§ 46-91. Relative of administrator.
No person who is a relative of an administrator shall be appointed to
a position with the City that is in a line relationship involving direct
supervision and evaluation of the position by the administrator. The
administrator whose relative is seeking employment with the City shall not
participate in that portion of any meeting where the proposed appointment
is discussed. An administrator with the City shall be those persons who
are in the Administration Unit and who are covered by the employment
agreement between the City of Millville and the Administration Unit.
§ 46-92. Relative of commissioner.
Unless the appointment is a nondiscretionary appointment, no person who
is a relative of a commissioner shall be appointed to employment with the
City in a department under the control or supervision of the commissioner.
In the event a relative of a commissioner seeks employment with the City in
a different department, then the employment application shall be reviewed
by the Personnel Committee and a recommendation made to the remaining
commissioners who may make the appointment by majority vote at a public
hearing subject to N.J.S.A. 40:72-4 and 40:72-5. The commissioner whose
A. One relative would have the authority to appoint, remove, discipline or
evaluate the performance of the other;
B. One relative would be responsible for auditing the work of the other; or
C. Other circumstances exist that place the relatives in a situation of
actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.
§ 46-89 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-92
35:911
relative is seeking employment shall not participate in that portion of any
meeting where the proposed appointment is discussed.
§ 46-92 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-92
35:912
ARTICLE XVIII
Outside Employment
§ 46-93. Conditions under which outside employment permitted.
A. Employees are allowed to hold outside employment as long as it does
not interfere with their City responsibilities. Employees are prohibited
from engaging in outside employment activities while on the job or
using City time, supplies or equipment in the outside employment
activities. The City Administrator may request employees to restrict
outside employment if the quality of City work diminishes. Any
employee who holds an interest, or is employed by, any business doing
business with the City must submit a written notice of these outside
interests to the City Administrator.
B. Full-time employees of the City may engage in outside employment if:
(1) The employee maintains the City as his or her primary employer;
(2) The employment does not conflict with his or her duties or position
as an employee of the City, including the employee's availability to
work call-in situations when the job responsibilities require that
availability;
(3) The outside employment does not create a conflict of interest with
the City employment; and
(4) The employee does not perform outside work during his or her
regularly scheduled work hours with the City.
§ 46-93 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-93
35:913

ARTICLE XIX
Performance Evaluations
§ 46-94. Purpose.
The purpose of the employee performance evaluation is to provide
probationary employees with timely reports of their progress and allow for
correction of deficiencies.
§ 46-95. Frequency of evaluations.
Department heads shall evaluate probationary employees a minimum of
three times during the working test period and provide a written
recommendation to the commissioner in charge of the department
indicating whether the employee should be retained.
§ 46-96. Termination at end of working test period.
The City shall comply with N.J.A.C. 4A:2-4.1 et seq. if an employee is
terminated from service or returned to his or her former permanent title at
the conclusion of a working test period due to unsatisfactory performance.
§ 46-94 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-96
35:915

ARTICLE XX
Personnel Records
§ 46-97. Maintenance of records.
The official personnel file for each employee shall be maintained by the City
Administrator. Personnel files are confidential records that must be secured
in a locked cabinet and will only be available to authorized managerial
and supervisory personnel on a need-to-know basis. Records relating to any
medical condition will be maintained in a separate file. Electronic personnel
and medical records must be protected from unauthorized access.
§ 46-98. Employee review.
Upon request, employees may inspect their own personnel files at a
mutually agreeable time on the City premises in the presence of the City
Administrator or a designated supervisor. The employee will be entitled to
see any records used to determine his or her qualification for employment,
promotion or wage increases and any records used for disciplinary
purposes. Employees may not remove any papers from the file. Employees
will be allowed to have a copy of any document they have signed relating to
their obtaining employment. Employees may add to the file their versions of
any disputed item.
§ 46-99. Confidential records.
Personnel files do not contain confidential employee medical information.
Any such information that the City may obtain will be maintained in
separate files and treated at all times as confidential information. Any such
medical information may be disclosed under very limited circumstances in
accordance with any applicable legal requirements.
§ 46-100. Public records.
The City endeavors to maintain the privacy of personnel records. There are
limited circumstances in which the City will release information contained
in personnel or medical records to persons outside the City. These
circumstances include:
A. In response to a valid subpoena, court order or order of an authorized
administrative agency.
B. To an authorized governmental agency as part of an investigation of the
City's compliance with applicable law.
C. To the City's agents and attorneys, when necessary.
D. In a lawsuit, administrative proceeding, grievance or arbitration in
which the employee and the City are parties.
E. In a workers' compensation proceeding.
§ 46-97 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-100
35:917
F. To administer benefit plans.
G. To an authorized health care provider.
H. To first aid or safety personnel, when necessary.
I. To a potential future employer or other person requesting a verification
of employment.
§ 46-100 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-100
35:918
ARTICLE XXI
Political Activity
§ 46-101. Policy.
Except as otherwise provided by state law, rule or regulation, employees
have exactly the same right as other citizens to join political organizations
and participate in political activities, as long as they maintain a clear
separation between their official responsibilities and their political
affiliations. Employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
while performing their public duties and from using City time, equipment or
supplies in any political activity. Any violation of this policy must be reported
to the City Administrator.
§ 46-101 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-101
35:919

ARTICLE XXII
Residency Requirement
§ 46-102. Appointment.
All applicants for initial appointment to an employment position with the
City, including policemen and firemen, shall be residents of the City of
Millville and must maintain continuous residency within the City of Millville
from the announced closing date of the Department of Personnel
examination up to and including the date of appointment. It is the
responsibility of each employee and officer to maintain a current record
of address with both his/her respective department and the City
Administrator's office. Falsification of records may result in disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
§ 46-103. Classification of qualified applicants.
The following classifications for duly qualified applicants for employment
with the City of Millville is hereby established:
§ 46-104. Appointment in class order.
The City shall first appoint all those in Class A and then those in each
succeeding class, in the order above listed, and shall appoint a person in
any such class only to a vacancy or vacancies remaining after all qualified
applicants in the preceding class have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment.
§ 46-105. Special skills.
The City reserves the right to hire or appoint without reference to the
residency requirement any officer or employee with special talents or skills
necessary for the operation of government.
A. Residents within the City of Millville.
B. Residents within the County of Cumberland.
C. Residents within the State of New Jersey.
D. All other qualified residents.
§ 46-102 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-105
35:921

ARTICLE XXIII
Resignations
§ 46-106. Notice.
Employees may resign in good standing by giving the commissioner in
charge of their department, or their department head, at least 14 days'
written notice. If an employee resigns without submitting the required
notice, he or she shall be held as having resigned not in good standing.
§ 46-107. Absent from duty.
Any employee who is absent from duty for five or more consecutive
workdays without just cause or an approved leave of absence shall be
considered to have abandoned his or her position and shall be held as
having resigned not in good standing.
§ 46-108. Failure to return to duty.
Any employee who has not returned to duty for five or more consecutive
workdays following an approved leave of absence shall be considered to
have abandoned his or her position and shall be held as having resigned not
in good standing.
§ 46-106 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-108
35:923

ARTICLE XXIV
Risk Management Loss Control Plan
§ 46-109. Adoption of plan; annual review.
A. The City has adopted a risk management loss control plan which is
designed to minimize the risk of losses due to accidents and injuries.
The plan is also designed to provide a healthy and safe environment
free from any recognized hazards. Written copies of the plan shall be
distributed to all department heads. City employees shall cooperate
with the implementation of the plan.
B. This plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the department heads
and recommended modifications shall be reviewed and adopted by the
governing body as required.
§ 46-109 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-109
35:925

ARTICLE XXV
Safety
§ 46-110. Policy.
The City will provide a safe and healthy work environment and shall comply
with the Public Employees Occupational Safety and Health Act (PEOSHA).
The City is equally concerned about the safety of the public.
§ 46-111. Training and rules.
Consistent with this policy, employees shall receive periodic safety training
and will be provided with appropriate safety equipment. Employees are
responsible for observing safety rules and using available safety devices,
including personal protective equipment. Failure to do so constitutes
grounds for disciplinary action.
§ 46-112. Reporting requirements.
Any occupational or public unsafe act, condition, practice or procedure
must be reported to the supervisor or department head. Any workconnected
accident or accident involving City equipment, facilities or motor
vehicles also shall be reported immediately. The City has appointed a safety
committee that meets on a regular basis to discuss and recommend
solutions to safety problems. Employees are encouraged to discuss safety
concerns with their safety committee representative.
§ 46-110 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-112
35:927

ARTICLE XXVI
Smoking
§ 46-113. Policy.
The New Jersey Legislature has declared that in all government buildings
the rights of nonsmokers to breathe clean air supersedes the rights of
smokers. In accordance with state law, the City has adopted a smoke-free
policy for all buildings. City facilities shall be smoke-free, and no employee
or visitor shall be permitted to smoke anywhere inside City buildings.
Employees are permitted to smoke outside City buildings at such locations
so as not to allow the reentry of the smoke into the building entrances.
Designated smoking areas have been marked for City employee's use.
Smoking inside and outside vehicles owned by the City and near or around
equipment, while operating or not, that may be sensitive to smoke is also
prohibited. Any violation of this policy shall constitute grounds for
disciplinary action.
§ 46-113 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-113
35:929

ARTICLE XXVII
Temporary Modified Duty
§ 46-114. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to establish uniform standards throughout City
government for temporary modified duty. Temporary modified duty within a
department of government shall be available to full-time permanent public
employees on a fair and equitable basis under the conditions set forth
herein when a public employee has a qualified disability that prevents the
employee from performing his or her regular job with the City.
§ 46-115. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
ADA — The Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., which
provides federal protection from employment discrimination for individuals
with qualified disabilities.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The commissioner in charge of a
department of government except the Fire Department and the Police
Department. The Fire Chief and the Police Chief are the chief executive
officers of their respective departments.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — The highest ranking civil service employee,
statutory employee, or appointee who is in charge of a subordinate
department of City government, such as the Tax Assessor or the Tax
Collector.
DISPARATE TREATMENT — That employees who are not disabled are
treated more favorably than a disabled employee.
LAD —
The Law Against Discrimination, N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq., which provides
state protection from employment discrimination for individuals with
qualified disabilities. The New Jersey Department of Labor has
promulgated regulations that explain that a place of public
accommodation must make reasonable modifications to its policies,
practices or procedures to ensure that people with disabilities have
access to public places. The regulations also explain that under the
LAD, these reasonable accommodations may include actions such as
providing auxiliary aides and making physical changes to ensure paths
of travel.
A.
The LAD prohibits discrimination in all aspects of the employment life
cycle, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Recruitment.
(2) Interviewing.
B.
§ 46-114 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-115
35:931
MAXIMUM MEDICAL IMPROVEMENT — The point at which the authorized
medical provider or authorized examining physician determines that the
condition resulting from the injury or illness is stable, additional medical
treatment or physical therapy will not improve the patient's condition, or
the patient has reached the medical plateau of recovery.
PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition that exists in a disabled employee
that is likely to last for an indefinite period of time or throughout the
remainder of the life of the employee.
QUALIFIED DISABILITY — A disability as defined under the ADA or the
LAD.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION — An accommodation provided to an
employee with a qualified disability that permits the employee to perform
all of the essential functions of his or her job but does not impose an
undue hardship on the operation of the employer's business. Reasonable
accommodation is any change or adjustment to a job or work environment
that permits a qualified applicant or employee with a disability to
participate in the job application process, to perform the essential functions
of a job, or to enjoy benefits and privileges of employment equal to those
enjoyed by employees without disabilities. For example, reasonable
accommodation may include:
(3) Hiring.
(4) Promotions.
(5) Benefits administration.
(6) Salary plans.
(7) Performance improvement plans.
(8) Job reviews.
(9) Application of policies and procedures.
(10)Discipline.
(11)Termination.
(12)Compensation.
A. Acquiring or modifying equipment or devices;
B. Job restructuring;
C. Part-time or modified work schedules;
D. Reassignment to a vacant position;
E. Adjusting or modifying examinations, training materials or policies;
F. Providing readers and interpreters; and
§ 46-115 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-115
35:932
TEMPORARY DISABILITY — A condition that exists in a disabled employee
that is likely to last until the employee has reached the maximum medical
improvement.
§ 46-116. Reasonable accommodation.
§ 46-117. Available positions.
§ 46-118. Time restrictions.
§ 46-119. Assignments.
Making the workplace readily accessible to and usable by people with
disabilities.
G.
A. A public employee with a qualified disability who can perform all of the
essential functions of his or her job with the City, with a reasonable
accommodation, shall be permitted to return to his or her job with the
City as required by federal and state law.
B. A public employee with a qualified disability who cannot perform all of
the essential functions of his or her job with the City, even with a
reasonable accommodation, shall not be permitted to return to his or
her job with the City, but the public employee shall be eligible for
temporary modified duty if he or she is capable of performing the job
that is available and is otherwise qualified.
A. The chief executive officer of a department of government does not
have the authority to create a position of employment that does not
already exist within the department or to fill a vacant position that does
exist if the work is not necessary for the efficient operation of the
department or to fill a vacant position that does exist if there are not
adequate funds available in the budget of the department to
compensate the employee filling the position.
B. Where a department of City government has a vacant position available
and there is a need within the department to fill the position and
adequate funds are available within the budget of the department to
compensate the employee, a public employee with a qualified disability
shall be eligible to return to work to perform temporary modified duty if
the employee is capable of performing the job and is otherwise
qualified.
A. Temporary modified duty within a department of government shall not
extend beyond a six-month period of time.
B. Temporary modified duty within a department of government shall end
before the expiration of the six-month period of time if the employment
position is filled by a permanent employee or the work is no longer
needed by the department or if there are insufficient funds available
within the budget of the department to continue to pay the salary of the
employee.
§ 46-115 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-119
35:933
A. Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to guarantee temporary
modified duty for any public employee who is eligible for such duty. The
chief executive officer of each department of government has the
authority to assign personnel and reassign personnel within the
department in accordance with his or her judgment as to what work is
necessary to maintain the efficient operation of the department and
who is best qualified to perform the available jobs within the
department. During the process of evaluating the qualifications of
available personnel the chief executive officer shall consider
competence, conduct, performance, and other reasonable standards.
No public employee shall receive disparate treatment because of his or
her qualified disability.
B. The commissioner in charge of the department or the department head
reserves the right to obtain a medical report from the treating
physician, at the City's expense, which indicates the nature and extent
of the employee's medical condition, the prognosis for partial or
complete recovery, the work restrictions, if any, and any other
information relevant to returning to work. The employee shall
cooperate with the City in securing the report.
C. The commissioner in charge of the department or the department head
reserves the right to require the employee to be examined by a
physician designated and compensated by the City as a condition of the
employee's return to work. The employee shall cooperate with the City
in having the examination and securing the report.
§ 46-119 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-119
35:934
ARTICLE XXVIII
Transitional Duty
§ 46-120. Purpose.
To establish guidelines and procedures for giving transitional duty
assignments to an employee who is recovering from a work-related injury
or illness and has been given temporary physical work restrictions by an
authorized medical provider.
§ 46-121. Delegation of responsibility.
Throughout this procedure, the designation "Transitional Duty Coordinator"
has been used to signify the individual with the ultimate decision-making
authority in this process. As with many other personnel processes, the
Transitional Duty Coordinator may delegate this responsibility to a designee
as deemed appropriate.
§ 46-122. General information regarding transitional duty
assignments.
A. Transitional duty is an opportunity, provided at the sole discretion of
the Transitional Duty Coordinator, for an employee to remain in the
workforce while recuperating from a work-related injury or illness. The
program benefits both the employee and employer by saving employee
leave, accelerating recovery and reducing claim costs. If an employee
with work-related restrictions refuses transitional duty without a
verifiable medical cause, the employee's benefits under workers'
compensation may be adversely affected.
B. The Transitional Duty Coordinator should evaluate the work
restrictions of employees injured on the job to determine if the
employee can be assigned transitional duty. The work restrictions must
be in written form from the authorized medical provider and must
clearly describe the physical restrictions and limitations related to
performing transitional job duties. If the Transitional Duty Coordinator
has questions or needs clarification, he or she should discuss the
restrictions with the authorized medical provider and the Claims
Administrator before making the transitional duty assignment.
C. The Transitional Duty Coordinator's decision to make and/or continue a
transitional duty assignment should take into consideration the
employee's work restrictions including employee's knowledge, skills,
abilities, safety of the motoring public, other employees and the general
public and the availability of work benefitting the department.
D. A transitional duty assignment is temporary in nature. It may be a
combination of various unrelated job tasks. The assignment also does
not need to be for a full forty-hour workweek. Depending upon the
nature of the injury or illness, transitional duty may last from one week
to two months.
§ 46-120 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-122
35:935
§ 46-123. Making transitional duty assignments.
E. The Transitional Duty Coordinator should make transitional duty
assignments with the goal of returning the employee to full duty as soon
as possible. This may require the addition of or adjustments to duties
included in the assignment as the employee's medical condition
progresses. When a department is unable to assign suitable work, other
departments may be contacted to determine if a suitable work
assignment can be identified.
F. The authorized medical provider must submit a status report to the
Transitional Duty Coordinator and Claims Administrator after each
employee visit; noncompliance with this process should be reported to
the Claims Administrator immediately. The Transitional Duty
Coordinator should review the transitional duty assignment after each
visit with an authorized medical provider and, if advantageous for the
employee and the department, allow the assignment to continue until
maximum medical improvement (MMI) is reached or until the employee
is released to full duty.
G. Employees will be paid in accordance with applicable policies, salary
ordinances and bargaining agreements while on transitional duty. No
overtime will be authorized unless the employee is expressly given
permission by the department head. All overtime assignments must be
approved in advance by the department head and must be in
accordance with the transitional duty assignment set forth by the
authorized medical provider.
H. Where appropriate, the employee's time card should be maintained by
the department to which the employee is regularly assigned.
I. The Transitional Duty Coordinator should notify upper management
and the Claims Administrator if he or she becomes aware that an
injured employee may have permanent medical restrictions. Permanent
restrictions should be handled differently from temporary restrictions.
Permanent restrictions may also be considered as a qualified disability
under the ADA.
A. Making transitional duty assignments is the joint responsibility of the
employer, Claims Administrator and managed care provider. The Claims
Administrator and authorized medical provider should continually
evaluate the availability of transitional duty for all temporarily disabled
employees.
B. The Transitional Duty Coordinator reviews the authorized medical
provider's work restrictions and selects transitional duty assignments
that are of benefit to the department and appear to be within those
restrictions. This may include assignments requiring travel to alternate
work locations. A transitional duty assignment does not have to be a full
forty-hour workweek. The following skills may be necessary to
participate in a transitional duty assignment:
§ 46-122 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-123
35:936
§ 46-124. Communications.
(1) Sit or stand for some tasks.
(2) Understand and follow directions and procedures.
(3) Accept direction and function cooperatively.
(4) Communicate effectively and coherently using telephone, or when
initiating or responding to verbal communications.
(5) Read and comprehend documents.
(6) Exercise independent judgment.
(7) When the Transitional Duty Coordinator and the supervisor
determine that transitional duty is within the employee's work
restrictions, the Transitional Duty Coordinator provides a letter to
the employee offering the transitional duty assignment. The letter
must describe the work to be performed, state the transitional duty
assignment will be reviewed periodically and state that the
assignment is temporary. This letter should be handed to the
employee upon arrival to work the following day. If the employee
does not return to work the next day, the employee should sign and
date the letter noting receipt. If it is necessary to mail the letter to
the employee, it should be mailed certified/return receipt with a
copy placed in the personnel file.
(8) If the employee agrees to the transitional duty assignment, he or
she should sign the transitional duty offer and return it to the
Transitional Duty Coordinator. If the employee declines the
transitional duty assignment, the employee should code his or her
time in accordance with applicable policies, salary ordinances and
bargaining agreements. If an employee with work-related
restrictions declines a transitional duty assignment without a
verified medical cause, the Transitional Duty Coordinator should
immediately notify the Claims Administrator. Refusal of a
transitional duty assignment may adversely affect the employee's
workers' compensation benefits.
C. If the employee's objection to a transitional duty assignment is based on
a disagreement with the authorized medical provider regarding workrelated
restrictions, the Transitional Duty Coordinator should discuss
the case with the authorized medical provider and the Claims
Administrator.
A. The Transitional Duty Coordinator shall maintain the confidentiality of
all medical information related to the transitional duty assignment.
Only individuals with an administrative "need to know" shall be
included in discussions on transitional duty. This includes department
heads and human resources representatives. Where applicable, the
Transitional Duty Coordinator shall limit discussions with the
§ 46-123 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-124
35:937
§ 46-125. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) — Federal protection from
employment discrimination for individuals with qualified disabilities. The
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was signed into law on July 26, 1990.
The ADA is one of America’s most comprehensive pieces of civil rights
legislation that prohibits discrimination and guarantees that people with
disabilities have the same opportunities as everyone else to participate
in the mainstream of American life — to enjoy employment opportunities,
to purchase goods and services, and to participate in state and local
government programs and services. Modeled after the Civil Rights Act of
1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin — and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
— the ADA is an “equal opportunity” law for people with disabilities.
AUTHORIZED MEDICAL PROVIDER — A medical provider who has been
designated to provide medical care and/or medical opinions for employees
with work-related injuries or illnesses as authorized by the New Jersey State
Workers' Compensation statute.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who renders service for pay, including persons
working under a professional service contract. Employees include persons
in probationary, regular, casual or temporary status.
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT (FMLA) — Federal job protection during use
of leave for a "serious health condition" or other qualifying event as defined
under the Act.
MAXIMUM MEDICAL IMPROVEMENT (MMI) — The point at which the
authorized medical provider determines that: 1) the condition resulting
from the injury or illness is stable; 2) additional medical treatment or
physical therapy will not improve patient's condition; or 3) that the patient
has reached the medical plateau of recovery.
authorized medical provider and other authorized individuals to the
medical restrictions and transitional duty issues in question.
B. If the need for transitional duty arises from a work-related injury or
illness, the Transitional Duty Coordinator should contact the Claims
Administrator. Copies of all related correspondence shall be sent to the
Claims Administrator.
C. Questions related to transitional duty accommodations under the
Americans with Disabilities Act and Family Medical Leave Act should be
forwarded to the Personnel Department and/or municipal solicitor.
D. The Transitional Duty Coordinator shall provide initial and continuous
communication with employees regarding the transitional duty
program (see sample statement).
§ 46-124 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-125
35:938
PHYSICAL WORK RESTRICTIONS — Work restrictions placed on an
employee by the authorized medical provider.
TRANSITIONAL DUTY — A temporary work assignment that does not
exceed an employee's medical work restrictions during a period of recovery
from a work-related injury or illness. A temporary work assignment that
does not develop into a permanent position and returns the employee to
regular full duty as soon as possible.
§ 46-126. (Reserved)
§ 46-125 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-126
35:939

ARTICLE XXIX
Transportation Expenses
§ 46-127. Transportation furnished at cost.
It is the policy of the City to reimburse employees for reasonable and
necessary expenditures made by employees while on official City business.
Whenever employees travel in the course of their official duties on behalf of
the City, they shall be furnished transportation at cost by the City.
§ 46-128. Use of personal motor vehicle.
Whenever the commissioner in charge of a department authorizes an
employee to use his or her personal motor vehicle for such travel, the
employee shall be reimbursed transportation expenses at the federal
mileage allowance rate, plus tolls for the most direct route. This allowance
is to compensate for the cost of gasoline, oil, depreciation and insurance.
The rate published by the IRS will be reviewed annually by the Finance
Department.
§ 46-127 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-128
35:941

ARTICLE XXX
Work Force Reduction
§ 46-129. Policy.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:8-1.1, the City may institute layoff actions for
economy, efficiency or other related reasons, but will first consider
voluntary alternatives. Seniority, lateral or other reemployment rights for
employees in career service titles will be determined by the New Jersey
Civil Service Commission.
§ 46-129 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-129
35:943

ARTICLE XXXI
Work Hours and Attendance
§ 46-130. Policy.
§ 46-131. Responsibility of employees. [Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 51-2019]
§ 46-132. Work hours. [Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 51-2019]
A. Regular and punctual attendance of employees is essential for the
effective and efficient operation of the business of City government. All
employees are expected to be at work and ready to assume their duties
at the beginning of the scheduled workday. Lateness and absence will
be tolerated only in emergencies which are beyond the employees'
control. Unscheduled absences, patterns of excessive absences,
reporting for work late, leaving work early, failing to inform department
heads of planned absences in advance and similar unsatisfactory
attendance will subject an employee to disciplinary action.
B. Unscheduled absences place an unfair burden on coworkers and should
be avoided. Frequent unscheduled absences, including late arrivals and
early departures, are grounds for discipline, up to and including
discharge. In addition, employees who fail to provide proper
notification of late arrivals and unscheduled absences are subject to
discipline, up to and including discharge.
C. Employees will be subject to immediate corrective action for no call/no
shows.
A. Department heads shall prepare attendance reports on forms specified
by the City Administrator. These reports shall be kept for the
department's use and also shall be sent to the City Administrator
Biweekly.
B. Department heads shall warn an employee of a pattern of absenteeism,
lateness or leaving work early as soon as the pattern is apparent.
Department heads shall be accountable for failure to detect patterns of
abuse. Department heads are expected to initiate appropriate
disciplinary action through the office of the City Administrator, if such
violations occur.
C. Employees who intend to be absent from work must comply with the
notification and request and approval procedures required for securing
authorized leaves of absence from work.
D. Employees who intend to be late for work or who intend to leave work
early must inform their department head no later than 15 minutes after
the scheduled start of work.
A. The normal workday for thirty-five-hour-per-week employees shall be
8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
§ 46-130 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-132
35:945
§ 46-132.1. Dress Code Policy. [Added 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
42-2019; amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 51-2019]
Dress, grooming and personal hygiene must be appropriate for the position.
Uniforms are required for certain jobs and are to be worn in accordance
with applicable departmental standards. All other employees are required
to dress in a manner that is normally acceptable in similar business
establishments and consistent with applicable safety standards. Employees
shall not wear suggestive attire, ripped jeans, athletic clothing, shorts, tshirts,
novelty buttons, baseball hats, and similar items of casual attire that
do not present a business-like appearance. Hair, sideburns, moustaches and
beards must be clean, combed, and neatly trimmed. Employees violating
this policy shall be required to take corrective action or will be sent home
without pay. In no way does the City construe this policy as a discriminatory
act nor is it the City's intent to violate any individual's constitutional rights.
§ 46-132.2. Children in the Workplace Policy. [Added 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 42-2019; amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 51-2019]
The City values an atmosphere that fosters a healthy balance between
workplace obligations and family matters. Children of employees are
permitted in the workplace for brief visits, generally no longer than 15
minutes. The child must remain under parental supervision; within sight
and sound of the parent or guardian at all times. The child's presence
must not disrupt the work environment or negatively impact productivity.
Children are not allowed in confidential or hazardous areas. Sick children
B. The normal workday for forty-hour-per-week employees shall be 7:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. A commissioner in charge of a department shall be
authorized to adjust this work schedule to reduce the lunch hour from
one hour to one-half hour by written authorization for employees
working in the field. The written authorization shall be filed in the office
of the City Administrator for payroll and personnel purposes.
C. Those departments of government which are required to operate a
twenty-four-hour-per-day-and-seven-day-per-week operation shall
establish shift schedules for those employees who are required to work
these shifts. These shift schedules shall be approved by the department
head and the commissioner in charge of the department and filed with
the office of the City Administrator for payroll and personnel purposes.
D. Summer schedules with modified work hours for employees regularly
working outside in the weather may be approved annually by resolution
of the governing body.
E. A commissioner in charge of a department shall be authorized to
approve a special work schedule for employees who are performing
essential services for the City outside the normal workday. The written
authorization shall designate the schedule by days per week and the
hourly assignments and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator for payroll and personnel purposes.
§ 46-132 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-132.2
35:946
are not allowed in the workplace. This policy does not apply to participation
in a structured event, such as "Bring Your Child to Work Day," or if children
are invited by the Commissioner to participate in a program, or special
occasion (e.g., retirement lunch on site) where prior managerial approval
has been obtained. It is the responsibility of the department head to ensure
that all employees adhere to the guidelines set forth in this policy. The City
Administrator will notify the department head to pursue appropriate action
if a violation of this policy is observed. Any employee bringing a child into
the workplace assumes any and all risk associated with such visit.
§ 46-133. Computerized time system. [Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 51-2019]
§ 46-134. Policy violations.
The department head is authorized to excuse absences from work, late
arrivals to work or early departures from work for emergencies occurring
which are beyond the control of the employee. However, the employee
shall be docked pay for the time away from work. Employees violating this
policy are subject to disciplinary action. The following system of progressive
discipline is recommended for the enforcement of this policy:
A. All employees shall use the computerized time system.
B. All exempt employees will be required to have two punches a day. One
upon arrival to work and one at departure for the day. Employees shall
swipe their card and hit "in" to begin the workday. Employees shall
swipe their card and hit "out" to end the workday.
C. All nonexempt employees will be required to have four punches a day.
One upon arrival to work, one prior to taking their lunch break
(whether staying inside the building or leaving the building), one when
returning from lunch break and one upon departure for the day.
Department heads are authorized to override this requirement for
employees working in the field at lunch time where time clocks are not
available and/or when it is not practical because of a business
emergency to return to the office to utilize the computerized time
system. It will be the responsibility of the department head to enter this
information into the time clock system.
D. All employees are to utilize their entire lunch time.
E. All nonexempt employees must punch in or out no earlier than seven
minutes of their scheduled start or stop time and no later than their
actual start or stop time, unless approval to deviate from this policy is
given, in writing, by their supervisors prior to punching in or out.
A. A written warning for the first violation.
B. A written reprimand for the second violation.
C. Minor discipline for the third violation.
§ 46-132.2 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-134
35:947
§ 46-134.1. Early closing and delayed opening policy.
In the event of unsafe conditions, the Commissioner in charge of Emergency
Management may authorize the City Administrator to close operations
earlier than the normal working hours. If conditions exist prior to scheduled
openings, the administrator shall notify department heads of a delayed
opening and a new opening time. Each department will have a calling
system in place. If an employee chooses not to report to work, compensating
time will be charged as per current personnel practices and collective
bargaining agreements. Sick time will only be charged for a legitimate
illness. If work is called off for the day, no time will be charged for the day.
This provision does not apply to employees deemed essential as per the
administrative policy of the City, on file in the City Administrator's office,
and any personnel who may be required to assist in an emergency.
D. Major discipline for the fourth or subsequent violation.
§ 46-134 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-134.1
35:948
ARTICLE XXXII
Workers' Compensation Policy
§ 46-135. Job-related injuries and illnesses.
A. Employees who suffer job-related injuries and illnesses may be entitled
to medical expenses, lost income and other compensation under the
New Jersey Workers Compensation Act. The City covers workers'
compensation benefits through its membership in a joint insurance
fund.
(1) Any occupational injury or illness must be reported immediately to
the supervisor or department head.
(2) All required medical treatment must be performed by a workers'
compensation physician appointed by the joint insurance fund, and
payment for unauthorized medical treatment may not be covered
pursuant to the Act.
B. Unless explicitly provided for in a bargaining agreement, the City will
only pay, either directly or through its workers' compensation insurer,
those benefits that are specifically provided for under the Workers'
Compensation Act and will not supplement these benefits with
additional benefits pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11A:6-8.
§ 46-135 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-135
35:949

ARTICLE XXXIII
Workplace Health Information Privacy Policy
§ 46-136. Federal law.
The United States Department of Health and Human Services issued the
Privacy Rule to implement the requirement of the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). The Privacy Rule
standards address the use and disclosure of individually identifiable health
information by organizations subject to the Privacy Rule. It also addresses
standards for individual privacy rights to understand and control how an
individual's health information is used. The Office of Civil Rights within
the United States Department of Health and Human Services has the
responsibility for implementing and enforcing the Privacy Rule. It is the
policy of the City of Millville to comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
§ 46-137. Protected health information.
The Privacy Rule protects all individually identifiable health information
held by the City in any form or media, whether electronic, paper or oral. The
Privacy Rule calls this information "protected health information (PHI)."
§ 46-138. Safeguards and security.
The City Administrator must take reasonable steps to safeguard the
protected health information of an employee from any intentional or
unintentional use or disclosure that is in violation of the HIPAA Privacy
Rule. All protected health information of employees or family members of
employees shall be maintained in a file separate from the official personnel
file of the employee and stored in a locked cabinet during periods of the day
and night when access is not required.
§ 46-139. Authorized use and disclosures.
The major purpose of the Privacy Rule is to define and limit the
circumstances in which the protected health information of an employee
may be used or disclosed by the City. The City may not use or disclose
protected health information except:
§ 46-140. Written authorization.
The authorization must be written in specific terms. All authorizations must
be in plain language and contain specific information regarding the health
information to be disclosed or used, the person disclosing and receiving
the information, the expiration date of the authorization, the right of the
A. As the Privacy Rule permits or requires; or
B. As the employee who is the subject of the information authorizes in
writing.
§ 46-136 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-140
35:951
employee to revoke the authorization in writing, and any other data
required by federal law.
§ 46-141. Minimum necessary requirement.
A central aspect of the Privacy Rule is the principle of minimum necessary
use and disclosure. The City must make reasonable efforts to use, disclose
and request only the minimum amount of protected health information
needed to accomplish the intended purpose of the use, disclosure or
request. The minimum necessary requirement is not applicable in any of the
following circumstances:
§ 46-142. Designated private official.
The City Administrator is designated as the person responsible for
implementing the Workplace Health Information Privacy Policy. The City
Administrator also is the contact person responsible for receiving employee
complaints and providing employees with information on the privacy
practices of the City.
§ 46-143. Access and confidentiality.
A. Disclosure to or a request by a health care provider for treatment;
B. Disclosure to an individual who is the subject of the information, or the
individual's personal representative;
C. Use or disclosure made pursuant to an authorization;
D. Disclosure to federal officials for complaint investigation, compliance
review or enforcement;
E. Use or disclosure that is required by law; or
F. Use or disclosure required for compliance with HIPAA Transaction Rule
or other HIPAA Administration Simplification Rules.
A. All access to protected health information maintained on file by the City
must be through the office of the City Administrator. No employees of
the City shall have access to protected health information except as
required to perform their official duties.
B. Any employee having access to protected health information shall be
responsible to maintain the confidentiality of it. No employee shall
discuss protected health information of another employee with anyone
except those persons who are authorized to receive the information and
then only in the context of performing their official duties.
C. Managers and supervisors shall not question employees about their
medical conditions. Instead, all such inquiries and matters shall be
referred to the City Administrator for appropriate processing in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the City and applicable
federal law, rules and regulations.
§ 46-140 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-144
35:952
§ 46-144. Employee rights.
Any employee who believes that their privacy rights have been violated
has the right to complain to the Federal Office of Civil Rights and to the
City Administrator. The employee shall comply with the employee complaint
policy when filing or making a complaint to the City Administrator.
§ 46-144 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-144
35:953

ARTICLE XXXIV
Workplace Violence Policy
§ 46-145. Purpose.
The City is committed to preventing workplace violence and to maintaining
a safe work environment. Given the increasing violence in society in
general, the City has adopted the guidelines set forth in this policy to deal
with intimidation, harassment, or other threats of (or actual) violence that
may occur during business hours or on its premises. Violent acts or threats
made by an employee against another person or property are justification
for disciplinary action and prosecution. This includes any violence or threats
made on City property, at City events or under circumstances that may
negatively affect the City's ability to conduct business.
§ 46-146. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:
ABET — To knowingly give substantial encouragement, by action or
inaction, to another person engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy.
AID — To knowingly give substantial assistance, by action or inaction, to
another person engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy.
§ 46-147. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any employee to engage in the following conduct
while on City property or while on City business:
(1) Aggressive or hostile behavior that subjects another person to a
reasonable fear of injury or subjects another person to emotional
distress;
(2) Aggressive or hostile behavior that causes physical injury to
another person;
(3) Committing acts of domestic violence;
(4) Intentionally damaging the property of the City or another
employee;
(5) Making threatening remarks; and
(6) Possession of a weapon except with the authority of the Chief of
Police.
B. It shall be unlawful for any employee or any person doing business with
the City to aid or abet the doing of any acts prohibited under this policy.
C. All employees, including supervisors and temporary employees, should
be treated with courtesy and respect at all times. Employees are
expected to refrain from fighting, horseplay, or other conduct that may
§ 46-145 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-147
35:955
be dangerous to others. Firearms, weapons, and other dangerous or
hazardous devices or substances are prohibited from the premises of
the City without proper authorization.
D. Conduct that threatens, intimidates, or coerces another employee, a
customer, or a member of the public at any time, including off-duty
periods, will not be tolerated. This prohibition includes all acts of
harassment, including harassment that is based on an individual's sex,
race, age, or any characteristic protected by federal, state, or local law.
E. All threats of (or actual) violence, both direct and indirect, should be
reported as soon as possible to your immediate supervisor. This
includes threats by employees, as well as threats by customers,
vendors, solicitors, or other members of the public. When reporting a
threat of violence, you should be as specific and detailed as possible.
F. All suspicious individuals or activities should also be reported as soon
as possible to a supervisor. Do not place yourself in peril. If you see or
hear a commotion or disturbance near your work station, do not try to
intercede or see what is happening.
G. The City will promptly and thoroughly investigate all reports of threats
of (or actual) violence and of suspicious individuals or activities. The
identity of the individual making a report will be protected as much as
is practical. In order to maintain workplace safety and the integrity of
its investigation, the City may suspend employees, either with or
without pay, pending investigation.
H. Anyone determined to be responsible for threats of (or actual) violence
or other conduct that is in violation of these guidelines will be subject to
prompt disciplinary action up to and including termination of
employment.
I. The City encourages employees to bring their disputes or differences
with other employees to the attention of their supervisors or the City
Administrator before the situation escalates into potential violence. The
City is eager to assist in the resolution of employee disputes and will not
discipline employees for raising such concerns.
§ 46-147 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-147
35:956
ARTICLE XXXV
Personnel Investigation Procedure
§ 46-148. Purpose.
The purpose of this standard operating procedure is to establish a uniform
procedure for the investigation of certain complaints involving City
employees that arise out of and occur during the course of employment with
the City. All City personnel shall cooperate with the investigation and be
truthful in all information provided.
§ 46-149. Criminal complaint.
§ 46-150. Motor vehicle accidents.
A. In the case of complaints alleging criminal conduct, the Chief of Police
and the county prosecutor's office shall be notified and requested to
perform an investigation in accordance with their standard operating
procedures. The commissioner in charge of the department where the
employee is employed and the City Administrator shall be kept
informed as to the progress of the investigation.
B. In the case of complaints alleging a disorderly persons offense or a
petty disorderly persons offense, the Millville Police Department shall
be notified and requested to perform an investigation in accordance
with their standard operating procedures. The commissioner in charge
of the department where the employee is employed and the City
Administrator shall be kept informed as to the progress of the
investigation. A copy of the final reports concerning the investigation
shall be provided to the City Administrator for a determination as to
whether disciplinary action is warranted.
A. In the case of a motor vehicle accident involving a City-owned vehicle
on a public roadway, the Millville Police Department shall be notified
and requested to perform an accident investigation in accordance with
their standard operating procedures. The commissioner in charge of
the department where the employee is employed and the City
Administrator shall be kept informed as to the progress of the
investigation. A copy of the accident report shall be provided to the City
Administrator for a determination as to whether disciplinary action is
warranted.
B. In the case of a motor vehicle accident involving a City-owned vehicle
on City property, the department head where the City employee is
employed shall investigate the accident and prepare a written report
for submission to the City Administrator for review and further action if
warranted. The City Administrator may refer the matter to the Millville
Police Department for further investigation and/or initiate disciplinary
action. The employee will also be subject to testing pursuant to the
City's Drug and Alcohol Policy.
§ 46-148 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-150
35:957

ARTICLE XXXVI
Donated Leave Policy
§ 46-151. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to establish uniform standards throughout City
government for a donated leave program.
§ 46-152. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CATASTROPHIC HEALTH CONDITION OR INJURY WITH RESPECT TO AN
EMPLOYEE — A life-threatening condition or combination of conditions; or
a period of disability required by his or her mental or physical health or the
health of the employee's fetus which requires the care of a physician who
provides a medical verification of the need for the employee's absence from
work for 60 or more workdays.
CATASTROPHIC HEALTH CONDITION OR INJURY WITH RESPECT TO AN
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER OF AN EMPLOYEE — A life-threatening
condition or combination of conditions; or a period of disability required by
his or her mental or physical health which requires the care of a physician
who provides a medical verification of the need for the family member's care
by the employee for 60 or more workdays.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — An employee's spouse, domestic partner,
child, legal ward, grandchild, foster child, father, mother, legal guardian,
grandfather, grandmother, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, and
other relatives residing in the employee's household.
§ 46-153. Eligibility.
An employee shall be eligible to receive donated sick or vacation leave if the
employee meets the following requirements:
A. The employee has completed at least one year of continuous service
with the City;
B. The employee has exhausted all accrued sick, vacation, and
administrative leave, all sick leave injury benefits, if any, and all
compensatory time off;
C. The employee has not been disciplined for chronic or excessive
absenteeism, chronic or excessive lateness, or abuse of leave in the
two-year period immediately preceding the employee's need for
donated leave; and
D. The employee has any of the following qualifying conditions:
(1) Suffers from a catastrophic health condition or injury;
§ 46-151 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-153
35:959
§ 46-154. Participation in program.
§ 46-155. Program requirements.
§ 46-156. Use of donated leave time.
(2) Is needed to provide care to a member of the employee's immediate
family who is suffering from a catastrophic health condition or
injury; or
(3) Requires absence from work due to the donation of an organ which
shall include, for example, the donation of bone marrow.
A. An employee may request the City Administrator to approve his or her
participation in the program as a leave donor or leave recipient. The
employee's department head may make such a request on behalf of the
employee for his or her participation in the program as a leave
recipient.
B. The employee or department head requesting the employee's
acceptance as a leave recipient shall submit to the City Administrator
medical verification from a physician or other licensed health care
provider concerning the nature and anticipated duration of the
disability resulting from either the catastrophic health condition or
injury, or the donation of an organ, as the case may be.
C. When the City Administrator has approved an employee as a leave
recipient, the City Administrator shall, with the employee's consent,
post or circulate the employee's name along with those of other eligible
employees in a conspicuous manner to encourage the donation of leave
time and shall provide notice to all negotiations representatives in that
appointing authority.
D. If the employee is unable to consent to this posting or circulation, the
employee's family may consent on his or her behalf.
A. A leave recipient must receive at least 40 sick hours or vacation hours
or a combination thereof from one or more leave donors to participate
in the donated leave program. A leave donor shall donate only whole
sick days (seven hours for 35 hours/week employees; all others eight
hours) or whole vacation days (seven hours for 35 hours/week
employees; all others eight hours) and may not donate more than 30
such days to any one recipient. A leave recipient shall receive no more
than 2,080 sick hours or vacation hours and shall not receive any such
time on a retroactive basis.
B. A leave donor shall have remaining at least 160 hours of accrued sick
leave if donating sick leave and at least 96 hours of accrued vacation
leave if donating vacation leave.
§ 46-153 MILLVILLE CODE § 46-156
35:960
§ 46-157. Prohibited acts.
An employee shall be prohibited from coercing or threatening, or
attempting to coerce or threaten, another employee for the purpose of
interfering with the rights involving donating, receiving or using donated
leave time. Such prohibited acts shall include, but not be limited to,
promising to confer or conferring a benefit such as an appointment or
promotion, or making a threat to engage in, or engaging in, an act of
retaliation against an employee.
§ 46-158. Suspension or termination of donated leave program.
The City may suspend or terminate the donated leave program at any
time upon 30 days' written notice of such suspension or termination to the
Commissioner of the Civil Service Commission and all affected employees
and labor negotiations representatives.
A. While using donated leave time, the leave recipient shall accrue sick
leave and vacation leave and be entitled to retain such leave upon his or
her return to work.
B. Any unused donated leave shall be returned to the leave donors on a
prorated basis upon the leave recipient's return to work, except that if
the proration of leave time results in less than seven or eight hours per
donor, depending on the donors' regular schedules, to be returned, that
leave time shall not be returned.
C. Upon retirement, the leave recipient shall not be granted supplemental
compensation on retirement for any unused sick time which he or she
had received through the leave donation program.
§ 46-156 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-158
35:961

ARTICLE XXXVII
Video Surveillance Policy
§ 46-159. City use of video surveillance.
A. The City may install video surveillance camera systems within public
buildings and throughout public areas within the City, primarily as
visual deterrents of criminal behavior and for the protection of
employees and municipal assets. In implementing these video camera
systems, the City will ensure compliance with federal, state and local
laws governing such usage.
B. The City's video surveillance camera systems are a significant tool to
which the employees of the City will avail themselves in order to
complete the goals and objectives of the City. Employees are only
permitted to use the video surveillance camera systems for a legitimate
purpose and with proper authorization. The City's designee will be
responsible for authorization of users. The improper use of these
systems can result in discipline up to and including termination.
C. No employee is permitted to view, continually watch, search, copy or
otherwise use one of the City's video surveillance camera systems or
tamper with access, archive, alter, add to, or make copies of any data
that has been recorded and stored within any of these systems without:
1) a specific legitimate purpose; and 2) permission from the designee of
the City.
D. The City shall designate a person to be responsible for the maintenance
and administration of the video surveillance camera system. Such
designee will be responsible for maintaining a user access log detailing
the date and name of individuals who view/access a stored recording.
E. Any employee who becomes aware of any unauthorized disclosure of a
video record in contravention of this policy and/or a potential privacy
breach has the responsibility to ensure that the City Administrator is
immediately informed of such breach.
§ 46-159 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-159
35:963

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Settlement of Certain Claims Made by Employees
§ 46-160. Board approval required.
All settlements of claims by employees against the City or its municipal
officers, servants, agents and employees for monetary damages shall not
be authorized unless approved by resolution adopted by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 46-160 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 46-160
35:965
Chapter 49
POLICE CHAPLAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
§ 49-1. Position created.
The position of Police Chaplain for the City of Millville Police Department
is hereby created in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will
be a volunteer position. The position of Police Chaplain shall be under the
direction of the Commissioner of Public Safety and subject to the control of
the Chief of Police.
§ 49-2. Qualifications.
Any person appointed as Police Chaplain shall be an ordained clergyman
in good standing in the religious body from which he/she is selected. The
Police Chaplain shall receive basic training in the position. The Police
Chaplain shall also be credentialed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the City of Millville Police Department and shall be qualified
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141.
§ 49-3. Duties.
The duties of Police Chaplain shall include, but not be limited to, assisting
the City of Millville Police Department in death notifications, station house
adjustments and any other duties that may be assigned by the Chief of
Police.
§ 49-4. Rank and salary.
Any person appointed as Police Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without
rank or salary.
§ 49-5. Term of office.
A person appointed as Police Chaplain shall serve for a period of one year
from date of appointment and shall continue to serve in that capacity until
he/she is either terminated or reappointed with the recommendation of the
Chief of Police.
§ 49-6. Senior Chaplain.
If more than one Police Chaplain is appointed, the Chief of Police and
Director of Public Safety shall appoint the individual to be designated as
Senior Police Chaplain.
§ 46-160 MILLVILLE CODE § 49-7
35:966
§ 49-7. Appointment.
The Chief of Police may recommend to the Commissioner of Public Safety
persons that he/she believes meet the qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141
as well as the rules and regulations of the City of Millville Police Department
with reference to Chaplains. All applicants for the position of Police
Chaplain shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, Senior Police Chaplain
and Chaplain liaison, if any, to determine their qualifications in accordance
with this chapter and shall make recommendations to the Commissioner
of Public Safety regarding the appointment of Police Chaplains. The
Commissioner shall appoint Police Chaplains in accordance with this
chapter, with the advice and consent of the Chief of Police.
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Enforcement of various licensing
regulations — See Ch. 33.
Motor vehicle and traffic regulations — See
Ch. 39.
Police regulations — See Ch. 52.
§ 49-7 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 49-7
35:967

ARTICLE I
Millville Police Department Established
§ 50-1. Creation. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 24-2006;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 24-2011; 5-19-2015 by Ord. No. 12-2015;
10-20-2015 by Ord. No. 27-2015; 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017;
3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 15-2018; 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 39-2018;
5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 25-2019]
There is hereby created and established a police department for the City
of Millville known as the Millville Police Department. It shall consist of
one Chief, one Captain, three Lieutenants, up to 15 Sergeants, and as
many patrol officers and civilian personnel as the governing body of the
municipality shall deem necessary for the effective government of the
department. The number of Police Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants and
police officers appointed in accordance with this article shall further be
determined by the Commissioner of Public Safety and provided the funds
for the positions are certified by the Chief Financial Officer of the City of
Millville, but in no event shall there be more positions than as established
in accordance herewith. However, there shall be an additional Captain who
shall be appointed on a temporary basis whenever there is a vacancy in
the office of Chief which exists for a period of 30 days or more. Said
appointment shall be temporary in nature, and any Captain so appointed
shall serve in said capacity only until such time as a new Chief is appointed.
The governing body shall periodically establish the number of patrolmen
and civilian personnel by resolution. The governing body of the municipality
is the appropriate authority to exercise legislative authority as set forth
below:
§ 50-2. Powers and duties of Director of Public Safety as
appropriate authority.
The Director of Public Safety is the appropriate authority to exercise
administrative authority to establish policies providing guidelines to the
Chief of Police for the operation of the Police Department. Furthermore, he
is the appropriate authority to:
A. Provide for the maintenance, regulation and control of the Police
Department;
B. Provide for a line of authority relating to the police function;
C. Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
Police Department and for the discipline of its members; and
D. Determine the terms of office for its members, fix their compensation,
and prescribe their powers, functions and duties, all as the governing
body shall deem necessary for the effective government of the
Department.
§ 50-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-2
35:969
§ 50-3. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department, and he shall
be directly responsible to the Director of Public Safety for the efficiency
and routine day-to-day operation of the Police Department. Furthermore,
pursuant to policies established by the Director of Public Safety, he shall:
A. Appoint the Chief of Police, superior officers, officers and other civil
service employees from a list of candidates supplied by the Civil Service
Commission;
B. Control the preparation of the budget for the Police Department and be
responsible for submitting it to the governing body for approval;
C. Establish policies to control the budget once adopted to ensure that
moneys are spent in accordance with the adopted budget;
D. Prescribe the internal organization of the Police Department, subject to
the rules and regulations, budget resolution, and Salary Ordinance
adopted by the governing body;
E. Establish policies formulating fundamental principles to serve as
guidelines to the Chief of Police in making his decisions with respect to
discharging his responsibility for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operation of the Police Department;
F. Issue special emergency directives to provide for the health, safety or
welfare of the municipality in an emergency situation; and
G. May preside as hearing officer or designate an independent hearing
officer in police disciplinary matters that originate within the Police
Department, including matters involving civilian employees under his
jurisdiction. [Amended 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. 27-2014]
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the
Department and its officers and personnel;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and
E. Report at least monthly, in writing, to the Director of Public Safety on
the operation of the Department during the preceding month and make
such other reports as may be requested by the Director of Public Safety.
§ 50-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 50-4
35:970
§ 50-4. Rules and regulations.102
The rules and regulations adopted by the governing body shall be contained
in a manual known as the "Police Manual."
§ 50-5. Discipline.
Members of the Police Department shall be subject to discipline including
suspension or dismissal for violations of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.3(a), ordinances of
the City including personnel policies established by the governing body,
rules and regulations adopted by the governing body, policies established
by the Director of Public Safety, special emergency directives and other
directives issued by the Chief of Police, or lawful orders of the Chief of
Police or superior officers.
§ 50-6. Special law enforcement officers and civilian school crossing
guards. [Amended 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
A. Adoption. The City of Millville Police Manual of 1995 containing the
revised rules and regulations is hereby adopted.
B. Amendments. The City of Millville Police Manual may be amended by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time to time as
hereinafter provided.
C. Amendatory procedure. Any Commissioner seeking to amend the Police
Manual shall do so by circulating a draft copy of the proposed change to
the City Clerk, City Solicitor and the other Commissioners at least five
days in advance of the Commission meeting when the change resolution
is to be considered.
D. Copies. A copy of the Police Manual shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk, and copies shall be made available to each member of
the Police Department. Copies shall be made available to special law
enforcement officers and civilian school crossing guards.
A. Appointment. The Director of Public Safety may appoint special law
enforcement officers and civilian school crossing guards for terms not
to exceed one year. Nothing herein shall be construed to require
reappointment upon the expiration of the term.
B. Tenure. No special law enforcement officer or civilian school crossing
guard shall be deemed permanently employed within the meaning of
Title 40A New Jersey Statutes Annotated. Pursuant to state law, neither
special law enforcement officers nor civilian school crossing guards are
members of the Police Department. However, they come within the
jurisdiction of the Department of Public Safety and the Director of
Public Safety.
102. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 44-1996, the rules and regulations, written
policies and standard operating procedures which are applicable to the Millville Police
Department are hereby amended to the extent that they are inconsistent with Art. V,
Discipline, of Ch. 46, Personnel Policies of the Code of the City of Millville.
§ 50-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-6
35:971
C. Discipline. Special law enforcement officers and civilian school crossing
guards shall be subject to discipline, including suspension or revocation
of appointment for violations of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.3(a), the rules and
regulations, special emergency directives, directives issued by the
Chief of Police, or lawful orders of the Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer of the City in the absence of the Chief.
D. Removal without cause. The Director of Public Safety may revoke the
appointment of a special law enforcement officer without cause or
hearing if the appointment was made for four months or less.
E. Hearing officer. The Director of Public Safety shall preside as hearing
officer in disciplinary matters involving special law enforcement
officers. The Chief of Police shall preside as hearing officer in
disciplinary matters involving civilian school crossing guards.
F. Supervision and direction. All special law enforcement officers and
civilian school crossing guards shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer of
the City in the absence of the Chief.
G. Rules and regulations. All special law enforcement officers and civilian
school crossing guards shall comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to the conduct and decorum of regularly appointed police
officers of the City, as well as any rules and regulations specifically
applicable to them.
H. Law enforcement authority.
(1) Consistent with 40A:14-146.11, SLEO Class One officers shall be
authorized to perform routine traffic details, spectator control and
similar duties, and issue summonses for disorderly persons
offenses, violations of municipal ordinances, and violations of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes.
(2) SLEO Class Two Officers, while on duty, shall be authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent,
regularly appointed full-time police officer.
(3) The Chief of Police shall decide and authorize which duties,
assignments, and powers each individual SLEO may perform.
§ 50-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 50-6
35:972
ARTICLE II
Contracted Off-Duty Employment
§ 50-7. Policy established.
For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the services
of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Millville Police Department and
to authorize the outside employment of City police while off duty, the City
hereby establishes a policy regarding the use of said officers.
§ 50-8. Escrow accounts.
A. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept policerelated
employment for private employers or school districts only
during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
City.
B. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first obtain
the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted if in
the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent
with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police
Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the
safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the work.
A. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Millville Police Department shall estimate
the number of hours such law enforcement services are required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police, and shall
establish an escrow account with the Chief Financial Officer of the City
by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation
and administrative fees set forth in § 50-10 for the total estimated hours
of service.
B. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have been
deposited with the Chief Financial Officer. No officer shall provide any
such services for more hours than are specified in the request for
services.
C. In the event that funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or posted
until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
§ 50-7 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-8
35:973
§ 50-9. Requests for services.
All requests to the City for the services of off-duty law enforcement officers
in the Millville Police Department for a period of one week or longer shall
be forwarded to the Chief of Police for posting at least 10 days before such
services are required. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by
the City shall be treated as an employee of the City provided, however,
that wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the
pension benefits of law enforcement officers so employed, nor shall hours
worked for outside employment be considered in any way compensable as
overtime.
§ 50-10. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for
services. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 25-2018]
D. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
A. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers are established as follows:
(1) Rate of compensation for private employers: $75 per hour.
(2) Rate of compensation for school districts: $40 per hour.
B. An additional fee of $5 per hour for private employers and $3 per hour
for school districts is hereby established to cover administrative costs,
overhead and out-of-pocket expenses of the City of Millville.
C. Therefore, the total hourly rate for private employers shall be $80 per
hour, and the total hourly rate for school districts shall be $43 per hour.
D. Any cancellation of a need for off-duty law enforcement officers must be
made to the police dispatcher's office at least four hours prior to the
scheduled start time. Failure to provide proper notice of the
cancellation before that time frame will result in the full hourly rate
being deducted from the private employer's escrow account.
§ 50-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 50-10
35:974
ARTICLE III
Currency Received as Evidence
§ 50-11. Annual audit.
§ 50-12. Currency subject to forfeiture.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:64-7, title to property forfeited shall vest in the
entity funding the prosecuting agency involved at the time that the item was
utilized illegally or, in the case of proceeds, when received.
§ 50-13. Currency not subject to forfeiture.
A. The evidence officer of the Millville Police Department shall conduct an
annual audit of all moneys received as evidence during each calendar
year. Said audit shall be reduced to writing and shall clearly indicate
the following information:
(1) The case number that the evidence applies to;
(2) The date when the money was received;
(3) The exact amount of the money received;
(4) The date when the money was disbursed; and
(5) To whom it was disbursed.
B. This written audit shall be prepared within 30 days after the end of each
calendar year, and a copy of the audit report shall be submitted to the
Cumberland County Prosecutor, Director of Public Safety, and the Chief
Financial Officer of the City of Millville.
A. For all indictable crimes and juvenile offenses money subject to
forfeiture pursuant to state law shall be submitted immediately to the
Cumberland County Prosecutor's office. The evidence officer shall
execute an evidence property receipt for the money delivered to the
Cumberland County Prosecutor's office. The Cumberland County
Prosecutor's office shall then turn the money over to the County
Treasurer where it shall be retained pending forfeiture proceedings
pursuant to state law.
B. For all disorderly persons offenses moneys subject to forfeiture
pursuant to state law shall be submitted immediately to the City
Treasurer's office. The evidence officer shall execute an evidence
property receipt for the money delivered to the City Treasurer's office.
The City Treasurer shall retain said moneys in a separate account
pending forfeiture proceedings pursuant to state law.
A. Currency which is not subject to forfeiture pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:64-7
because it is to be returned to the lawful owner shall be secured in the
following manner:
§ 50-11 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-13
35:975
(1) Upon receipt of the currency the evidence officer shall log the
currency in as evidence in accordance with procedures established
by the Chief of Police.
(2) Thereafter, the evidence shall be secured in a vault located in the
evidence room of the Millville Police Department which shall be
secured by a combination lock or key lock which is accessible only
to the evidence officer and the Chief of Police.
(3) The currency shall remain secured at all times in that fashion until
disbursed to the lawful owner.
B. The threshold question as to whether currency is subject to forfeiture
or not shall be determined in the following manner:
(1) In the case of indictable crimes and juvenile offenses, the
determination shall be made by the Chief of Police or his designee
after consultation with the County Prosecutor or his designee.
(2) In the case of disorderly persons offenses, the determination shall
be made by the Chief of Police or his designee after consultation
with the City Attorney or Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 50-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 50-13
35:976
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Charges
§ 50-14. Copies of documents. [Amended 2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
7-2005]
When the Police Department shall be required to furnish copies of
fingerprints or photographs of any person to a person lawfully requesting
same, other than for official use, the charge shall be paid in accordance with
the Public Open Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., and as set forth in
Article XIII of Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code.
§ 50-15. Fingerprints and photographs.
When the Police Department shall be required to fingerprint or photograph
any person, other than a defendant or suspect, or for official purposes, a
charge of $10 shall be prepaid by the person requesting the service.
§ 50-14 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-15
35:977

ARTICLE V
Mutual Police Aid in Emergencies
§ 50-16. Establishment of agreement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a reciprocal
mutual aid agreement with all other municipalities located in Cumberland
County, New Jersey, who adopt a reciprocal ordinance with the City to
provide mutual police aid in case of emergency. This reciprocal mutual
aid agreement will apply whenever the City has an emergency within its
boundaries requiring additional police assistance to protect life and
property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder and whenever another
municipality within Cumberland County, who has enacted a reciprocal
ordinance, may experience a similar emergency requiring additional police
assistance.
§ 50-17. Assistance.
The Chief of Police of the City shall provide assistance to another
municipality or municipalities within Cumberland County making a valid
request to supply personnel and equipment as required to the extent
possible without endangering persons or property within the City. The
members of the Police Department supplying aid shall have the same power,
authority, rights and immunities as the members of the Police Department
of the municipality to which assistance is rendered.
§ 50-18. Cost and expense of personnel and equipment.
The City shall upon providing assistance to another municipality assume
the cost and expenses of providing its personnel and equipment to the
requesting municipality, except in the instance when the requesting
municipality receives state or federal aid by way of reimbursement. In
such circumstances, the cost incurred by the City shall be submitted for
reimbursement to the municipality requesting assistance.
§ 50-19. Injury or death while rendering assistance.
Members of the Police Department of the City suffering injury or death
while rendering assistance to another municipality shall be entitled to
all benefits they would have realized if injury or death occurred in the
performance of their normal duties within the City.
§ 50-16 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 50-19
35:979
Chapter 52
POLICE REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverage control — See Ch.5.
Industrial noise standards — See Ch. 30,
§ 30-61.
Loitering at amusement arcades — See Ch.
30, 30-102.
Motor vehicle and traffic regulations — See
Ch. 39.
Curfew in parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 43, Art. I.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
§ 50-19 MILLVILLE CODE § 50-19
35:980
ARTICLE I
Abandonment of Motor Vehicles
[Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 38-2001; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No.
12-2005]
§ 52-1. Statutory provisions.
A. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.1(a) makes it unlawful for a person to operate a motor
vehicle upon the public highways of the state in such a manner as to
willfully cause such vehicle to become disabled, by reason of lack of fuel
or otherwise, for the purpose of interfering with or obstructing the
passage of other vehicles.
B. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.1(b) makes it unlawful for a person to willfully abandon
a motor vehicle upon the public highways for the purpose of interfering
with or obstructing the passage of other vehicles.
C. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5(a) makes it unlawful for any person to abandon a
motor vehicle on or along any highway (other than a limited access
highway), or other public property, or on any private property without
the consent of the owner or other person in charge of the private
property. A vehicle which has remained on or along any highway, or
other public property, or on private property without consent for a
period of more than 48 hours or for any period without current license
plates shall be presumed to be an abandoned motor vehicle.
D. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5(b) makes it unlawful for any person to abandon a
motor vehicle on or along any limited access highway without the
consent of the entity having jurisdiction over the limited access
highway. A vehicle which remains on or along such a highway for a
period of more than four hours or for any period without current license
plates shall be presumed to be an abandoned motor vehicle.
E. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6 makes it unlawful for a person to park or leave
unattended a motor vehicle on private property without the consent of
the owner or other person in control or possession of the property or for
a period in excess of the time for which consent was given. This section
authorizes the owner or other person in control or possession of the
property to remove and store the motor vehicle. In the case of an
emergency or disablement of the motor vehicle, the owner or operator
thereof shall arrange for the expeditious removal of the vehicle.
F. N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.7 authorizes any law enforcement officer to enter upon
the property upon the request of the property owner for the purpose of
issuing a summons for a violation.
G. N.J.S.A. 39:3-4 provides that no person owning or having control over
any unregistered vehicle shall permit the same to be parked or to stand
on a public highway. Any police officer is authorized to remove any
unregistered vehicle from the public highway to a storage place or
garage, and the expense involved in such removal and storing of the
§ 52-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-1
35:981
vehicle shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle, except that the
expense shall be paid by the lessee of a leased vehicle.
H. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that
abandoned motor vehicles on or along any public street or on public
property within the City are a nuisance and a threat to public safety.
Accordingly, any police officer is hereby authorized to remove any
abandoned vehicle from those locations to the municipal storage
facility. The expense for towing and storing of the vehicle shall be
assessed in accordance with the towing and storage regulations
contained in this chapter.
§ 52-1 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-1
35:982
ARTICLE II
Badges Required
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
§ 52-2. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE — Any person employed by county or municipal
government performing official duties within the City of Millville.
PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYEE — An employee of a public service company,
such as a cable television company, electric company, gas company, oil
company, telephone company, sewer utility or water utility.
§ 52-4. Regulations.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that
citizens have the right to be safe and secure in their homes. The
municipality desires to protect its citizens from fraud, potential criminal
activity and undue annoyance and alarm.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to set forth requirements designed
to deter or reduce criminal activity and to reassure citizens that the
persons performing public service activities on their property are
lawfully there and properly employed by the public service company.
A. All government employees whose official duties require them to visit
the private property of the public within the City shall display or wear
an official badge, emblem or identification of sufficient size which
plainly indicates the name of the employee and the unit of local
government employing them.
B. All public service employees whose duty it is to collect or receive money
from the public, or to connect or disconnect service, or to read meters,
or to conduct any other business on the private property of the public
shall display or wear an official badge, emblem or identification of
sufficient size which plainly indicates the name of the employee and the
name of the company employing the employee.
§ 52-2 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-5
35:983
§ 52-5. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $200 for a first offense, up to and including $400
for a second offense, and up to and including $500 and up to and including
30 days of community service for a third or subsequent offense.
§ 52-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-5
35:984
ARTICLE III
Curfew for Juveniles
§ 52-6. Findings and purpose. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005103]
This article is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52 and may be cited
as the "Curfew Ordinance of the City of Millville." The governing body
finds and declares that children are being left unsupervised during the
overnight hours within the community. This has resulted in the potential
for involvement in criminal activity as well as the potential threat to the
mental and physical health and welfare of the children who are being left
unsupervised by parents or guardians. It is the intent and purpose of this
article to regulate by curfew the activities of juveniles during these hours
and to encourage the effective supervision of children by their parents and
guardians.
§ 52-7. Definitions. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 39-2001]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
ATHLETIC EVENT — Sporting events such as baseball, basketball, boxing,
football, hockey, lacrosse, soccer, tennis and wrestling.
CITY — The City of Millville.
COMMUNITY BASED ORGANIZATION — A business or nonprofit
organization located within the City which regularly engages in the type of
activity or event being sponsored. Examples include the Boy Scouts or Girl
Scouts, the local ballet school, the local marshal arts school and the local
Historical Society.
CULTURAL EVENT — Activities or events to include the fine arts such
as composing, painting, sculpting and writing or the performing arts such
as acting, dance and music sponsored by religious or community based
organizations.
EDUCATIONAL EVENT — Activities or events that involve the process
of instruction or training to advance aesthetic, mental, moral or physical
development sponsored by religious or community based organizations.
GUARDIAN — Any person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of
the juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of
the parent or who is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
Examples include babysitters and adult relatives of the juvenile such as
brothers or sisters, aunts or uncles, and grandparents.
JUVENILE — Any person who is under the age of 18 years and who is not
fully emanicipated.
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 52-5 through 52-12 as §§ 52-6
through 52-12.1, respectively.
§ 52-6 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-7
35:985
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — A medical condition of a sudden unexpected
happening or an unforeseen condition or occurrence which requires a
sudden or unexpected occasion for action.
PARENT — Any person who is the natural or adoptive parent or the
stepparent of the juvenile.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to any alley, bridge, park, parking lot, plaza, public lands,
recreational area, road, sidewalk, or street.
RELIGIOUS EVENT — Religious services sponsored by a religious
organization who believes in a particular system of faith and worship
recognized and practiced by a particular church, denomination, or sect.
SCHOOL EVENT — Extracurricular school activities such as concerts, pep
rallies, plays, and recitals.
SOCIAL EVENT — Activities or events such as bowling, dancing, dinner,
movies, and skating.
TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named in these
regulations, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time as may be in current use within the City.
§ 52-8. Curfew hours. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 39-2001;
6-7-2011 by Ord. No. 9-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be in any public place between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Saturday of each week.
§ 52-9. Exceptions.
In the following circumstances, juveniles shall be permitted in public Places
during the prohibited hours specified in these regulations:
A. When accompanied by a parent or guardian of the juvenile.
B. When traveling to or from their place of employment.
C. When engaged in interstate travel, either beginning, ending, or
traveling through the City.
D. When engaged in errands involving medical emergencies.
E. When attending, traveling or walking to or from an athletic, cultural,
educational, school, or social event authorized in advance by the parent
or guardian.
F. When attending, traveling or walking to or from a religious event
authorized in advance by the parent or guardian.
G. (Reserved)104
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, pertaining to visits to private residences, was
repealed 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 39-2007.
§ 52-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-9
35:986
§ 52-10. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a juvenile knowingly to
permit or by inefficient control to allow such juvenile to be or remain
in any public place under circumstances not constituting an exception
to these regulations during the prohibited hours. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's or guardian's
control. This section is intended to set a reasonable community standard of
parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that
a parent or guardian is completely indifferent to the activities, conduct, or
whereabouts of the juvenile.
§ 52-11. Enforcement procedure.
If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is on the streets in
violation of these regulations, the officer shall notify the juvenile that he
or she is in violation of the article and shall require the juvenile to provide
his or her name, address and telephone number and how to contact his or
her parent or legal guardian. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver's
license, a police officer on the street shall use his or her best judgment in
determining age. If the officer determines a person is in violation of this
article he or she shall take the juvenile to the police station where a parent
or legal guardian shall be notified to come for the juvenile whereupon
they shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under
constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to centralize responsibility
in the person designated there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair,
impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making available
experienced personnel and access to information and records.
H. (Reserved)105
A. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent or legal
guardian thereof a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. A police officer discharging an enforcement obligation under these
regulations shall file a written report with the Chief of Police or shall
participate to the extent of the information for which he is responsible
in the preparation of a report on the curfew violation. It is not the
intention of this article to require extensive reports but should have a
reasonable amount of information for gathering of additional
information.
C. When a parent or legal guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, pertaining to visits to visits to restaurants, was
repealed 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 39-2007.
§ 52-9 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-11
35:987
§ 52-12. Court jurisdiction; violations and penalties.
Pursuant to state law, the Millville Municipal Court is hereby authorized
to hear all violations of these regulations including violations of juvenile
offenders.
§ 52-12.1. Posting of notice of regulations.
Notice of the existence of these curfew regulations shall be posted in, on
or about such public or quasi-public places as may be determined by the
Chief of Police in order that the public may be constantly informed of the
existence of these regulations.
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent or
legal guardian. If the parent or legal guardian cannot be located or fails
to take charge of the juvenile then the juvenile shall be released to the
juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police
regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the juvenile
may be entrusted to an adult relative, neighbor or other person who
will, on behalf of a parent or legal guardian assume the responsibility
of caring for the juvenile pending the availability or arrival of a parent
or legal guardian.
D. In the case of the first violation of a juvenile, the Chief of Police, shall,
by certified mail, send to the parents or legal guardians of the minor
written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent
violation will result in full enforcement of these regulations including
enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. Parent or guardian. Any person who shall violate any of these
regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000 and/or community service not to exceed 90 days. The
minimum fine for a first offense shall be $25. The minimum fine for a
second offense shall be $50. The minimum fine for a third offense shall
be $75 and 10 days of community service.
B. Juvenile. Any juvenile who shall violate any of these regulations shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/
or community service not to exceed 90 days. The minimum fine for a
first offense shall be $25. The minimum fine for a second offense shall
be $50. The minimum fine for a third offense shall be $75 and 10 days of
community service.
C. Community service. If both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or
guardian violate these regulations, and the Court imposes community
service as part of the sentence, they shall be required to perform
community service together.
§ 52-11 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-12.1
35:988
ARTICLE IV
Disorderly Conduct
§ 52-13. Enumeration of actions constituting disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct. Any
person who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct:
§ 52-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is convicted of an offense under this article shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 to make restitution, to perform
community service not to exceed 30 days, or to be incarcerated for a period
not to exceed 30 days, or any combination of the foregoing within the
discretion of the Court.
A. Any person who shall act in a tumultuous or violent manner toward
another person where such other person is placed in fear of safety of his
or her health or life.
B. Any person who shall act in a tumultuous or violent manner toward
another person where the property of that person is placed in danger of
being damaged or destroyed.
C. Any person who shall cause, engage in or provoke any brawl, fight or
riotous conduct so as to endanger the health or life or property of
another person.
D. Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any other
person who becomes outraged and thus creates a public disturbance.
E. Any person who shall endanger the lawful occupation or pursuit of
another person by acts of abusive conduct, angry threats or violence.
F. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with other persons for
the purpose of causing, engaging in or provoking a brawl, fight or
riotous conduct.
G. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with other persons on the
public sidewalk or the public street so as to interfere with the free flow
of pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic and refuses to disperse when
ordered to do so.
H. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with other persons for an
unlawful purpose.
I. Any person who interferes with any lawful public gathering or religious
worship within the City.
§ 52-13 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-14
35:989

ARTICLE V
Drug-Free Zones
§ 52-15. Approval of maps designating drug-free school zones.
The City of Millville hereby approves the School Property Drug Maps
prepared on August 19, 1997, which locate schools within the City of
Millville and which designates the boundaries of the drug-free zones within
1,000 feet of each property used for school purposes.
§ 52-16. Approval of maps designating public housing facility drugfree
zones.
The City of Millville hereby approves the Public Housing Drug Maps
prepared on July 7, 1998, which locate the public housing buildings and real
property used in connection therewith within the City of Millville and which
designates the boundaries of the drug-free zones within 500 feet of each
property used for public housing facility purposes.
§ 52-17. Approval of maps designating public park drug-free zones.
The City of Millville hereby approves the Public Parks Drug Maps prepared
on July 7, 1998, which locate public parks within the City of Millville and
which designates the boundaries of the drug-free zones within 500 feet of
each property used for public park purposes.
§ 52-18. Approval of maps designating public library and museum
drug-free zones.
The City of Millville hereby approves the Public Library and Museum Drug
Maps prepared on July 7, 1998, which locate the public library and museum
within the City of Millville and which designates the boundaries of the drugfree
zones within 500 feet of each property used as a public library or
museum.
§ 52-19. Keeping of maps as official records.
The Drug Free Zone Maps shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk and maintained as an official record of the City of Millville to be
introduced as evidence in the courts of this state and other courts of
competent jurisdiction in prosecutions involving drug violations.
§ 52-15 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-19
35:991

ARTICLE VI
Dumpsters
[Added 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005106]
§ 52-20. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
DUMPSTER — A roll-off container or a roll-off dumpster used for the
collection of debris or building materials from renovated structures.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Alleys, lands, sidewalks, and streets owned by or
under the jurisdiction of the City of Millville.
§ 52-22. Regulations.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that
citizens have the right to safe and unobstructed passage on public
property within the City.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to set forth standards and
requirements for the location and use of dumpsters on public property
within the City.
A. No person shall locate a dumpster on public property without first
obtaining a permit from the City Clerk and paying a permit fee of $50
which may be issued for a period of time up to and including 30 days.
B. All persons seeking a dumpster permit shall complete an application on
the form provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include a
sketch of the location where the dumpster is to be located, and the
application shall be reviewed and approved by Traffic Safety before a
permit is issued.
C. No dumpster shall be placed within five feet of an adjacent property
owners driveway.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered Former Art. VI, Firearms and Fireworks, as
Art. VIII.
§ 52-20 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-22
35:993
§ 52-23. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days in the discretion of the
municipal court.
D. No dumpster shall be placed at a location on a public street which
interferes with the free flow of vehicular traffic.
E. No dumpster shall be placed at a site more than 24 hours prior to the
beginning of construction nor remain at a site more than 24 hours after
construction is completed.
F. Upon removal of any dumpster, the public property shall be swept clean
of all loose debris and restored to its former condition.
G. Each dumpster shall prominently display the name, address and
telephone number of the owner.
H. Each dumpster shall have both the front and rear surfaces reflectorized
for night safety in such a manner as to indicate the height and width of
same.
§ 52-22 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-23
35:994
ARTICLE VII
Electric-Powered Motor Scooters
[Added 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005107]
§ 52-24. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
PUBLIC LAND — Includes all ballparks, lake areas, parks, and recreational
areas owned by or under the jurisdiction of the City of Millville or the Board
of Education.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, and
streets owned by or under the jurisdiction of the City of Millville.
§ 52-26. Regulations.
Unlicensed drivers shall not operate electric-powered motor scooters on the
public lands and public property within the City of Millville.
§ 52-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that a
significant safety problem has arisen as a result of unlicensed drivers
operating electric-powered motor scooters on the public lands and
public property. These electric-powered motor scooters are not
registered with the state. Frequently, the operators of these devices do
not utilize helmets or use hand signals to signify their intentions
regarding stopping or turning. Consequently, these operators present a
significant traffic hazard.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit the use of electricpowered
motor scooters by unlicensed drivers on the public lands and
public property.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. VII, Loitering, as Art. IX.
§ 52-24 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-27
35:995

ARTICLE VIII
Firearms and Fireworks
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
§ 52-28. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
FIREARM — A weapon that expels a projectile (such as a bullet or pellets)
by the combustion of gunpowder or other explosive.
FIREWORKS — Include any combustible or explosive composition or any
substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
detonation or explosion.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 52-30. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm or fireworks within
the City except under the following authorized circumstances.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
unauthorized or unregulated discharge of firearms and fireworks within
the City creates a serious risk of injury to people and damage to
property, including the risk of fire.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit the discharge of firearms
and fireworks within the City except for certain authorized
circumstances.
A. A law enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her
official duties.
B. A person lawfully hunting during hunting season on lands authorized
for that purpose.
C. A person lawfully target shooting or trap shooting on lands authorized
for that purpose.
D. A fireworks display over lands or water which has been authorized by
the Fire Official. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 16-2012]
§ 52-28 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-30
35:997
§ 52-31. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
E. A person lawfully acting in accordance with the provisions contained in
the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice or other applicable state law.
§ 52-30 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-31
35:998
ARTICLE IX
Loitering in a Public Place
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005108]
§ 52-32. Preemption.
§ 52-33. Findings and purpose.
A. N.J.S.A. 2C:33-2.1 makes it unlawful for a person to loiter in a public
place with the purpose of unlawfully obtaining or distributing a
controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance analog.
B. N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1.1 makes it unlawful for a person to loiter in a public
place with the purpose of engaging in prostitution or promoting
prostitution.
C. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
municipal regulations contained herein are not preempted by state law
based on the following:
(1) The municipal regulations do not conflict with state law, either
because of conflicting policies or operational effect;
(2) N.J.S.A. 2C:1-5d expresses an intent that the New Jersey Code of
Criminal Justice is to be exclusive in the field, but that section alone
does not preempt these regulations;
(3) The subject matter does not reflect the need for uniformity;
(4) The state scheme is not so comprehensive or pervasive that it
precludes the coexistence of municipal regulations; and
(5) The municipal regulations do not stand as an obstacle to the
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives
of the State Legislature.
A. It is the responsibility of local government to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Such
authority has been delegated to municipalities by the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
loitering of groups of people or gangs in public places with the purpose
of engaging in criminal activity or unlawful conduct is a significant
problem which threatens the public health, safety and welfare.
C. The purpose of these regulations is to deter or reduce criminal activity
and unlawful conduct and to maintain a quality of life within the
community which reassures citizens that they are safe and secure in
public places.
108. This ordinance also repealed former Art. IX, Protection of Police Department Dogs, and
Art. X, Railway Crossings.
§ 52-32 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-34
35:999
§ 52-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
ATHLETIC EVENT — To include, for example, sporting contests such as
baseball, basketball, field hockey, football, lacrosse, rowing, soccer, softball,
tennis and track and field.
CULTURAL EVENT — To include, for example, artistic and intellectual
events such as concerts, dance recitals, lectures, movies, plays, and artistic
displays.
LOITERING — To prowl, remain or wander in one location, including sifting
in or out of a motor vehicle.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to any alley, boardwalk, bridge, driveway, park, parking lot,
plaza, public library, public street, sidewalk or transportation facility, or
the doorways and entrance ways to any building which front on any of the
aforesaid places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place.
PURPOSE — A person is presumed to intend the reasonable and natural
consequences of their actions. A person manifests the purpose to engage in
unlawful conduct when a reasonable person would conclude that such an
intent exists from an observation of the person's actions, conduct, demeanor
and speech under the attendant circumstances.
RECREATIONAL EVENT — To include, for example, bicycle race, five-mile
run, walkathon, and athletic activities available to the public at large.
SOCIAL EVENT — To include, for example, baby contests, air show, boat
show, car show, dance, festival, Mardi gras and parade.
§ 52-35. Regulations.
A. It is unlawful for a person to loiter in a public place with the purpose of
interfering with or obstructing the free flow of pedestrian traffic or
vehicular traffic.
B. It is unlawful for a person to loiter in a public place with the purpose of
engaging in an altercation with another person.
C. It is unlawful for a person to loiter in a public place with the purpose of
creating a disturbance or otherwise interfering with a school activity,
such as an athletic event, cultural event, educational activity or a social
event.
D. It is unlawful for a person to loiter in a public place with the purpose of
creating a disturbance or otherwise interfering with a public event,
such as an athletic event, cultural event, recreational event, or a social
event.
§ 52-34 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-35
35:1000
§ 52-36. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
E. It is unlawful for a person to loiter on private property that is
customarily used for a commercial purpose by the public with the
purpose of interfering with or obstructing the free flow of pedestrian
traffic or vehicular traffic seeking the use of the commercial enterprise.
F. Where five or more persons are participating in a course of unlawful
conduct, as defined herein, a law enforcement officer engaged in
executing or enforcing the law may order the participants and others in
the immediate vicinity to disperse. Any person who fails, neglects, or
refuses to obey this order commits a violation of these regulations.
§ 52-35 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-36
35:1001

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)109
§ 52-37. through § 52-43. (Reserved)
109. Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Noise Pollution Control, as amended, was repealed 1-17-2017
by Ord. No. 2-2017 and 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 12-2017. See Now Art. XVI, Noise.
§ 52-37 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-37
35:1003

ARTICLE XI
Shopping Carts
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
§ 52-44. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-45. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
PRESUME — A presumption of law that courts shall draw a particular
inference from a particular fact unless and until the truth of such inference
is disproved.
§ 52-46. Regulations.
A. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
proliferation of shopping carts found on public property and on private
residential property is a nuisance that negatively affects the
appearance of the community, adversely impacts property values, and
represents a financial loss to the commercial businesses who own the
shopping carts.
B. The purpose of these regulations is to prevent the removal of shopping
carts from the premises of the commercial businesses who own them,
and to provide for the collection and removal of shopping carts found off
the commercial premises of the owner.
A. It is unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the
commercial property of the owner.
B. Shopping carts found on the private property of any person shall be
presumed to have been removed from the commercial property by the
resident owner or resident tenant of the private property where they
were found.
C. Any shopping cart found off the commercial property of the owner shall
be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the City and stored
on City property for a reasonable time before disposition.
D. The City shall notify the commercial business designated on the
shopping cart as the owner that the City has recovered the shopping
cart. The owner may recover the shopping cart from the City upon the
payment of $10.
E. Commercial businesses who regularly allow customers to use shopping
carts in the operation of their business shall make reasonable efforts to
prevent the removal of the shopping carts from the commercial
property. These efforts shall include:
§ 52-44 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-46
35:1005
§ 52-47. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
(1) Posting notices at the commercial business that tell customers that
the shopping carts shall not be removed from the premises.
(2) If manpower is available, an employee of the commercial business
shall be assigned to the parking lot to recover shopping carts and
place them in a stored area and to prevent customers from
removing the shopping carts from the premises.
§ 52-46 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-47
35:1006
ARTICLE XII
Theater Regulations
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
§ 52-48. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
THEATER — A building or a natural outdoor setting for the presentation
of performances or the representation of dramatic storytelling, such as
concerts, movies and plays.
§ 52-50. Regulations.
§ 52-51. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
A. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that the
consumption of alcohol and smoking in a theater represent a significant
risk to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit these activities in a
theater.
A. Unless otherwise provided by local or state law, it shall be unlawful for
any person to consume an alcoholic beverage in a theater.
B. Unless otherwise provided by local or state law, it shall be unlawful for
any person to smoke in a theater. This section shall not apply to the
outdoor theater located on the riverfront.
§ 52-48 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-51
35:1007

ARTICLE XIII
Towing and Storage Services
[Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015110]
§ 52-52. Definitions.
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
AUTO REPAIR FACILITY — Any public garage where motor vehicles are
painted and/or repaired. No motor vehicle shall remain at an auto body shop
for longer than six months, for purposes of this article.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of a motor
vehicle from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a parking
area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident thereto,
but does not include recovery of a motor vehicle from a position beyond the
right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other object within
the right-of-way or berm.
CITY — The City of Millville.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Millville.
CITY COMMISSION — The Board of Commissioners of the City of Millville.
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs incurred by the City or its
agents in the removal or attempted removal of hazardous substances and
disposal thereof, or costs for the taking of reasonable measures to prevent
or mitigate damage, whether actual or threatened, to the public health,
safety or welfare.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking pumping, pouring, emitting, or dumping of
hazardous substances into the water or lands of the State of New Jersey.
DISPATCH FACILITY — A place established to transmit requests for towing
services.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — The list of hazardous substances adopted by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to Section 101
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, P.L. 96-510 (42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.), and amendments thereto,
and those substances listed by the NJDEP as environmental hazardous
substances pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 1983, Chapter 315 (N.J.S.A.
34:5A-4), and amendments thereto.
HEAVY-DUTY TOW — A tow truck with dual wheels capable of towing
large trucks/vehicles shall meet the following minimum requirements: gross
vehicle weight (GVW), 30,000 pounds; gross combined weight rating
(GCWR), 80,000 pounds; boom rating, 50,000 pounds; winch rating, 50,000
pounds; cable size and length, 5/8 inch and 200 feet.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XIII, Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles, as amended.
§ 52-52 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-52
35:1009
INSIDE BUILDINGS — Any portion of a towing facility that is completely
indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal
of vehicles and is secured by a locking device on each opening.
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials, machinery, or two or more unregistered/uninspected,
inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk. For purposes of this article,
an auto repair facility or a towing facility shall not be considered a junkyard.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a motor vehicle
comes in contact with any other object for which the motor vehicle must be
towed or removed from the scene thereof.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Any portion of a towing facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is eight
feet high unless otherwise prescribed by the City of Millville Zoning
Ordinance111 and is installed with a passive alarm system (e.g., bell ringer
located in the gate area to the enclosed facility) or a similar on-site security
measure. Fences which are not less than six feet in height which existed
prior to passage of this article shall be permitted; however, if such fences
are replaced, the new fence shall be eight feet in height unless otherwise
prescribed by the Zoning Ordinance.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — Any portion of a towing facility that is not
indoors and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier,
and all other storage facilities not otherwise defined as inside buildings or
outside secured.
PETROLEUM OR PETROLEUM PRODUCTS — Oil or petroleum of any
kind and in any form, including but not limited to oil petroleum, gasoline,
kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes.
PLOT PLAN — A diagram which shows the buildings, streets, roads,
driveways, dimensions of existing and proposed structures, parking areas,
easements and property lines of an existing or proposed site at a defined
scale.
POLICE HOLD VEHICLES — Motor vehicles which are alleged to have been
involved in illegal activity, involved in a fatal motor vehicle collision, or
designated by a Millville police officer.
PUBLIC GARAGE — Any building, structure or property designed and used
for equipping, adjusting, greasing, washing, polishing, servicing or storage
of motor vehicles, other than at a junkyard, operated for profit and for
service of the public. For purposes of this article, a "public garage" means
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 52-52 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-52
35:1010
any general repair garage, specialized repair garage, car wash, auto repair
facility, or towing facility.
RESPONSE TIME — Not more than 20 minutes from the time of the initial
request by the Millville Police Department dispatcher to the tow vehicle's
arrival at the site of the incident requiring tow services, all traffic
regulations observed.
STORAGE FACILITY — A place for the storing of motor vehicles.
TOWING FACILITY — Any public garage which offers towing services. No
motor vehicle shall remain at a towing facility for longer than 60 days for
purposes of this article.
TOWING OPERATOR — Any entity that operates a towing business or tow
vehicle.
TOW VEHICLE — Those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by the vehicle manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OR SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
§ 52-53. License required.
Prospective tow list operators shall have a duly licensed towing facility or
auto repair facility meeting the requirements set forth in this article.
§ 52-54. Application process for Police Department tow list.
A. License application; data required. An application shall be in writing,
upon forms to be furnished by the City of Millville, signed by the
applicant and filed with the City Clerk; said application shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name, business address, business name, telephone number
and e-mail address of the towing operator.
(2) The location of the towing operator's towing facility.
(3) The name of the towing operator's insurance company and
insurance policy number.
(4) The towing fees, storage fees charged, and any other information
which the City Clerk deems relevant and appropriate, including
experience and references.
(5) The type, condition, and design of tow vehicle(s) and equipment
available for service, and the name and address of the owner of
such vehicle(s).
(6) Communications availability, including radio communications, and
the location and availability of the dispatch center.
§ 52-52 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-54
35:1011
(7) The name, address and driver's license number for each driver or
operator of the tow vehicle(s).
(8) Proof that each vehicle to be licensed is duly registered and
inspected by the State of New Jersey, Division of Motor Vehicles, as
a tow vehicle.
(9) Proof of insurance upon the terms and conditions stated in § 52-56
herein.
(10) Plot plan. A plot plan shall:
(a) Be drawn neatly to scale, preferably at one inch equals 20 feet.
(b) Indicate the entire lot for which application is being made.
(c) Contain a symbol indicting the direction of north.
(d) Indicate the name of all streets and ways upon which the lot is
located, street address and the location and type of existing
and proposed street fixtures, such as utility poles, street lights,
traffic signals and signs.
(e) Indicate the name of the nearest intersection street and the
distance, in feet, to it.
(f) Indicate, with dimensions, all parking and storage areas with
distance from building and property lines.
(g) Indicate all driveways and curb cuts and easements.
(h) Indicate the width of all rights-of-way (streets and ways) upon
which the lot is located.
(i) Indicate the lot number of the subject property and abutting
lots.
(j) Draw a key map of area.
(11) Renewals; plot plan. The applicant may submit a notarized
statement with its renewal application that the plot plan required
by Subsection A(10) above has not changed from the immediate
preceding term. Any changes to the plot plan must be approved by
the Planning and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. If a firm, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation
or other organization, the name and address of each officer, director,
partner, and/or member thereof. Each application for a license, or a
renewal thereof, shall contain the street address for the residence and
business of the licensee at the time of application or renewal. A post
office box shall be permitted only as part of a mailing address that is
submitted by the licensee in addition to the street address of the
licensee's residence or business. A licensee whose last address appears
as a post office box shall change the address on the application to the
§ 52-54 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-54
35:1012
street address of the licensee's residence and business. An application
of a corporation shall be signed in the name of the corporation by the
president and attested by the secretary.
C. Said application shall be duly verified by the applicant before a notary
public or some other person duly authorized to administer oaths.
D. Each such application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the
license fee hereinafter prescribed.
E. No license shall be issued to a towing operator whose towing facility is
located within the City unless said facility is located within a zoning
district where such use is a permitted use in accordance with the City of
Millville Zoning Ordinance112 or unless a use variance has been
obtained therefor, and any and all Planning Board or Zoning Board
approvals and/or permits have been obtained therefor, or unless
sufficient proofs are provided by the applicant that said facility was
operated at its present location prior to adoption of the zoning
ordinance. Details of the location shall be shown on a map or diagram
accurately depicting the dimensions, proposed layout and size of the
vehicle storage spaces, fire lanes and the maximum number of vehicles
to be stored at such premises. The information shall be submitted on a
site plan approved by the City of Millville Planning Board and/or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. The tow vehicle(s) shall comply with any and all state, federal and local
laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to safety, lighting and
towing equipment and shall be subject to inspection by the Millville
Police Department or its designee.
G. An application shall not be deemed complete unless accompanied by:
(1) A current and complete criminal history and a current and
complete State of New Jersey certified motor vehicle abstract for
each driver or tow vehicle operator employed by or otherwise
associated with the towing operator.
(2) A letter of compliance from the Zoning Official representing the
municipality having jurisdiction over the facilities of the tow
operator's base of service, dispatch and/or storage area that such
facilities are not in violation of applicable land use ordinances.
(3) An approval from the City Clerk or such other official, as
applicable, representing the municipality having jurisdiction over
the property of the tow operator that such property is not in
violation of applicable property maintenance and health codes. This
compliance letter shall include the dispatch facility and storage
facility if not one and the same.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 52-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-54
35:1013
H. The City of Millville shall have the right to verify the accuracy of the
information supplied in the application by interviewing, investigating
and inspecting all personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas
proposed for utilization by the applicant and to determine compliance
with all applicable laws, regulations and standards of performance
required by this article.
I. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the City Clerk or a
designee shall furnish a copy of the application to the Chief of Police.
J. An applicant shall be disqualified from obtaining or holding a towing
operator's license if a criminal history background check and/or driver's
abstract required pursuant to § 52-54 G(1) reveals a record of
conviction of any of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime or offense as follows:
aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide,
kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, or
endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4,
whether or not armed with or having in his possession any weapon
enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4 or N.J.S.A.
2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense
for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection J(1) of this section.
(3) In New Jersey or elsewhere, the conviction of an alcohol or drugrelated
traffic offense enumerated in N.J.S.A. 39:4-49.1, N.J.S.A.
39:4-50 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-51 et seq. or its equivalent in any
other state, territory, commonwealth or other jurisdiction of the
United States, which has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the
application being submitted.
(4) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if a person who
has been convicted of one of the crimes or offenses enumerated in
Subsection J(1) or (2) of this section can produce a certificate of
rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the
criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an equivalent
certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal offense
occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant
from operating or driving a taxicab.
K. The City Clerk, with the assistance of the Millville Police Department,
upon receipt of a completed application, shall conduct a background
investigation of the towing operator. This investigation shall include an
inspection of the towing facility, the tow vehicle(s) and the towing
§ 52-54 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-54
35:1014
§ 52-55. Recommendation of approval or disapproval.
§ 52-56. Insurance. [Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 45-2018]
operation, and inquiry into all relevant matters to determine if the
towing operator meets the requirements of all applicable laws,
regulations, standards of performance and security of vehicles towed or
stored as mandated by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49b.
L. The City Clerk and/or the Millville Police Department may request and
obtain additional information from the Chamber of Commerce and the
Department of Weights and Measures and Consumer Protection of the
applicable county and from any other appropriate sources.
M. The towing operator shall at no time transfer or assign a license, or any
part thereof, for any purpose whatsoever.
N. No individual shall operate a tow vehicle unless that individual is duly
licensed by the State of New Jersey. Any change in licensure of vehicle
operators during the period of the license must be reported to the City
Clerk within 15 days of such change. Failure to do so shall be basis for
revocation of a license.
A. In the event that the City Clerk determines that the towing operator is
not qualified, a written report shall be filed specifying the findings and
the reasons for the recommendation of rejection. A copy of the report
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular
mail to the towing operator applicant.
B. Any towing operator who is denied a license based upon the findings
and recommendations of the City Clerk may file with the City Clerk a
written request for a hearing before City Commission, provided that
such request is filed within 30 days of receipt of notification. A hearing
shall be scheduled before City Commission within 60 days of the City
Clerk's receipt of such request, at which hearing City Commission shall
be the hearing officer for final determination of the matter.
A. In order to be included on the City of Millville Police Department Tow
List, a towing operator shall submit proof of insurance to the City Clerk
and a copy thereof to the Millville Police Department each year on or
before January I. The towing operator shall furnish proof of insurance
coverage for their garage operations by Certificate of Insurance
accompanying the license application. Said certificate shall name City
of Millville as the certificate holder and shall name City of Millville as an
additional insured on all liability policies. All insurance policies shall be
obtained front an insurance company authorized to conduct business in
the State of New Jersey. Said insurance policies shall be written for not
less than the limits specified below or required by law, whichever may
be greater.
§ 52-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-56
35:1015
§ 52-57. Licensing procedure.
Upon the receipt and review by the City Clerk of a completed application,
and upon the findings resulting from the investigation of the applicant and
a recommendation of approval, the application shall thereupon be referred
to the Commission of the City of Millville for consideration, and when the
Commission has determined to approve the granting of such license, it shall
do so by resolution. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the City Clerk
shall issue a license certificate, which shall state the purpose for which the
(1) Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(2) Commercial general liability insurance or its equivalent for bodily
injury, personal injury and property, damage including loss of use,
with minimum limits of $1,000,000 each occurrence and
$2,000,000 general aggregate.
(3) Workers' compensation insurance, including occupational diseases,
in accordance with the statutory requirements of the laws of the
State of New Jersey. The worker's compensation insurance policy
shall contain an employee's liability endorsement providing limits
of not less than statutory requirements.
(4) Garage keepers' legal liability which includes comprehensive and
collision coverage. Said policy shall include "on hook" coverage and
coverage for the property of others which is in the care, custody or
control of the licensed towing operator. Said policy shall also
include the peril of transportation for any motor vehicle in the
possession or control of the towing operator in an amount not less
than $100,000 per location.
(5) Garage liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(6) The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance
company give City of Millville 30 days prior notice of any changes
or cancellation terms of such policies during the period of
coverage.
B. The towing operator shall agree in writing to assume the defense of and
indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees, attorneys and agents, from all suits,
actions, damages or claims to which the City, its elected officials,
boards, commissions, officers, employees, attorneys and agents may be
subjected of any kind and nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by,
arising out of or as a consequence of the provision of towing, storage
and/or emergency services provided by the towing operator pursuant to
this article. Tow operators shall enter into a hold-harmless agreement
in a form to be approved by the City Solicitor prior to being included on
the towing list.
§ 52-56 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-57
35:1016
license is granted, the name, business name and the base-of-service address
of the licensee, the number of the license and the date of its expiration,
which license certificate shall be signed by the City Clerk.
§ 52-58. License term.
All licenses issued under this article shall be effective for the period of two
years. The license shall begin on the first day of January and end on the 31st
day of December two years after the granting of the same. All licenses shall
expire automatically; applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted
on or before December 1 of the expiring year. Applications received after
December 1 of the expiring year will not be accepted.
§ 52-59. Fees.
A nonrefundable fee of $500 shall be submitted simultaneously with an
original application and all renewal applications.
§ 52-60. Suspension or revocation of license.
A license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause by action
of the Millville City Commission, after an opportunity for the licensee to
be heard, for the violation of any of the provisions of this article or any
other ordinance of the City of Millville. Such license, when so suspended or
revoked, shall not be reinstated except for good and sufficient cause shown.
§ 52-60.1. Police Department tow list.
A. Eligibility.
(1) All towing operators, in order to provide services in no-preference
motor vehicle accidents or for the removal of motor vehicles from
private or public property, as may be authorized by the Police
Department or the City Zoning Officer, must be licensed by the City
of Millville in accordance with this article.
(2) Towing operators must meet the twenty-minute response time to be
eligible for inclusion on the City of Millville Police Department tow
list.
B. The list of licensed towing operators shall be maintained by the Police
Department and shall be utilized on a rotation basis. The rotation shall
be on a weekly basis unless otherwise specified by the Police
Department or in the event of emergency conditions. The towing and
storage services shall be rotated among towing operators on an equal
basis, by the job or by the week.
C. Licensed tow operators shall be subject to the minimum standards of
the performance rules and regulations of the Millville Police
Department, including safety, availability, and compliance with the
procedures established by this article.
§ 52-57 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-60.1
35:1017
§ 52-60.2. Services to be performed by licensed towing operators.
D. If the Chief of Police determines at any time that a towing operator is
unable or unwilling to fulfill the requirements of this article or the
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey, the Chief of Police
shall file a written report with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall then
notify the towing operator by regular and certified mail at the address
stated pursuant to § 52-54A(1), that the Chief of Police has
recommended its removal from the Police Department towing list. The
tow operator may file a written exception and request for a hearing with
the City Clerk within 15 days from receipt of notification. The City Clerk
shall then schedule a hearing before City Commission within 30 days of
the aforesaid request. After conducting a hearing, the City Commission
may then, by resolution, remove the towing operator from the Police
Department towing list if the Commission determines, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the performance of the towing
operator is unreliable or inadequate.
E. The tow operator shall cease towing of vehicles on behalf of the City of
Millville Police Department upon notification by the City Clerk that the
tow operator is to be removed from the list.
A. Licensed towing operators agree to provide the following services on an
around-the-clock basis:
(1) Removal and transporting of motor vehicles involved in a motor
vehicle accident where the owner or operator of the motor vehicle
has not made a preference for the towing of the vehicle.
(2) Removal and transporting of a motor vehicle from private or public
property as may be authorized by the Police Department or the City
Zoning Officer.
(3) Removal and disposal from City or private property motor vehicles
which, pursuant to state law and regulations, would be subject to
the jurisdiction of the Millville Police Department. Such vehicles
shall be moved to such location as specified by the Millville Police
Department.
(4) The storage of a motor vehicle removed and transported from the
scene of a motor vehicle accident.
B. Cleanup.
(1) A towing operator responding to a tow shall be responsible for all
site cleanup related to a motor vehicle accident, including the
pickup and removal of all debris from the scene of the accident and
containment of any hazardous fluids from the vehicle prior to tow,
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and all
services as defined by state regulations and this article (Article XIII
of Chapter 52 of the Millville City Code).
§ 52-60.1 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-60.2
35:1018
§ 52-60.3. Responsibility of towing operators on list.
(2) It is understood that the responsibility of the tow operator as
established above in no way relieves the vehicle owner of his
responsibility for the cleanup and removal of any debris or spilled
fluids coming from his vehicle.
C. A towing operator shall provide either one boom tow truck with a wheel
lift or winch rollback or one boom tow truck with a wheel lift, capable of
transporting the vehicle to be removed without additional damage. The
transported vehicle shall not exceed the carry weight or capacity of the
carrying vehicle.
D. The towing operator shall ensure the proper utilization and deployment
of safety devices as more particularly defined in § 55-60.3 herein.
E. If a licensed towing operator is unable to handle a particular situation
for whatever reason, the City shall have the right to use whatever
means necessary to accomplish the removal, transporting and storage
of motor vehicles.
F. No towing operator shall subcontract any work to be performed
pursuant to this article without having first obtained prior written
approval from City Commission. Any towing operator to whom approval
to subcontract work has been given shall be responsible for the services
performed by and the acts and omissions of the subcontractor and shall
remain liable for any violation of this article by the subcontractor.
A. The towing operator shall provide a towing facility of sufficient size to
accommodate not fewer than 25 passenger vehicles and one tractor and
trailer and not less than 800 square feet of inside storage facilities to
hold and protect "police hold" vehicles. At no time shall any automobiles
towed by a towing operator be stored at any other location, except
where a vehicle is towed at the request of the owner to a specific
location. Vehicles shall have a maximum of sixty-day storage life with
the exception of vehicles awaiting repair or in the process of being
repaired at authorized body shops, in which case vehicles shall have a
maximum of six months' storage life, or vehicles taken to authorized
junkyards.
B. The towing facility shall be staffed by the licensed towing operator
during normal business hours and include twenty-four-hour telephone
service seven days per week during the week in which the licensed
facility is on call.
C. The towing operator shall provide tow vehicles capable of handling the
transporting of motor vehicles as defined in § 52-52 and equipped to
provide regular towing service. Gross vehicular weight of 14,000
pounds to 15,000 pounds is "regular towing service." Gross vehicular
weight of 15,000 pounds and above is "heavy towing service." Carry
§ 52-60.2 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-60.3
35:1019
weight shall not be less than 4,000 pounds or less than that needed to
carry the transported vehicle safely.
D. Each tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with towing and
safety equipment; warning devices, such as lights, flares and flags, to
warn other automobile operators of the presence of a disabled
automobile; and mechanics tools to perform complete emergency work,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on the
highest practical location of the vehicle, which when in use shall be
visible from 360° at a distance of not less than 500 feet during
daylight hours.
(2) One snatch block per winch.
(3) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night. Safety tow lights, red in color, shall be mounted in the rear of
the vehicle being towed.
(4) Ample chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle. The
working limit of cable shall be noted.
(5) At least one heavy-duty broom, shovel, crowbar or pry bar, jumper
cables, flashlight, fire extinguisher of dry chemical type having a
capacity of not less than two pounds, one dozen flares or similar
warning devices for placement at the scene of an accident or
behind a disabled vehicle, not less than 10 pounds of dry sand or a
drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled onto the roadway, and
tools sufficient to enable the tow vehicle operator to perform
proper and adequate emergency repair services for the tow.
(6) Backup alarms.
E. All wrecked vehicles must be in compliance with all safety equipment
requirements as listed in N.J.S.A. 39:3-1 et seq. and 49 CFR 393.
F. No changes may be made to tow vehicles or equipment without prior
written approval of the Millville Police Department.
G. Each tow vehicle shall display a sticker issued by the City Clerk on the
upper left side of the driver's door panel and shall have the City of
Millville's name and license number issued to the licensed tow operator
and license expiration date displayed on the vehicle. [Amended
4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 16-2019]
H. Towing operators and their employees shall provide all services
required by this article at all times and shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Possess sufficient knowledge, skill and ability to provide minimum
road services for disabled vehicles and to adequately remove a
§ 52-60.3 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-60.3
35:1020
vehicle from an accident scene without causing additional damage
to the vehicle.
(2) Possess a valid driver's license and/or a commercial driver's license
with no restrictions or conditional endorsements except for the
wearing of eyeglasses.
(3) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
(4) Obey all traffic laws, statutes, regulations and ordinances
promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the City of Millville.
(5) Be subject to inspection by the City Clerk and/or the Millville Police
Department prior to rendering any services pursuant to this article.
(6) Have no criminal convictions and not be subject to driving privilege
suspensions or revocations within one year from the date of the
application or renewal.
I. The tow vehicles provided by the towing operator shall be of such type
and design to properly and safely perform all towing services required
by this article and shall at all times comply with New Jersey statutes
and regulations and be subject to inspection by the Millville Police
Department.
J. All drivers of tow vehicles shall possess at all times a valid New Jersey
driver's license and a commercial driver's license, where applicable,
which shall be subject to inspection by the Millville Police Department.
Said operator shall respect all traffic laws and shall comply with all
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey and of the City of
Millville.
K. The tow vehicles provided by the towing operator shall be
geographically located so as to permit a response time within 20
minutes.
L. The towing fees and storage fees established by the towing operator
shall be conspicuously posted at the towing facility owned or operated
by the towing operator, which fees shall not exceed the maximum fees
set forth in this article.
M. At all times, the towing operator shall maintain the towing facility in a
clean and orderly fashion. Reasonable measures shall be taken by the
towing operator to prevent vandalism, theft or damage to automobiles
stored therein.
N. In the event that automobiles which are towed and stored by the towing
operator are abandoned or unclaimed by the owners thereof, the towing
operator shall make no claim against the City, its agents or employees.
Only those vehicles towed from private property or public right-of-way
under authorization of either the City Zoning Officer or the Police
Department, not including accident vehicles, shall be disposed of by the
§ 52-60.3 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-60.3
35:1021
§ 52-60.4. Towing facilities.
City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., or other appropriate state
statutes or state regulations.
O. The towing operator operating pursuant to these regulations is an
independent contractor and in no sense an agent, servant or employee
of the City. Said operator shall at all times maintain direct supervision,
management and control over all its employees and personnel engaged
in the operation or services performed pursuant to these regulations.
P. The City shall not be responsible for the acts of the towing operator in
performing the services contemplated by this article. The towing
operator agrees to save and hold harmless the City from all manner of
liability as a result of its actions or omissions, whether of a negligent or
intentional nature.
Q. Towing operators approved for tow list eligibility shall be required to
fulfill tow requests of the Millville Police Department. Failure or refusal
to remove a vehicle pursuant to directive of the Millville Police
Department shall be cause for removal from the list.
R. The tow operator shall be responsible for ensuring the proper, safe and
secure storage of all vehicles towed. The tow operator shall be liable for
any and all damage incurred by such vehicles while in transit to or while
stored in or at the facilities of the operator.
S. The tow operator shall record all vehicles towed in a book kept for such
purposes. The details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced or
transported, together with full information of the towed vehicle and
name and address of the owner and the charges paid for his services,
shall be recorded. Full information of the towed vehicle shall include,
but not be limited to, the vehicle's license number, VIN registration
number, make, model, color and year. The record book herein described
shall be kept open for inspection at all times by any duly authorized
representative of the City of Millville. A quarterly towing record
containing the information herein stated above shall be filed with the
Millville Police Department and the City Clerk setting forth the details
of all tows by vehicle type, date, time of day, sector and whether
additional services were required.
A. Every tow operator on the Police Department Tow List shall maintain
outside secured storage area meeting the following requirements:
[Amended 6-6-2018 by Ord. No. 32-2018]
(1) The storage area shall be capable of storing not fewer than 25
passenger vehicles and one tractor and trailer.
(2) The storage area shall be located either within the limits of the City
or at such location outside of the City as to facilitate a response
time of not more than 20 minutes.
§ 52-60.3 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-60.4
35:1022
§ 52-60.5. Fees.
(3) Outside storage areas shall be fully enclosed by a fence of sufficient
security to prevent trespassing, having a height of eight feet, or as
otherwise prescribed by the City of Millville Zoning Ordinance,113
with at least one lockable gate for ingress and egress, and shall be
lighted from dusk to dawn. (If the storage facility includes more
than one access point, then all access points must be secured with
appropriate gate and lock.) Fences which are not less than six feet
in height which existed prior to adoption of this article shall be
permitted; however, if such fences are replaced, the new fence
shall be eight feet in height or as otherwise prescribed by the
Zoning Ordinance.
(4) The storage facility shall be available to the Millville Police
Department 24 hours a day, 365 days per year, and shall be open to
the public on weekdays during normal business hours and for
limited but reasonable hours on weekends. The applicants shall
specify the hours on which the facility will be open to the public on
weekends. The storage facility shall release a stored vehicle to the
owner thereof on such date as shall have been requested by said
owner, and storage charges shall not accrue beyond the requested
date of release.
(5) The tow operator shall have an employee on duty during all hours
in which the storage facility is open.
(6) The tow operator shall not charge a release fee or other charge for
releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business hours or
on weekends.
B. The City of Millville shall not be responsible for the processing of
licensure or any other documents required by the State of New Jersey
with regard to vehicles left abandoned at a repair facility. Vehicles left
abandoned at a repair facility, including those involved in accidents, are
the responsibility of the repair facility, per N.J.S.A. 39:10A-8.
A. When towing or storing a motor vehicle under the police tow list, the
towing charge and storage charge per vehicle shall not exceed those
charges as set forth in the following fee schedule.
(1) Towing.
(a) Days.
[1] First mile or less.
[a] Regular: $125.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 52-60.4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-60.5
35:1023
[b] Heavy duty: $450 per hour per truck (payable in
fifteen-minute increments); two-hour minimum per
truck.
[2] Each additional mile: $5.
(b) Nights, weekends and New Jersey State holidays:
[1] First mile or less.
[a] Regular: $125.
[b] Heavy duty: $450 per hour per truck (payable in
fifteen-minute increments); two-hour minimum per
truck.
[2] Each additional mile: $5.
(2) Storage of vehicles, per day.
(a) Inside building.
[1] Regular: $35.
[2] Heavy duty: $100.
(b) Outside secured.
[1] Regular: $30.
[2] Heavy duty: $65.
(3) Additional fees.
(a) Recovery fee: $150. Recovery fee shall include oil dry (three
forty-pound bags).
(b) Each additional oil dry: $15 per bag.
(4) There will be no charge for towing of all non-heavy-duty City of
Millville vehicles within the City of Millville and the County of
Cumberland.
(5) There shall be no additional charges other than provided herein.
B. Tow vehicles transporting multiple motor vehicles at one time may
charge the applicable fee for each such vehicle transported.
C. The towing rates shall be calculated based on the total distance
traveled from the point of tow to the tow operator's base of service by
way of the shortest available route. Fractions may be rounded up to the
nearest whole mile.
D. The City Clerk shall make available to the public, during normal
business hours, a copy of this article and the fee schedule of licensed
towing operators.
§ 52-60.5 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-60.5
35:1024
§ 52-60.6. Miscellaneous provisions.
E. There shall be no additional charges other than those provided in the
fee schedule.
A. The City Clerk and the Millville Police Department shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
B. Abandoned vehicles.
(1) The City of Millville Police Department may authorize the towing
and storage of motor vehicles located on public streets or public
property which are unregistered, abandoned or illegally parked or
which are permitted to be towed and stored pursuant to state
statute or state regulations.
(2) Abandoned or unlicensed motor vehicles which are in violation of
§ 52-1 of the Millville City Code shall be subject to enforcement
procedures as established in the aforesaid section.
C. A tow operator shall not tow motor vehicles located in the public rightof-
way or on private property unless authorized to do so by the owner of
the vehicle or by the Police Department. This article, however, does not
preclude a towing operator licensed by the City or state from towing
motor vehicles located on private property in accordance with state
licensure privileges.
D. Motor vehicles which remain unclaimed by the owner or other person
having legal right thereto shall be disposed of pursuant to the
applicable provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes. The last
known owner of an abandoned vehicle, or the owner of the property
from which an abandoned vehicle is removed, shall be responsible for
all towing fees or charges, storage fees or charges, road service fees or
charges, and any other fees permitted by law.
E. The Millville Police Department may make periodic inspections of
facilities, equipment and service and, upon request, shall be provided
full access to equipment or property. Such inspections shall be made
quarterly, semiannually, or annually, as determined by the applicable
City official, but in no case shall such inspections be made less than
annually.
F. The towing operator shall notify the vehicle owner, by written form
acknowledged by the owner at the time of the tow, or by certified mail
within three days of the tow, of towing and storage fees and removal of
the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the towing operator to
obtain all information regarding the vehicle owner at the time of the
tow.
G. Storage by Police Department.
§ 52-60.5 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-60.6
35:1025
(1) The Police Department shall have the right to store at its own
facilities motor vehicles towed at its direction or confiscated in
suspected crimes. All licensed towing operators shall extend
storage to the City of Millville Police Department and, if so
requested, shall provide separate storage space for exclusive use of
the Police Department.
(2) Abandoned vehicles or vehicles confiscated by the Police
Department are to be stored as authorized by the Police
Department to assure protection of the vehicle and to provide
security of said vehicle until appropriately disposed of by the Police
Department.
(3) The towing operator shall not release a designated police hold
vehicle without the proper release form approval from the Millville
Police Department.
H. All towing operators shall provide adequate public posting of charges at
their primary place of business and storage facility.
I. Towing operators shall not pile vehicles or park towed vehicles on
public streets or sidewalks.
J. All towing operators shall maintain a record of each motor vehicle
towed, stored and released and of all services rendered, which records
shall be maintained at one central location and retained for a period of
not less than five years.
K. Discharged petroleum or hazardous substances. Pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, including N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11g,
Subdivision c, any person in any way responsible for a discharge of
petroleum or hazardous substances shall be strictly liable, jointly and
severally, without regard to fault, for all costs of cleanup and removal of
the discharge from the public right-of-way and private property within
the area of the spill. The tow operator and/or facility owner shall be
responsible for the cleanup and removal of any spill or discharge of
petroleum or hazardous substances at its storage facility. The facility
owner may choose to take action against the vehicle owner for the cost
of such cleanup and removal. The responsible party shall contact the
NJDEP Action Line to report any spills or leaks as required by N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11e.
L. This article is not intended to regulate or set fees for nonbasic towing
services or the towing or storage of trucks and buses. Such service, if
requested, shall be billed at reasonable prevailing rates. The towing
contractor shall submit a list of fees in advance for nonbasic towing to
the City Clerk, who shall have the sole discretion in determining
reasonable prevailing rates.
§ 52-60.6 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-60.6
35:1026
ARTICLE XIV
Urinating in a Public Place
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005114]
§ 52-61. Findings and purpose.
The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that urinating
in a public place is an affront to public decency. The purpose of these
regulations is to prohibit these actions in a public place.
§ 52-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to any alley, boardwalk, bridge, driveway, park, parking lot,
plaza, public street or sidewalk, or the doorways and entranceways to any
building which front on any of the aforesaid places.
§ 52-63. Regulations.
§ 52-64. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty under this article shall be subject to a fine up to and
including $200 for a first offense, up to and including $400 for a second
offense, and up to and including $500 and up to and including 30 days of
community service for a third or subsequent offense.
A. It is unlawful for any person to urinate in a public place, except in a
structure designated for that purpose.
B. It is unlawful for any person to urinate on private property that is
customarily used for commercial purposes by the public, except in a
structure designated for that purpose.
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XV as XIV and its original
§§ 52-51 and 52-52 as §§ 52-61 through 52-64. It also repealed former Art. XIV,
Unauthorized Taps of Cable Television Services.
§ 52-61 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-64
35:1027

ARTICLE XV
Working on Motor Vehicles on Public Streets
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005115]
§ 52-65. Findings and purpose.
§ 52-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles.
§ 52-67. Regulations.
§ 52-68. Violations and penalties.
A person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to a
fine up to and including $500, or community service up to and including 30
days or imprisonment up to and including 30 days, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
A. The governing body of the City of Millville finds and declares that it is a
significant risk to public health, safety and welfare when a person
works on a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is located on a public
street.
B. The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit this activity, except in
limited authorized circumstances.
A. It is unlawful for any person to perform mechanical repairs or other
repairs to a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is located on a public
street within the City of Millville.
B. This regulation shall not apply to a motor vehicle which has become
disabled on the public street, and the purpose of the repairs is to
effectuate the immediate removal of the motor vehicle from the public
street to the private property of the owner or to a commercial garage
for further repairs.
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XVI as Art. XV and its original
§§ 52-53 and 52-54 as §§ 52-65 through 52-68.
§ 52-65 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-68
35:1029

ARTICLE XVI
Noise116
[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2-2017; amended 3-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 12-2017]
§ 52-69. (Reserved)
§ 52-70. Declaration of findings and policy.
§ 52-71. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this article have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with
a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or
its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is
more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services, including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of
science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and whereas the people have a right to, and
should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound.
B. Now therefore, it is the policy of the City of Millville to prevent
excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
C. This article shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources
within the City of Millville.
116. Editor's Note: Former Art. XVI, Sex Offenders, was repealed 7-21-2009 by Ord. No.
25-2009.
§ 52-69 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-71
35:1031
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator, and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of
the normal configuration of the equipment. "Multidwelling unit building"
means any building comprising two or more dwelling units, including, but
not limited to, apartments, condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses,
townhouses, and attached residences.
MULTIUSE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
be currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by an NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
B.
§ 52-71 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-71
35:1032
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the vertical boundary that separates one
parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or
commercial property; the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling
unit that is part of a multidwelling unit building; or on a multiuse property
as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries between the two
portions of the property on which different categories of activity are being
performed (e.g., if the multiuse property is a building which is residential
upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be
the interface between the residential area and the commercial area, or
if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC unit on the same
parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of the receiving
unit). Note: This definition shall not apply to a commercial source and a
commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of property
(e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 52-72. Applicability.
A. This noise ordinance applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
§ 52-71 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-72
35:1033
§ 52-73. Exemptions.
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multiuse properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities (i.e., nonprofits and/or religious
facilities);
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multiuse properties;
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in §§ 52-78 and 52-79 below, the provisions of this
article shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA)117 FEMA or other government agencies to
the extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I, II and III, except as provided for in § 52-78
below.118
117. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
118. Editor’s Note: Said tables are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 52-72 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-74
35:1034
§ 52-74. Enforcement officers.
§ 52-75. Measurement protocols.
§ 52-76. Maximum permissible sound levels.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
ordinance and pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level
meter (i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance
determinations) and pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 52-75B of this ordinance and with the definition of "real property line"
as contained herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling, and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same, and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 52-72A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I, II
or III, except as specified in § 52-75B.119
B. Impulsive sound: Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
119. Editor’s Note: Said tables are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 52-74 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-76
35:1035
§ 52-77. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
IV120 when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
the measurement protocol in § 52-75B of this ordinance. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
§ 52-78. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
A. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.121
B. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
C. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound operated on
a public space or public right-of-way from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator.
D. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property
line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort,
and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the
unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a Noise Control Officer or
Noise Control Investigator.
(1) Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but
not be limited to:
120. Editor’s Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
121. Editor’s Note: Said tables are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 52-76 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-78
35:1036
§ 52-79. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore nonminor violations.
§ 52-80. Penalties for offenses.
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be cause for a notice of
violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject
to a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum
penalty pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December
2014. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
§ 52-78 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-80
35:1037
C. Upon identification of a violation of this article, the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this Ordinance that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 52-71 of this article)
an NOV shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq., where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the municipality. It
shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a formal
enforcement action, a final agency action or a final legal
determination that a violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV
may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a nonminor violation, the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected, an NOPA with a civil
penalty of not more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014, will be issued. If
a nonminor violation is immediately corrected, an NOV without a civil
penalty shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation
occurs again (within 12 months of the initial violation) an NOPA shall be
issued regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected or
not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, an NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of an NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
§ 52-80 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-80
35:1038
§ 52-81. Severability; repealer; construal of provisions.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this article is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of the ordinance shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this article are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
C. No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or
from other law.
§ 52-80 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 52-81
35:1039
Chapter 54
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2. Personnel policies — See Ch. 46.
§ 52-81 MILLVILLE CODE § 52-81
35:1040
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 23-2008]
§ 54-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the defined contribution retirement
program:
§ 54-2. Positions exempt from membership.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from defined
contribution retirement program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Municipal Administrator.
B. Municipal Attorney.
C. Municipal Engineer.
D. Municipal Prosecutor.
E. Judge of the Municipal Court.
F. Sewer Plant Superintendent.
G. Sewer Superintendent.
H. Superintendent of Public Property.
I. Superintendent of Public Works.
J. Superintendent of Recreation.
K. Street Superintendent.
L. Water Superintendent.
M. Water Superintendent/Sewer Superintendent.
A. Tax Collector.
B. Chief Financial Officer.
C. Construction Code Official.
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
E. Tax Assessor.
F. Planning Director.
G. Registered Municipal Clerk.
§ 54-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 54-2
35:1041
§ 54-3. Implementation.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
I. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 54-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 54-3
35:1042
Chapter 56
SEWER AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer and water connection fees — See Ch.
11, § 11-92E(2).
Sanitary sewer performance standards — See
Ch. 30, § 30-175.
Water supply standards — See Ch. 30,
§ 30-186.
Standards for plumbing work — See Ch. 35,
Art. II.
§ 54-3 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 54-3
35:1043

ARTICLE I
Sewer Utility
§ 56-1. Creation of Sewer Utility.
From and after January 1, 1967, the sanitary sewer service of the City shall
be operated as a self-liquidating utility, and charges for such service shall
be imposed upon users thereof. The revenues derived shall be dedicated to
the purposes of the service as a self-liquidating utility.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — The piping or other appurtenance necessary
to connect the premises owned or leased by the customer to the sewer
lateral located at the curbline.
SEWER LATERAL — The "Y" connection or "T" connection and the service
pipe extending from the sewer main to the curbline.
SEWER MAIN — The city-owned piping in or along public highways and
streets or along privately and publicly owned rights-of-way used for the
transmission of sewage.
§ 56-3. Deadline for making required connection. [Amended
4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
It is the policy of the City to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
These regulations reflect a realization of the benefits of connecting existing
properties to the municipal sewer system to protect the public health, safety
and welfare. Where there has been an extension of sewer mains, the owners
of property located within 100 feet of the sewer main measured from their
property line shall be required to connect their premises to the municipal
sewer system within 180 days after notification from the City to make the
connection.
A. Exception. Unless otherwise required by state law, a residential
property owner may delay connection to the municipal sewer system if
the property owner already has an existing private subsurface sewage
disposal system servicing the premises that is operating properly.
B. Testing protocol. It is recommended that a test of the private
subsurface sewage disposal system shall be conducted at least once
every three years at the expense of the property owner in accordance
with the Technical Guidance for Inspections of On-Site Wastewater
Treatment and Disposal Systems published by NJDEP. If the property
owner chooses to undertake the test, the test shall be performed by a
licensed professional engineer. A copy of the written report setting
forth the results of the test shall be filed with the Cumberland County
Health Department for review and further action, if required. A copy of
§ 56-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-3
35:1045
§ 56-4. Notice to property owners to connect to completed main.
When there has been completion of construction of sewer mains, the
Superintendent is directed to give written notice to adjacent property
owners within 30 days of completion of construction, that the property
owners must connect their house or other building to the system. Said
notice shall be in writing and sent by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the property owners last known address.
§ 56-5. Requirements for sewer connection.
the report also shall be filed with the Superintendent of the Municipal
Sewer Utility.
C. Noncompliance. If the Cumberland County Health Department
determines that the private system which services the premises is
malfunctioning, the Superintendent shall notify the property owner that
connection to the municipal sewer system must be made within 180
days. If the private system represents an immediate health risk as
determined by the Cumberland County Health Department, the
connection shall be made forthwith.
D. Annual report. The Superintendent of the Sewer Utility shall file an
annual report with the Commissioner in charge of the Department and
the City Clerk which contains the following information: The location of
each property (block and lot number and street address) excepted from
the connection to the municipal sewer system pursuant to these
regulations; the name and address of each property owner; the date of
each test report received for the subject property; and the results set
forth in the test report (pass or fail).
A. No person, firm or corporation shall make any direct connection with
the public sewer system or alter or repair any connection with the
public sewer system without having first obtained all appropriate
written permits from the City of Millville.
B. Each building shall have an individual sewer lateral and individual
customer service line when connected to the public sewer system
unless an exception to this requirement is approved by the City
Engineer. Existing connections found to be in violation of this
subsection shall be required to connect properly to the public sewer
system within 180 days after notice to make the correction, unless an
exception to this requirement is approved by the City Engineer for good
cause. It is the general policy of the City that cross-connections
involving separate buildings owned by separate customers shall not be
permitted.
C. Compliance with existing regulations. Each permit to connect with the
public sewer system shall require that the applicant for the permit
agree that it or he shall carefully make the connection with the public
sewer system in the manner prescribed by the rules and regulations in
§ 56-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-5
35:1046
§ 56-6. Minimum diameter of sewer mains.
All sewer mains laid within the City shall be at least eight inches or more in
diameter or as may be prescribed by the City Engineer.
§ 56-7. Application for extension of service.
Applications for extension of service shall be made to the office of the City
Clerk who shall report the same to the Superintendent of the Sewer Utility
and to the City Engineer. The Superintendent of the Sewer Utility, together
with the City Engineer, shall estimate the cost of the extension and shall
estimate the annual revenue to be derived from the extension of service.
§ 56-8. Allocation of cost for sewer extensions. [Amended 4-2-2002
by Ord. No. 13-2002]
When an application for the extension of sewer service is filed with the
City, the following requirements shall apply and the cost of the projected
extension shall be paid in the following manner at the option of the City:
existence. Secondly, it or he shall indemnify and save harmless the City
from all accidents or damages caused by any negligence in protecting
his work, or any imperfect or inadequate work done. Thirdly, it or he
shall faithfully comply with the regulations of the City and shall replace
and restore the sidewalk, pavement or street surface over any opening
that may be made. All work performed shall be subject to the inspection
and approval of the City Engineer.
D. Qualified contractor required. Connections with the public sewer
system shall be made only by a plumber licensed by the State of New
Jersey or by some other person duly authorized by the city. Connections
shall be made with suitable material approved by the city. All work
included in the construction of connections with the public sewer
system shall be done to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or
Superintendent of the Sewer Utility, and the person or persons
performing the work shall accept as final all decisions of the City
Engineer or Superintendent of the Sewer Utility as to the fitness of
materials furnished or work performed and shall immediately replace
all materials or work rejected.
E. Inspections. No connections shall be covered until inspected by a duly
authorized representative of the city.
A. All construction shall be completed by the applicant in accordance with
the design standards approved by the City Engineer and in conformity
with the Land Use and Development Regulations contained in Chapter
30.
B. The construction shall thereafter become the property of the City upon
connection with the sewer system of the City, the approval of the
§ 56-5 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-8
35:1047
§ 56-9. City may provide for assessment as local improvement.
In lieu of the foregoing, the City may proceed to extend and install service
connections, including the construction and installation of sewer mains
and sewer laterals and other appurtenances as may be necessary and
assess the cost thereof as a local improvement. While the City reserves the
right to exercise this power at its option in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, it will be the policy of the City to do so upon the written
consent of 2/3 of the owners of property to be benefited. This percentage
will be determined by calculating the estimated cost of such extension and
the damages and benefits attributable to each owner affected thereby.
§ 56-10. Septic tank emptying permits.
Septic tank emptying permits must be obtained from the Superintendent
of the Sewer Utility designating the domestic origin by name and address.
The rate charged by the Sewer Utility shall be $0.05 per gallon. The
Superintendent of the Sewer Utility shall have the authority to set
procedures for the emptying of said effluent, including the authority to
suspend all such discharges.
construction by the City Engineer, and the adoption of an ordinance
accepting the dedication of the improvements.
C. The City shall require the applicant to pay the entire cost for the
installation of sewer mains, sewer laterals, and related improvements
where no discernible public benefit is involved. This requirement shall
apply to extensions of sewer service to individuals and to commercial,
industrial, institutional, and residential developments.
D. In the alternative, the City may negotiate an agreement with the
applicant to share a portion of the cost for the installation of sewer
mains, sewer laterals, and related improvements where there is a
discernible public benefit involved. Before determining whether the
City will contribute to the cost of the project and in what proportion,
City officials shall consider the benefits the project will provide to
economic development and job creation, to existing sewer customers,
or to future commercial, industrial, institutional and residential
developments. Any agreement must be approved by resolution of the
governing body.
§ 56-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-10
35:1048
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use Regulations
§ 56-11. General provisions.
The Director of Public Works of the City is authorized to promulgate
regulations from time to time to implement the intent and purpose of this
article.
§ 56-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the use of public
sewers and to establish the rights of inspection.
§ 56-13. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in these regulations shall be as follows:
APPROVED TEST PROCEDURE — An analysis performed in accordance
with the analytical test procedures approved under 40 CFR Part 136.
Analysis for those test procedures not included therein shall be performed
in accordance with procedures approved by the state or the City. All
analyses required to be performed under the sewer use regulations shall be
performed by an approved test procedure for the parameter or condition
being analyzed by an NJDEP certified laboratory for the parameter.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in milligrams per liter.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine expressed in milligrams
per liter, or parts per million by weight, which will complete the normal
reactions with all chemicals and materials in the sewage leaving an excess
of 0.1 milligram per liter (0.1 parts per million by weight), after 30 minutes
contact time at room temperature of approximately 70º F.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water, in standard platinum cobalt units.
COMBINED WASTE — A wastewater containing surface or stormwater.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform
bacteria, and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future
specified and controlled in the City's NJPDES permit for its wastewater
treatment facilities where the facilities have been designed and used to
reduce or remove such pollutants.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample of individual samples (aliquots) of at
least 100 ml, collected at periodic intervals over a specified time period.
If not specifically stated otherwise, a composite sample is to be a twentyfour-
hour composite representing 24 consecutive hourly samples of equal
§ 56-11 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-13
35:1049
volume. Flow weighted composite samples will not be required unless
specified by the City.
COOLING WATER — Any water used for the purpose of carrying away
excess heat, and which may contain biocides used to control biological
growth or other additives to protect the cooling system against corrosion or
scaling.
CUSTOMER — The applicant for sewer service at one household, business,
commercial user or industrial user, whether the owner or a tenant.
DOMESTIC WASTE — The liquid waste resulting from residences,
buildings, institutions, septic tanks, holding tanks, and industrial sources,
including the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food,
wastewater consisting of human excrement, gray water and similar wastes
from sanitary conveniences, and swimming pool water, but excluding any
mixture which includes any industrial waste, process wastewater,
contaminated stormwater, contaminated groundwater, or boiler blowdown.
Any wastewater with concentration above the following criteria will not be
considered domestic waste:
BOD5 300 mg/l
TSS 300 mg/l
EFFLUENT — Wastewater after some degree of treatment, flowing out of
any treatment device or facilities.
FLOATABLE OIL — Fat or grease in a physical state which will separate by
gravity from wastewater through treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of "floatable oil" if it is
properly pretreated in such a manner that the discharged wastewater does
not interfere with the wastewater facilities.
FORCE MAIN — A pipeline carrying flow under pressure.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.
GREASE OR OIL — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent or other
acceptable means.
HEAVY METALS — The electro-negative metals with a density greater than
five grams per cubic centimeter.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined in this article.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user that discharges, causes or allows the
discharge of industrial waste into the City system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The process wastewater and other liquid wastes
resulting from any industrial manufacturing process defined in the latest
edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, or is not domestic
waste as defined herein, or is any wastewater from any service process
§ 56-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-13
35:1050
which because of the contaminants it contains is comparable to industrial
wastewater including such wastewater mixed with water or domestic waste.
INFILTRATION — Water entering the utility sewer system from the ground,
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints,
connection, or manhole walls.
INFLOW — Water discharged into the utility sewer system from such
sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains,
foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers and
combined sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street
washwaters, or drainage.
INFLUENT — Wastewater raw or partly treated, flowing into any
wastewater treatment device or facility.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources both:
LOCAL SEWER — Any sewer or system of sewers which is connected to the
utility sewer system and owned and/or operated by any person other than
the utility.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The average of all tests values for a pollutant
discharged or permitted to be discharged in a calendar month. If only one
test is performed in a month, then that one test value shall be considered to
be a monthly average.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the
discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the
contiguous zone and the ocean. New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NJPDES) is the state program.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, uses or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's
NJPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including
NJDEP regulations contained in New Jersey's sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
B.
§ 56-13 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-13
35:1051
of any requirement of the City's NJPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association (public or private), group or society and includes the State of
New Jersey, and agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions
created by or pursuant to state law.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS — That portion of the total extractable
grease or fats, which is not retained on an activated alumina absorption
column after elutriating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage, sludge, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive substance, thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal or agricultural
waste or other residue discharged into the City's sewer system or waters of
the state.
POTW — Publicly operated treatment works (POTW).
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property including land, improvements, or
appurtenances, as buildings, ground, etc.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment by application of physical, chemical and/
or biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in, or alter the
nature of the pollutant properties in, a wastewater other than residential
prior to its direct or indirect discharge into the municipality's wastewater
facilities and to remove illegal and/or undesirable waste constituents, or to
reduce the strength of the waste prior to discharge into the municipality's
wastewater facilities.
PUMPING STATION — A facility in which wastewater is conveyed from a
lower hydraulic elevation to a higher hydraulic elevation using mechanical
or pneumatic devices.
REGULATORY AGENCY — Agencies such as but not limited to the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Corps of Engineers
which has authority over the operation of and/or discharges from the
utilities wastewater treatment plant.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm- ,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such ground- , surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
§ 56-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-13
35:1052
SEWER SYSTEM — All collection sewers, pumping stations, force mains,
wastewater treatment plants, and appurtenances thereto within the City
owned and operated by the City Sewer Utility.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers with no particle having a diameter greater than 1/2 inch in
any direction, excluding household garbage wastes.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user which meets any
one of the following criteria:
SLUG — Any discharge of waste sewage or industrial waste which in
connection of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or immediately following any
form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the City's Sewer Utility or his
duly appointed deputy, agent or representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
It is subject to any Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
A.
It discharges an average of 25,000 gallons or more of industrial waste
per day to the City.
B.
It discharges an average daily volume of industrial waste which volume
equals or exceeds 5% of the City's average daily dry-weather influent
volume.
C.
It discharges industrial waste that contributes 5% or more of the City's
average daily dry-weather loading of BOD5, CBOD5, or TSS.
D.
It discharges industrial waste which, before any pretreatment by the
industrial user, is equal to 5% or more of the average daily dry-weather
influent loading to the City of any of the pollutants listed in N.J.A.C.
7:14A, Appendix B, Tables II through VI, inclusive.
E.
The discharge consists of landfill leachate or a mixture of landfill
leachate and surface or ground water.
F.
The discharge consists of polluted groundwater, which is pumped from
the ground to decontaminate the groundwater.
G.
The industrial user presents, or is found by NJDEP or by the City
to present, a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the City's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
such that SIU designation is appropriate.
H.
§ 56-13 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-13
35:1053
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Those pollutants or combinations of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon exposure,
ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly or
indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information
available, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic
mutations, physiological malfunctions, including malfunctions in
reproduction or physical deformation in such an organism or their offspring.
Toxic pollutants shall include, but are not limited to, those pollutants
designated under Section 307 of the Federal Act or Section 4 of the state
Act.
UNSHREDDED GARBAGE — Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food or food products and from the handling, storing and sale
of produce, excluding household garbage wastes.
USEPA — Refers to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or
successor agency.
USER — Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the wastewater treatment facilities of the City.
UTILITY — The City Sewer Utility under the authority and jurisdiction of the
Director of Public Works.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into
or permitted to enter the City's treatment facilities.
§ 56-14. (Reserved)122
§ 56-15. Use of public sewers.
A. Sanitary sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters into any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm sewers. Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City, but under no
circumstances into sanitary sewers. Unpolluted industrial cooling water
or processed water may be discharged by approval of the City to a
storm sewer or natural outlet, but under no circumstances into the
sanitary sewers.
C. Prohibited wastewater discharge. No person shall discharge or deposit
or allow to be discharged or deposited into the wastewater treatment
system and facilities any wastewater which contains the following:
122. Editor's Note: Former § 56-14, Maintenance of customer service line, was repealed
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 36-2014.
§ 56-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-15
35:1054
(1) No person shall introduce into the City's system any pollutants
which cause pass-through or interference as set forth in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and defined in these regulations.
(2) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW
including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140º F. or 60º C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(3) Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 or with a
pH higher than 10.0 unless the POTW is specifically designed to
accommodate such discharges.
(4) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that
the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40º C. or
104º F. unless the NJDEP, upon request of the POTW, approves
alternate temperature limits.
(5) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(6) Noxious materials. Incompatible pollutants which whether singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are noxious or malodorous, are
capable of creating a public nuisance, or are or may be sufficient to
prevent entry into the treatment facilities for its maintenance and
repair.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(8) Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground
or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in
the treatment works, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension. This prohibition does not apply to the use of garbage
disposal units in private dwellings whose only discharge is
domestic sewage.
(9) Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use
and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the sewer
treatment facilities or personnel operating the system. Any
introduction of radioactive waste must be in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 7:28-11.2.
(10) Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous wastes which will or may
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise interference
with the proper operation of the treatment facilities. Prohibited
§ 56-15 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-15
35:1055
materials include, but are not limited to: grease, improperly
shredded garbage, animal guts or tissues, diseased human organs
or tissue fluids, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
wood, plastic, tar, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, and similar substances. (Other materials may be specified at
the discretion of the Director of Public Works.)
(11) Discolored material. Wastes with color not removable by the
treatment works.
(12) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(13) Any slug discharge as defined herein.
(14) Substances interfering with sludge management. Any substances
which may cause the City's sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation
and reuse, as defined by NJDEP's beneficial reuse policy, or to
interfere with the reclamation process where the City is processing
a reuse and reclamation program or to make the City's sludge not
acceptable for ultimate disposal at the City's current ultimate
disposal site. In no case shall a substance discharged into the
sewer system cause the disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under Section 405 of the New Jersey Guidelines for the
Utilization and Disposal of Municipal Industrial Sludge and
Septage; Section 503 of the Federal Clean Water Act, any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Sludge Waste Disposal Act, and Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or the New Jersey
Guidelines for the Utilization and Disposal of Municipal and
Industrial Sludges and Septage.
(15) Any pollutants or other substances including filamentous bacteria
or other organisms, dissolved ions or any chemicals which cause
pass-through or interference as set forth in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and
defined in these regulations. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
36-2014]
D. Limitations on wastewater discharge. The following table lists the
maximum concentration of pollutants permitted in wastewater
discharges to the municipal wastewater treatment plant. Dilution of any
wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements
shall be considered a violation of this article. [Amended 2-7-2006 by
Ord. No. 4-2006123]
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the repeal of the previous table "shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act committed in
violation of this section prior to the effective date of this ordinance."
§ 56-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-15
35:1056
TABLE
Maximum Permissible Concentration
Milligrams Per Litter (mg/l)
Parameter Limitation Concentration
Arsenic Maximum daily 0.026
Cadmium Maximum daily 0.059
Chromium Maximum daily 0.110
Copper Maximum daily 1.300
Cyanide Maximum daily *
Lead Maximum daily 0.410
Mercury Maximum daily 0.010
Molybdenum Maximum daily 2.700
Nickel Maximum daily 0.100
Selenium Maximum daily 0.320
Silver Maximum daily 5.900
Zinc Maximum daily 4.400
Methoxychlor Maximum daily *
PBCs Maximum daily *
Toxaphene Maximum daily *
CBOD Weekly average 500
CBOD Monthly average 500
Oil and grease Weekly average 45
Oil and grease Monthly average 30
TSS Weekly average 1,500
TSS Monthly average 250
NOTE:
* Prohibited from discharge.
E. Pretreatment requirements. When pretreatment standards are adopted
by NJDEP or USEPA for any given class of industries, or those regulator
agencies otherwise limit the discharge of any substance or pollutant,
the users will be required to reduce the discharge of these substances
into the sewers to the levels prescribed by those regulatory agencies.
Additionally, the users shall comply with more stringent standards
necessitated by local conditions as determined by the City of Millville.
F. Compliance with written rules and regulations required. All users of the
wastewater facility shall comply with the requirements of the written
rules and regulations of the Director of Public Works, which regulations
§ 56-15 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-15
35:1057
shall become effective upon filing in the office of the City Clerk after
the effective date of this article.
G. Certain discharges to natural outlets prohibited. It shall be unlawful to
discharge any wastewater or other polluting material into any natural
outlet within the City of Millville, except where suitable treatment has
been provided and where a NJPDES permit has been obtained from the
appropriate governmental authority where required.
H. Injury to or tampering with wastewater facilities prohibited. No person
shall maliciously, intentionally, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is part of the wastewater facilities of the City of
Millville.
I. Notice.
(1) Any user of the City's sewer system shall give notice to the City if
there is:
(a) Any new introduction of pollutants into the City's sewer system
which would be subject to Sections 301 or 306 of the federal
Act if it were directly discharging those pollutants; or
(b) Any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants
being introduced into the City's system at the time of issuance
of the permit.
(2) For purposes of this article, adequate notice shall include
information on the quality and quantity of effluent introduced into
the City system and any anticipated impact of such change on the
quality or quantity of effluent to be discharged from the City's
wastewater treatment system. Notice shall be based upon sampling
data as required to be collected under NJDEP SIU permit, if
applicable, and/or under § 56-16D(2).
J. Trading credits. The City is committed to fostering a positive business
climate, and the credit trading program will be recognized as an
economic development resource for the City having a priority mission of
attracting new industry, jobs and tax ratables. Industries may apply to
the City to trade pretreatment credits among each other. The City will
entertain trading of pretreatment credits among existing industries or
among existing industries and a prospective industry which is
considering location within the City.
(1) When existing industries desire to trade credits other than BOD5
and TSS, the industries doing the trading must demonstrate that
the traded credit of a certain pollutant will result in the same or
less loading of the particular pollutant from the combined
industrial wastewater of the industries conducting the trading.
§ 56-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-15
35:1058
(2) When existing industries desire to trade BOD5 or TSS credits, the
industries can trade BOD5 and TSS credits equivalent to the
difference in actual BOD5 and TSS loading discharged into the
City's sewer system by the industry yielding the credits and the
industry receiving the credits. The difference would be computed
using the maximum loading allowed for the industry yielding the
credits, as defined by the maximum allowed BOD5 and TSS
concentrations in § 56-15D.
(3) When existing industries are trading credits, the industries must
submit 12 effluent wastewater data points that describe their
wastewater characteristics for the pollutant for which trading
rights are being applied. All data must be a composite sample as
defined herein. The data must be temporally spaced over a
minimum of three months.
(4) When an existing industry desires to trade BOD5 or TSS credits to
a prospective industry, the industries can trade BOD5 and TSS
credits equivalent to the difference in actual BOD5 and TSS loading
discharged into the City's sewer system by the industry yielding the
credits and the industry receiving the credits. The difference would
be computed using the maximum loading allowed for the industry
yielding the credits, as defined by the maximum allowed BOD5 and
TSS concentrations in § 56-15D.
(5) When an existing industry is trading BOD5 and TSS credits to a
prospective industry, the same data must be collected as required
by Subsection J(3) above. However, the data would need to be
substantiated by the prospective industry during the first six
months of its operation.
(6) The City reserves the right to request more data from industries
which operate on a cyclical or seasonal basis where the operation
results in the generation of wastewater that is highly variable in
characteristics. A pretreatment credit agreement must be entered
into with the affected industries and the City. Such agreement shall
identify the agreed-upon credit and provide the City with the
means to enforce the new limits for the affected industries.
K. Water conservation. It is the City's policy to encourage water
conservation. Therefore, an industry may apply to the City for a change
to increase its concentration-based limitation if it can demonstrate its
wastewater volume will be reduced and pollutant concentrations
increased as a result of water conservation measures.
(1) The industry's application should consist of a letter signed by the
principal executive officer familiar with the day-to-day operation of
the wastewater treatment facility stating the details of the
requested change. This letter must be accompanied by an
engineering report that addresses the water conservation
measures including an estimate of the water volume reduction and
§ 56-15 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-15
35:1059
§ 56-16. Sampling, monitoring, inspecting, metering and reporting.
change in wastewater pollutant characteristics. Wastewater flow
data and pollutant data for those pollutants that the industry is
requesting a change of concentration limit, for the preceding
twelve-month period, must be submitted with the application to
define the existing baseline conditions. The flow data must be in the
form of daily flow records, and the pollutant data must be at least
representative of 24 hours' composite sampling once per month.
In all cases, the City will seek to approve only those applications
where water use is the only component of change of wastewater
characteristics. If other process changes are being performed, and
are necessary to be performed to allow the decrease of water use,
calculations must be submitted showing the change of pollutant
concentration resulting from the process changes separate from
the change of pollutant concentration resulting from water
conservation measures.
(2) In no case will the City approve a higher pollutant loading to the
sewage treatment system as a result of the industry's application
for change of concentration limit for that pollutant because of
water conservation measures.
(3) Once approved for a change of concentration limit under this
application procedure, an industry must submit daily wastewater
flow data. Additionally, the industry must submit one time each
month for 12 consecutive months a twenty-four-hour composite
pollutant sample to the City to demonstrate that the changes of its
industrial processes are in accordance with the application which
was approved.
A. Sampling. All industrial users shall provide a structure for the sampling
of wastewater before the point of discharge into a sanitary sewer. The
sampling structure shall be constructed and maintained by the
industrial user at its own expense and shall be kept safe and accessible
at all times to the City of Millville. Sampling structure design shall be
subject to the approval of the City of Millville.
B. Metering and other facilities. When required by the Director of Public
Works, an industrial user shall install and maintain additional facilities
at its own expense including, for example, meters, sealed automatic
monitoring systems, or other appurtenances to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of waste. Construction, installation, and
maintenance of such additional facilities shall be the responsibility of
the industrial user which shall keep these facilities safe and accessible
to the City of Millville at all times. Design and construction of such
additional facilities shall be subject to the approval of the City of
Millville.
(1) If a sewage metering device is installed the cost of said installation
shall be the responsibility of the user installing it.
§ 56-15 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-16
35:1060
(2) The metering device shall have an accuracy requirement of +/-
2.0%.
(3) The device shall be calibrated annually.
(4) In the event the device becomes inoperable, the Sewer Utility
should be notified of the date and time it became inoperable along
with the date and time the meter is returned to operation. A
reading, by Sewer Utility personnel, must be done on the date the
meter becomes inoperable and again just before the meter is put
back in operation.
(5) The meter shall be installed in such a manner that easy access is
provided for the purpose of reading and inspection by utility
personnel.
(6) Information such as drawings, manuals, description of the
metering device, etc., should be supplied to the Sewer Utility and
the City Engineer's office for review and approval before
installation.
C. Inspections. As a precondition for the right to discharge waste in any
form into the sewers and wastewater facilities of the City of Millville, all
users shall provide immediate access to their facilities at any time
during which there is a discharge to the wastewater facility. Access
shall be made available to the City for the purpose of checking the
quality of the discharge, taking samples, and making tests of the
discharge, or for the purpose of enforcing this article. All users shall
provide access to property and premises for inspection to determine if
there are any violations of this article. Each industrial user shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the City of Millville in taking
samples and in making the tests.
D. Submission of information concerning waste discharge required. As
precondition for the right to discharge waste in any form into the
sewers and wastewater facilities of the City of Millville, all persons
subject to this article shall be required to provide information to the
Director of Public Works as needed to determine compliance with this
article. This information may include:
(1) Wastewater discharge rate and volume over a specified time
period.
(2) Chemical analysis of wastewater which shall allow the City to
continually evaluate the appropriateness of its current local limits.
As a minimum the frequency of such analyses shall be once per
quarter for all nonsignificant industrial users. Such chemical
analyses shall be for those pollutants which the City has current
limits in place as found on the table under § 56-15D. However, in
addition, all industries shall submit once per year the results of the
priority pollutant scan of their effluent as analyzed by a New Jersey
certified laboratory using procedures under 40 CFR Part 136. The
§ 56-16 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-16
35:1061
City Superintendent may waive the requirement for an industrial
user to submit an annual priority pollutant scan upon the showing
of two consecutive priority pollutant scans with nondetection
levels. The Superintendent may also withdraw said waiver if
deemed necessary. Furthermore, all significant industrial users
shall submit a copy of the NJDEP discharge monitoring reports
that are regularly sent to the NJDEP in compliance with their
NJDEP and SIU permit reporting requirements at the time these
reports are sent to the state. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
36-2014]
(3) Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality including but not limited to
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all products that are
discharged into the City's sewer system.
(4) Quantity and disposition of specified liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or
other materials important to sewer use control.
(5) A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer
pretreatment facility location.
(6) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(7) Details of systems designed to prevent and/or control the loss of
spilled materials to the sanitary sewer (i.e. spill prevention plan).
(8) Any other information required by the Director of Public Works
including a completed copy of the City's industrial wastewater
pretreatment survey and application for new industrial wastewater
connections.
E. Industrial wastewater monitoring and reports.
(1) All significant industrial users who discharge wastewaters to the
treatment works shall maintain such records of production and
related factors, effluent flows, and pollutant amounts of
concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with
the requirements of this article and any applicable state or federal
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Such records shall be made available upon request to the Director
of Public Works. All such records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of
NJDEP and the USEPA upon demand.
(3) Each significant industrial user discharging industrial waste into
the system shall install at its own cost and expense suitable
monitoring equipment to facilitate an accurate observation,
sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall be
maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at
all times.
§ 56-16 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-16
35:1062
(4) Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with City of Millville
requirements and all applicable construction standards and
specifications. Plans and specifications for all such work shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to construction.
F. Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests, and
analyses of the characteristics of wastewater, to which reference is
made in this article, shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Environment Federation, or other methods or procedures that may be
acceptable to the governmental authority requiring the measurements,
tests or analyses. Sampling method, location, time, duration and
frequency shall be determined on an individual basis by the City of
Millville.
G. Accidental discharge. If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with
or will be unable to comply with any prohibitions or limitations in these
regulations, the facility responsible for such discharge will take
immediate corrective action to prevent continued harm to the
treatment works system of the City.
H. Discharger reporting. Accidental discharges of toxic pollutants,
incompatible pollutants, or slug loads into the City's sewer system must
be reported to the City in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Two-hour notice. Within two hours of being aware of the discharge,
the industry representative must telephone the Superintendent at
(856) 825-7000 and report the following information: [Amended
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 36-2014]
(a) A description of the discharge.
(b) Steps being taken to determine the cause of noncompliance.
(c) Steps being taken to reduce and eliminate the noncomplying
discharge.
(2) Twenty-four-hour notice.
(a) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
and return to compliance.
(b) The cause of noncompliance.
(c) Steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent the
noncomplying discharge.
(d) An estimate of the threat to human health or the environment
posed by the discharge.
§ 56-16 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-16
35:1063
§ 56-17. Discontinuance of service by City.
(e) The measures the discharger has taken or is taking to
remediate the problem and any damage or injury to human
health or the environment, and to avoid a repetition of the
problem.
(f) Any revisions of the information already reported in the twohour
notice.
(g) Any unanticipated bypass or upset which violates any of the
City's maximum allowed limits as detailed in the sewer
regulations herein unless already addressed under the twohour
notice.
(3) Five-day notice. Written submission of all the above plus steps
taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncomplying discharge and any updating of information already
reported under either the two-hour or the twenty-four-hour notice.
I. Accidental discharge and slug control plans. At least once every two
years, the City shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user
needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The City may require
any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan.
Alternatively, the City may develop such a plan for any user. An
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge, practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or
slug discharge; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
A. Since it is impractical to discontinue sewer service to a customer for
violation of the sewer regulations, the Director in charge of the Water
Utility may discontinue water service to a sewer customer for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Misrepresentation of material facts in an application for extension
of sewer service.
§ 56-16 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-17
35:1064
§ 56-18. Enforcement procedure.
(2) Use of sewer system for any other property or purpose different
than described in the application for sewer service.
(3) Willful discharge of pollutants into the sewer system in violation of
§ 56-15.
(4) Tampering with any service pipe, meter, sewer lateral, or any other
appurtenance owned by the City.
(5) Vacancy.
(6) For failure to pay any connection fees, installation fee or sewer user
charge within 30 days of the due date.
(7) Refusal of reasonable access to the property for purposes of
inspecting, testing, reading, maintaining, installing or removing of
meters, or other purposes related to the proper operation of the
sewer system.
(8) Making or refusing to sever any cross-connection between a pipe or
fixture carrying sewage into the sewer system and a pipe or fixture
carrying sewage from any other source.
(9) Failure to repair a defective meter, defective customer service line,
defective sewer lateral, or other defective appurtenance within a
reasonable time after written notice has been given by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Utility.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Superintendent of the Sewer Utility
shall have the right to terminate sewer service temporarily to make
necessary repairs or connections in the event of a breakdown,
emergency, or any other unavoidable cause. The Superintendent,
however, shall use all reasonable and practical measures to notify the
customer of such discontinuance of service.
C. Disconnection and reconnection fees. The Superintendent is authorized
to charge the customer $25 for disconnection of service and an
additional $25 for reconnection of service. This fee shall be collected in
the same manner as other charges.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Director of Public Works or the
Superintendent finds that any person has violated or is violating the
regulations contained in this article, or any regulation adopted
pursuant to § 56-11 of this article, the Superintendent may serve upon
such person written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory
correction thereof.
B. Order to show cause. If the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the Director in charge of the Sewer Utility may issue an
order directed to the offending person requiring said person to show
§ 56-17 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-18
35:1065
cause before the Public Works Committee why any order should not
be made directing any or all of the following actions to be taken:
[Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]
(1) The termination of service;
(2) The immediate implementation of pretreatment procedures to
ensure compliance; and/or
(3) The payment of the additional cost incurred by the Sewer Utility as
a result of the violation.
(4) An administrative fee of $25 shall be assessed to cover the cost of
preparing and mailing the order to show cause.
C. Hearing. The Public Works Committee shall conduct a hearing no
sooner than 10 days after service of the order to show cause. The Public
Works Committee shall consist of the Utilities Collector or designee, the
Sewer Utility Superintendent or designee, the Water Utility
Superintendent or designee, the City Clerk or designee, and the Chief
Financial Officer or designee. A quorum of three persons shall be
required to conduct a hearing. The Public Works Committee shall
report its decision in each case to the Board of Commissioners with a
recommendation for a resolution to be adopted by the Board at the next
regularly scheduled Commission meeting after the hearing has been
completed.
D. Injunctive relief and damages. Any discharge in violation of the
provisions of this article or regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall
be considered grounds for legal action. If any person discharges
sewage, industrial waste or other wastes into the treatment facilities
contrary to the provisions of this article, the Board of Commissioners of
the City may authorize the City Solicitor to commence an action for
injunctive relief and appropriate legal damages in the Superior Court of
New Jersey.
E. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding any other provision
contained herein, the Municipal Court shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to hear alleged violations of this article. Any person who is
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, or an order of the Board of Commissioners
lawfully issued pursuant to the provision of this article, shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $1,000, or community service for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or incarceration for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
any combination of the foregoing in the sole discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. Each day that a violation occurs or continues after notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 56-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-19
35:1066
§ 56-19. Maintenance of sewer lateral and service line. [Amended
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 36-2014]
The customer shall be responsible for the entire cost of the installation
of the sewer lateral and service line up to and including the connection
at the sanitary sewer main. Additionally, the customer shall maintain the
sewer lateral and the service line up to and including the connection at the
sanitary sewer main in good working order at all times. The customer shall
be responsible for notifying the Superintendent as to any maintenance work
to be performed prior to the work being commenced, and furthermore, shall
notify the Superintendent of the party engaged by the customer to perform
the maintenance work. Neither the customer nor the party engaged to do
the work shall back fill any trench until the work has been inspected and
approved by the construction official or the plumbing inspector or their
designated representative. If any street or sidewalk is to be excavated
within the right-of-way, the customer shall comply with the provisions
contained in Chapter 61 of the Municipal Code. The work to be performed
is subject to the inspection and approval of the Superintendent.
§ 56-19 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-19
35:1067

ARTICLE III
Sewer User Charges
§ 56-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose an annual user charge, as
hereinafter defined, on all domestic, commercial, industrial, and
institutional users of the sewer system of the City of Millville.
§ 56-21. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ANNUAL UNIFORM AMOUNT — The annual sewer charge set by the City
for one residential dwelling unit.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Liquid wastes resulting from residences, buildings,
institutions, septic tanks, holding tanks, and industrial sources, including
the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food, wastewater
consisting of human excrement, gray water and similar wastes from
sanitary conveniences, swimming pool water, but excluding any mixture
which includes any industrial waste, process wastewater, contaminated
stormwater, contaminated groundwater, or boiler blowdown. Any
wastewater with concentrations above the following criteria will not be
considered domestic waste:
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — The unit of measure that is equal to one
residential dwelling unit based on the average number of gallons of sewer
flow for one residential dwelling.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The process wastewater and other liquid wastes
resulting from any industrial manufacturing process defined in the latest
edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, or is not domestic
waste as defined herein, or is any wastewater from any service process
which because of the contaminants it contains is comparable to industrial
wastewater including such wastewater mixed with water or domestic waste.
SEWER FLOW — The volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer
system. Except for equivalent dwelling units, sewer flow shall be measured
by an approved sewer flow meter, or if such a device is not installed, sewer
flow shall be measured by the water consumption of the sewer user. Water
consumption shall be based on water meter readings for City water and
pumping records for private wells, or a combination of both. Sewer users
who dispose of wastewater by means other than into the public sewer
system shall provide accurate measurements of the volume of wastewater
discharged to the public sewer system, otherwise sewer flow shall be the
total water consumption.
USER CHARGE — The charge levied upon all users of the City's sewer
system for the annual cost of operation, maintenance, capital expenditure
and debt service of the wastewater treatment plant, collection lines,
pumping stations, treatment facilities and other appurtenances.
§ 56-20 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-22
35:1069
§ 56-22. Charges. [Amended 3-16-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004;
3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005; 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 33-2009;
1-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013124]
Annual sewer user charges shall be made by the municipality to owners of
real property upon which improvements stand which utilize the municipal
sewer system. The annual uniform amount for each equivalent dwelling unit
is hereby established at $520. The sewer user charge shall be based upon
equivalent dwelling units in accordance with the following table.
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Classification Number of EDUs
Residential dwelling units:
Single-family home 1 per unit
Apartment 1 per unit
Condominiums 1 per unit
Duplex and half doubles 1 per unit
Mobile home 1 per unit
Townhouse 1 per unit
Public office buildings owned and occupied by
federal, state, county and local government
1 per 2,400 square feet
Schools including staff:
Boarding school 1 per 3 persons
Day school with:
Cafeteria and showers 1 per 15 persons
Cafeteria or showers 1 per 20 persons
No cafeteria and no showers 1 per 30 persons
NOTE: All other uses not set forth in the above schedule shall be charged
at the rate set for industrial domestic use based on water meter readings,
unless sewer flow meter readings are available.
§ 56-23. Industrial domestic use. [Amended 3-16-2004 by Ord. No.
10-2004; 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 33-2009; 1-2-2013 by Ord. No.
1-2013125]
The annual user charge for industrial domestic waste shall be $6.50 per
thousand gallons of sewer flow. However, in no event shall the annual user
charge be less than the annual uniform amount set for one equivalent
dwelling unit.
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date for these user charges
shall begin with the billing period for 1-1-2014.
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date for these user charges
shall begin with the billing period for 1-1-2014.
§ 56-22 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-24
35:1070
§ 56-24. Multiple uses. [Amended 3-16-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004;
11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 33-2009; 1-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013126]
Where a building or premises is occupied by one or more residential units
and nonresidential units which are not separately metered either by a sewer
flow meter or a water consumption meter, the sewer user charge shall be
determined as follows: $6.50 for each 1,000 gallons or part thereof, subject
to a minimum sewer user charge of one EDU for each residential unit plus
one EDU for all of the remaining nonresidential units.
§ 56-25. Sewer rental exemption. [Amended 3-16-2004 by Ord. No.
10-2004]
Senior citizens and persons totally and permanently disabled and their
surviving spouses who have owner-occupied residential dwellings and who
qualify for the deduction against their real estate taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:4-8.40 shall be entitled to an annual credit of $200 against their
residential sewer charges.
§ 56-26. Commingling of wastes.
Where a commercial or industrial establishment has both domestic wastes
and industrial wastes and the wastes are commingled and so discharged
to the City's sewer system, the industrial waste charge as set forth below
shall apply. Any commercial or industrial establishment may, at its option
and its own expense, separate its industrial waste from its domestic waste
and provide separate connections to the City sewer system for each type
of waste. If a commercial or industrial establishment exercises this option,
the annual user charge shall be based on the sewer rate for the separate
wastes.
§ 56-27. Industrial wastes.
A. The owner of each commercial or industrial establishment which
discharges to the City sewer system industrial waste of other pollutants
in violation of § 56-15 of this chapter, shall be charged at the annual
user rate for industrial domestic use and in addition be subject to the
following surcharges.
Percent Over Permitted Limit Charge
Up to 5% $0.25/lb
5% to 10% $0.20/lb
10% to 25% $0.15/lb
Over 25% $0.10/lb
126. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date for these user charges
shall begin with the billing period for 1-1-2014.
§ 56-24 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-27
35:1071
§ 56-28. Bills or charges to become a lien.
Charges for installation of facilities and sewer user charges shall become a
lien upon the premises of the customer as provided by statute whenever a
bill for sewer service or installation remains unpaid 60 days after it becomes
due.
§ 56-29. Foreclosure of liens.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case of foreclosure of
statutory liens. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute such legal
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property in which sewer charges remain unpaid
60 days after their due date.
B. The concentrations reported shall be converted from milligrams per
liter (mg/l) or parts per million (ppm) to pounds using the following
equation:
Flow (gal/day) x concentration (mg/l) x 8.33 lbs/gal = Lbs/Day
1,000,000
§ 56-27 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-29
35:1072
ARTICLE IV
Water Utility
§ 56-30. Creation of Water Utility.
The water service of the City shall be operated as a self-liquidating utility,
and charges for such services shall be imposed upon users thereof. The
revenues derived shall be dedicated to the purposes of the service as a selfliquidating
utility.
§ 56-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — The piping or other appurtenance necessary
to connect the premises owned or leased by the customer to the water
lateral located at the curbline.
WATER LATERAL — A corporation stop, bend connection, stopcock and
service pipe extending from the water main to the curbline.
WATER MAIN — The City-owned piping in or along public highways and
streets or along privately and publicly owned rights-of-way used for the
transmission or distribution of water.
§ 56-32. Deadline for making required connection. [Amended
4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
It is the policy of the City to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
These regulations reflect a realization of the benefits of connecting existing
properties to the municipal water system to protect the public health, safety
and welfare. Where there has been an extension of water mains, the owners
of property located within 200 feet of the water main measured from their
property line shall be required to connect their premises to the municipal
water system within 180 days after notification from the City to make the
connection.
A. Exception. Unless otherwise required by state law, a residential
property owner may delay connection to the municipal water system if
the property owner already has an existing private well servicing the
premises that is operating properly.
B. Testing protocol. It is recommended that a test of the private well shall
be conducted at least once every five years during the summer months
of June, July, or August at the expense of the property owner in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Ordinance 9 of the
Cumberland County Health Department. If the property owner chooses
to undertake the test, a copy of the written report setting forth the
results of the test shall be filed with the Cumberland County Health
Department for review, certification, and further action, if required. A
§ 56-30 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-32
35:1073
§ 56-33. Notice to property owners.
When there has been completion of construction of water mains, and no
exception is applicable, the Superintendent shall give written notice to
the adjacent property owners within 30 days after the completion of
construction, that the property owners must connect their homes or other
building to the system. Said notice shall be in writing and sent by regular
and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owners last
known address.
§ 56-34. Requirements for water connection.
copy of the report also shall be filed with the Superintendent of the
Municipal Water Utility.
C. Noncompliance. If the Cumberland County Health Department
determines that the private well which services the premises cannot be
certified, pursuant to requirements set forth in Ordinance 9, the
Superintendent shall notify the property owner that connection to the
municipal water system must be made within 180 days. If the private
well represents an immediate health risk, as determined by the
Cumberland County Health Department, the connection shall be made
forthwith.
D. Annual report. The Superintendent of the Water Utility shall file an
annual report with the Commissioner in charge of the Department and
the City Clerk which contains the following information: The location of
each property (block and lot number and street address) excepted from
the connection to the municipal water system pursuant to these
regulations; the name and address of the property owner; the date of
each test report received for the subject property; and the results set
forth in the test report (pass or fail).
A. No person, firm or corporation shall make any direct connection with
the public water system or alter or repair any connection with the
public water system without having first obtained all appropriate
written permits from the City of Millville.
B. Each building shall have an individual water lateral and individual
customer service line when connected to the public water system
unless an exception to this requirement is approved by the City
Engineer. Existing connections found to be in violation of this
subsection shall be required to connect properly to the public water
system within 180 days after notice to make the correction, unless an
exception to this requirement is approved by the City Engineer for good
cause. It is the general policy of the City that cross-connections
involving separate buildings owned by separate customers shall not be
permitted.
C. Compliance with existing regulations. Each permit to connect with the
public water system shall require that the applicant for the permit
§ 56-32 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-34
35:1074
§ 56-35. Minimum diameter of water mains.
All water mains laid within the City shall be at least six inches or more in
diameter or as may be prescribed by the City Engineer.
§ 56-36. Application for extension of service.
Applications for extension of service shall be made to the office of the City
Clerk who shall report the same to the Superintendent of the Water Utility
and to the City Engineer. The Superintendent of the Water Utility, together
agree that it or he shall carefully make the connection with the public
water system in the manner prescribed by the rules and regulations in
existence. Secondly, it or he shall indemnify and save harmless the City
from all accidents or damages caused by any negligence in protecting
his work or any imperfect or inadequate work done. Thirdly, it or he
shall faithfully comply with the regulations of the City and shall replace
and restore the sidewalk, pavement or street surface over any opening
that may be made. All work performed shall be subject to inspection
and approval of the City Engineer.
D. Qualified contractor required. Connections with the public water
system shall be made only by a plumber licensed by the State of New
Jersey or by some other person duly authorized by the City. Connections
shall be made with suitable material approved by the City. All work
included in the construction of connections with the public water
system shall be done to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or
Superintendent of the Water Utility and the person or persons
performing the work shall accept as final all decisions of the City
Engineer or Superintendent of the Water Utility as to the fitness of
materials furnished or work performed and shall immediately replace
all materials or work rejected.
E. Inspections. No connections shall be covered until inspected by a duly
authorized representative of the City.
F. Size of service. The size of the customer service line and the size of the
water lateral shall be adequate for the structure connecting to the
system and the intended average daily flow of water. The size of each
shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent of the Water
Utility. With respect to single-family residential dwellings, the size of
the customer service line and the size of the water lateral shall not be
less than one inch. With respect to residential duplexes which cannot be
subdivided, the size of the customer service line and the size of the
water lateral shall not be less than 1 1/2 inches with at least a one-inch
meter. This article applies to all new and replacement water
connections. [Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]
G. Occupancy permit. No occupancy permit shall issued for any new or
renovated structure connecting to the public water system until a water
meter has been installed to accurately measure the flow of water.
§ 56-34 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-36
35:1075
with the City Engineer, shall estimate the cost of the extension and shall
estimate the annual revenue to be derived from the consumption of water
by means of the extended service.
§ 56-37. Allocation of cost for water extensions. [Amended 4-2-2002
by Ord. No. 13-2002]
When an application for the extension of water service is filed with the
City, the following requirements shall apply and the cost of the projected
extension shall be paid in the following manner at the option of the City:
§ 56-38. City may provide for assessment as local improvement.
In lieu of the foregoing, the City may proceed to extend and install service
connections, including the construction and installation of water mains
and water laterals and other appurtenances as may be necessary and
assess the cost thereof as a local improvement. While the City reserves the
right to exercise this power at its option in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, it will be the policy of the City to do so upon the written
consent of 2/3 of the owners of property to be benefited. This percentage
will be determined by calculating the estimated cost of such extension and
the damages and benefits attributable to each owner affected thereby.
A. All construction shall be completed by the applicant in accordance with
the design standards approved by the City Engineer and in conformity
with the Land Use and Development Regulations contained in Chapter
30.
B. The construction shall thereafter become the property of the City upon
connection with the water system of the City, the approval of the
construction by the City Engineer, and the adoption of an ordinance
accepting the dedication of the improvement.
C. The City shall require the applicant to pay the entire cost for the
installation of water mains, water laterals, and related improvements
where no discernible public benefit is involved. This requirement shall
apply to extensions of water service to individuals and to commercial,
industrial, institutional and residential developments.
D. In the alternative, the City may negotiate an agreement with the
applicant to share a portion of the cost for the installation of water
mains, water laterals, and related improvements where there is a
discernible public benefit involved. Before determining whether the
City will contribute to the cost of the project and in what proportion,
City officials shall consider the benefits the project will provide to
economic development and job creation, to existing water customers or
to future commercial, industrial, institutional and residential
developments. Any agreement must be approved by resolution of the
governing body.
§ 56-36 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-38
35:1076
ARTICLE V
Water Use Regulations
§ 56-39. General provisions.
The Director in charge of the Water Utility is authorized to promulgate
regulations from time to time to implement the intent and purpose of this
article.
§ 56-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the use of the public
water system and to establish the right of inspection.
§ 56-41. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in these regulations shall be as follows:
CUSTOMER — The applicant for water service at one household, business,
commercial user or industrial user, whether the owner or a tenant.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association (public or private), group or society, and including the State of
New Jersey, its agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions
created by or pursuant to state law.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the City's Water Utility or his
duly appointed deputy or authorized representative.
USER — Any person who is connected to the public water system and
facilities of the City.
UTILITY — The City Water Utility under the authority and jurisdiction of the
Director in charge thereof.
§ 56-42. Fire hydrants.
§ 56-43. Use of public water system.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed upon or
about any fire hydrant any paint, rubbish, building materials, fence or
other obstruction of any character. No guy rope shall be fastened to any
fire hydrant nor shall any vehicle be parked against any fire hydrant.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall damage, tamper with, or in any
way use, open or attempt to open any fire hydrant except for an
authorized emergency use under the supervision of either the Director
of Public Safety, or the Director in charge of the Water Utility, or their
designated representative.
A. Compliance with water rules and regulations required. All users of the
public water system shall comply with the requirements of the written
rules and regulations of the Director in charge of the Water Utility,
§ 56-39 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-43
35:1077
§ 56-44. Inspecting, metering and reporting.
which regulations shall become effective upon filing in the office of the
City Clerk after the effective date of this article.
B. Injury to or tampering with public water facilities. No person shall
maliciously, intentionally, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment that is part of the public water system of the City of Millville.
C. Water meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to be connected to the
public water system without having a properly installed and properly
operating water meter to accurately measure the water use of the
customer.
D. Maintenance. The customer shall be solely responsible for all damage
to water meters, whether due to freezing or any other cause, and the
meter shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the property
owner. All persons using water shall keep water pipes and fixtures
within their premises, and the customer service pipe to the main, in
good repair and shall protect them from frost at their own expense. The
customer shall immediately notify the Superintendent of any damage to
a meter or the fact that a meter is not working as soon as it is known by
the customer.
E. Prohibited acts. No plumber, customer or other unauthorized person
shall turn the water on or off at any corporation stop, curb stop or meter
valve, or disconnect or remove the meter without the written consent of
the Superintendent of the Water Utility, except when emergency repairs
are required.
A. Inspection. Properly identified and authorized agents of the Water
Utility shall have the right to access to customer premises at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of reading meters, inspecting meters,
installing meters, removing meters, or repairing meters and for
examining fixtures and pipes, observing the manner for using water,
and for any other purpose which is proper and necessary in the conduct
of the operation of the Water Utility.
B. Water meter requirements. Every water service of every description
within the City, including commercial, industrial, residential, public and
utility, shall be required to have installed on its premises a water meter
of a type as specified and approved by the Superintendent of the Water
Utility. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 22-2013]
(1) The Municipal Water Utility shall provide without cost one 5/8-inch
by 3/4-inch water meter per service, without fee. Each additional 5/
8-inch by 3/4-inch meter shall be provided at a cost of $150 per
meter. Meters larger than 5/8 inch by 3/4 inch shall be available at
the following costs:
§ 56-43 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-44
35:1078
§ 56-45. Water meters to be set inside building.
Water meters shall be installed inside buildings, dwellings, business or
industrial establishments, in the basement, boiler room, utility room, or
other suitable location, whenever practicable.
§ 56-46. When water meters may be set outside. [Amended 7-2-2013
by Ord. No. 22-2013]
Size of Meter
(inches)
Cost of Computer Meter with
Touch Read Assembly
(per meter)
1 x 1 $300
1 1/2 x 1 1/2 $725
2 x 2 $825
(2) Meters larger than two inches shall be furnished and installed by
the customer at the customer's expense, subject to the approval of
the Superintendent of the Water Utility as to the type, size and set.
C. Calibration. Meters larger than two inches shall be calibrated at least
once very five years by the customer at the customer's expense subject
to the approval of the Superintendent as to the contractor performing
the calibration.
D. Reporting. As soon as a customer becomes aware of a defective water
meter, defective customer service line, defective water lateral or
defective main, the customer shall notify the Superintendent of the
Water Utility forthwith.
A. When such inside setting is not practicable and a meter is smaller than
one inch in size, the meter may be set at an outside location upon the
payment of an installation fee of $450 payable in advance of
installation.
B. When such inside setting is not practicable, and the meter is one inch in
size, the meter may be set at an outside location upon the payment of an
installation fee of $500 payable in advance of the installation.
C. When such inside setting is not practicable, and the meter is 1 1/2
inches in size, the meter may be set at an outside location upon the
payment of an installation fee of $950 payable in advance of
installation.
D. When such inside setting is not practicable, and the meter is two inches
in size, the meter may be set at an outside location upon the payment of
an installation fee of $950 payable in advance of installation.
§ 56-44 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-47
35:1079
§ 56-47. Certain unusual fittings to be at customer's expense.
When it is practicable to set a meter larger than one inch in size within a
building, any valve, bypass or unusual piping that is required by the Water
Utility shall be provided by the customer at his expense.
§ 56-48. Final decision by Superintendent regarding location of
meter.
Decision as to the practicality and suitability of location for water meters
shall be made by the Superintendent of the Water Utility, whose decision
shall be final.
§ 56-49. Power to declare emergency.
At any time that the Director in charge of the Water Utility shall declare
that an emergency exists in the water supply of the City's water system
requiring specified measures for conserving water for any and all uses and
for fire protection, the measures shall remain in effect until the Director
in charge of the Water Utility shall declare that the emergency has ended.
During any emergency, the Director in charge of the Water Utility may adopt
regulations governing the use of water as he or she shall deem necessary to
conserve water within the City. Such regulations may include restrictions on
the use of water for watering lawns, shrubbery, gardens, vegetation, or the
use of water for wetting or washing sidewalks, streets or to be utilized in
private swimming pools, or the washing of automobiles, or any other use of
water that the Director in charge of the Water Utility may feel it necessary
to regulate.
§ 56-50. Discontinuance of service by City.
A. The Director in charge of the Water Utility may discontinue water
service for any of the following reasons:
(1) Misrepresentation of material facts in an application for extension
of water service.
(2) Willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures, or other appurtenances.
(3) Use of water for any other property or purpose different than
described in the application for water service.
(4) Tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb stopcock or seals, or
any other appurtenance owned by the City.
(5) Vacancy.
(6) For the failure to pay any connection fee, installation fee, or water
user charge within 30 days of its due date.
§ 56-47 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-50
35:1080
§ 56-51. Maintenance of customer service line.
The customer shall be responsible for the entire cost of the installation
of the customer service line. Additionally, the customer shall maintain the
customer service line in good working order at all times. All leaks in the
service line or any other pipe or fixture in or upon the premises owned
by the customer shall be repaired as soon as practicable. The customer
shall be responsible for notifying the Superintendent as to any maintenance
work to be performed prior to the work being commenced, and furthermore,
shall notify the Superintendent of the party engaged by the customer to
do the maintenance work. Neither the customer nor the party engaged to
do the work shall backfill any trench until the work has been inspected
and approved by the Construction Official or Plumbing Inspector or their
designated representatives. Any work or material found to be not
acceptable by the Construction Official or Plumbing Inspector shall be
removed and replaced.
§ 56-52. Enforcement procedure.
(7) Refusal of reasonable access to the property for purposes of
inspecting, reading, maintaining, installing, or removal of water
meters, or other purposes specified herein.
(8) Making, or refusing to sever, any cross-connection between a pipe
or fixture carrying water furnished by the City, and a pipe or fixture
carrying water from any other source.
(9) Failure to repair a defective meter, defective customer service line,
defective water lateral, or other defective appurtenance within a
reasonable time after written notice has been given by the
Superintendent of the Water Utility.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Superintendent shall have the right to
cut off the water supply temporarily to make necessary repairs or
connections in the event of a breakdown, emergency, or for any other
unavoidable cause. The Superintendent, however, will use all
reasonable and practicable measures to notify the customer of such
discontinuance of service.
C. Disconnection and reconnection fee. The Superintendent is authorized
to charge the customer $25 for disconnection of service and an
additional $25 for reconnection of service. This fee shall be collected in
the same manner as other charges.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Director in charge of the Water Utility
or the Superintendent finds that any person has violated or is violating
the regulations contained in this article, or any regulation adopted
pursuant to § 56-39, the Superintendent may serve upon such person
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
§ 56-50 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-52
35:1081
§ 56-53. Installation and maintenance of water lateral and pipe
service.
The customer shall be responsible for the entire cost of the installation of
the water lateral and service pipe and replacement. The customer shall be
responsible for notifying the Superintendent as to any maintenance work to
be performed prior to the work being commenced, and furthermore, shall
notify the Superintendent of the party engaged by the customer to perform
B. Order to show cause. If the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the Director in charge of the Water Utility may issue an
order directed to the offending person requiring said person to show
cause before the Public Works Committee why an order should not be
made directing any or all of the following actions to be taken:
[Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]
(1) The termination of service;
(2) The requirement that immediate installation of facilities be made to
ensure compliance; and/or
(3) The payment of the additional cost incurred by the Water Utility as
a result of the violation.
(4) An administrative fee of $25 shall be assessed to cover the cost of
preparing and mailing the order to show cause.
C. Hearing. The Public Works Committee shall conduct a hearing no
sooner than 10 days after service of the order to show cause. The Public
Works Committee shall consist of the Utilities Collector or designee, the
Sewer Utility Superintendent or designee, the Water Utility
Superintendent or designee, the City Clerk or designee, and the Chief
Financial Officer or designee. A quorum of three persons shall be
required to conduct a hearing. The Public Works Committee shall
report its decision in each case to the Board of Commissioners with a
recommendation for a resolution to be adopted by the Board at the next
regularly scheduled Commission meeting after the hearing has been
completed.
D. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding any other provision
contained herein, the Municipal Court shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to hear alleged violations of this article. Any person who is
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, or an order of the Board of Commissioners
lawfully issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, or community service for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or incarceration for a period not to exceed 90
days, or any combination of the foregoing in the sole discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Each day that a violation occurs or continues
after notice has been served shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 56-52 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-53
35:1082
the maintenance work. If any street or sidewalk is to be excavated within
the right-of-way, the customer shall comply with the provisions contained
in Chapter 61, Streets and Roads Department, of the Municipal Code. The
work to be performed is subject to the inspection and approval of the
Superintendent.
§ 56-53 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-53
35:1083

ARTICLE VI
Water User Charges
§ 56-54. Rate when meters introduced.
Whenever a meter shall have been introduced to measure the quantity
of water consumed, the Schedule of Rates to govern the use and supply
of water shall be determined by the size of the meter together with the
quantity of water consumed as follows:
A. Minimum quarterly charges for water service. All classes of users shall
be subject to the following minimum quarterly charges in accordance
with their applicable service meter size: [Amended 12-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 29-2010]
Meter Size
(inches) Allowed Minimum Charge Gallonage
5/8 x 3/4 $30 10,000
1 x 1 $60 20,000
1 1/2 x 1 1/2 $90 30,000
2 x 2 $120 40,000
3 x 3 $150 50,000
4 x 4 $180 60,000
6 x 6 $360 120,000
8 x 8 $450 150,000
B. Excess water consumption. Water consumption in excess of the water
allowance for the minimum quarterly charge for each applicable meter
size shall be computed at the rate of $3.50 per thousand gallons.
[Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002; 11-2-2009 by Ord. No.
33-2009; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 29-2010]
C. No proration. All minimum quarterly charges shall apply for any
quarter, or fraction thereof, without proration in the event the customer
does not utilize the service for any entire quarterly period.
D. Water surcharge. In the event that customer supplied with a water
meter shall fail to grant the Water Utility access to his property for
purposes of reading the meter for three consecutive billing periods,
then the customer shall be charged a surcharge of $50 for that billing
period and each successive billing period for which access continues to
be denied, collectible in addition to the applicable quarterly minimum
water charge.
E. Meter testing fee. Whenever a customer requests that their water
meter be pulled and tested, the customer shall be subject to a meter
testing fee of $50 for each request when the meter is determined to be
operating properly. [Added 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 29-2010127]
§ 56-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-54
35:1085
§ 56-55. Hotel and motel water service.
Water service to hotels and motels shall be billed on the basis of gross
gallons of water consumed irrespective of the number of hotel or motel
units.
§ 56-56. Residential water service.
Where a separate water meter does not exist for each separate dwelling
unit, all apartment complexes, townhouses, condominiums and multifamily
dwellings shall pay a minimum water user charge for each separate
dwelling unit which is equivalent to the minimum user charge for a single
residential dwelling. Where the aggregate water consumed in one building
does not exceed the aggregate minimum permitted for the number of
separate dwelling units in the building, the Water Utility shall bill each
separate dwelling unit for the minimum charge for the quarter. Where the
aggregate water consumed in one building exceeds the aggregate minimum
permitted for the number of separate dwelling units in the building, the
Water Utility shall prorate the excess among the number of separate
dwelling units in the building and shall bill each one for the additional
prorated portion of the excess.
§ 56-57. Fire hydrant and suppression system charges. [Amended
7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 22-2013]
§ 56-58. Turn-on and turnoff charges.
A charge of $25 shall be made for turn-ons and turnoffs.
§ 56-59. Water lateral or tapping fees. [Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord.
No. 13-2002]
F. Effective date. The rates and exemptions for all quarterly water charges
shall become effective for the billing period due February 1, 2011.
[Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No.
29-2010]
A. There shall be a quarterly charge of $50 for each fire hydrant and $50
for each fire suppression system.
B. Replacement or repair of damaged fire hydrants shall be billed to the
customer at the cost of the fire hydrant or repair parts and materials
plus 15%. Current labor rates shall apply. Equipment reimbursement
shall be based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Schedule of Equipment Rates.
A. The following tapping fees shall be charged:
(1) One-inch tap: $375 piping to curbline complete.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 56-54 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-59
35:1086
§ 56-60. Street opening fee.
A street opening fee as prescribed by § 61-9 of Chapter 61, Streets and
Roads Department, plus the cost of any additional work shall be charged in
addition to the above tap charges.
§ 56-61. Bills or charges to become a lien.
Charges for installation of meters or other facilities and water use charges
shall become a lien upon the premises of the customer as provided by
statute whenever a bill for water service or installation remains unpaid 60
days after it becomes due.
§ 56-62. Foreclosure of lien.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case of foreclosure of
statutory liens. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute such legal
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which water charges remain unpaid
60 days after their due date.
§ 56-63. Theft of service.
Nothing in these regulations shall be interpreted as prohibiting the
institution of theft charges against any person stealing water from the City,
by receiving City water without a meter, by bypassing a meter, by tampering
with a meter or by any other means.
(2) One-and-one-half-inch tap: $475 piping to curbline complete.
(3) Two-inch tap: $550 piping to curbline complete.
B. Taps larger than two inches in size shall be installed by the customer at
the customer's expense subject to the inspection and the approval of
the Superintendent of the Water Utility using only materials and
methods approved by him, Additionally, an approved backflow
prevention device shall be installed.
§ 56-59 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-63
35:1087

ARTICLE VII
Sewer and Water Connection Fees
§ 56-64. Purpose and scope. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No.
13-2005]
The purpose of this article is to set forth the principles for the imposition
of sewer and water connection fees based on the guidelines established in
state law and to set forth the formulas and rates for the computation of the
connection fees.
§ 56-65. Definitions. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
SEWER CONNECTION FEE — The fee required from a new connector to
the sewer utility, representing a fair payment toward the total capital cost
paid for developing the sewer utility system.
SEWER CONNECTION RATE — The total capital cost, including debt
service, paid by the sewer utility to develop the sewer utility system through
the end of the preceding fiscal year, divided by the total number of EDUs
and service units served by the sewer utility at the end of the preceding
fiscal year.
SEWER SERVICE UNIT — In attributing service units to each connector,
the estimated average daily flow of sewage for the new connector shall be
divided by 240 gallons, which represents the average daily flow of sewage
from the average single-family residence within the City, to produce the
number of service units to be attributed.
WATER CONNECTION FEE — The fee required from a new connector to
the water utility, representing a fair payment toward the total capital cost
paid for developing the water utility system.
WATER CONNECTION RATE — The total capital cost, including debt
service, paid by the water utility to develop the water utility system through
the end of the preceding fiscal year, divided by the total number of EDUs
and service units served by the water utility at the end of the preceding
fiscal year.
A. This article applies when three conditions have been met. First, a new
physical connection to the system is made either directly at the main or
indirectly on the property. Secondly, there is an impact on the system as
a result of increased water demand or sewer flow for the property.
Thirdly, there is an increase in the number of new connectors or users
on the property.
B. This article shall not apply to a change in use within an existing
structure unless all three conditions referred to above have been met.
§ 56-64 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-65
35:1089
WATER SERVICE UNIT — In attributing service units to each connector, the
estimated average daily flow of water for the new connector shall be divided
by 300 gallons, which represents the average daily flow of water for the
average single-family residence within the City, to produce the number of
service units to be attributed.
§ 56-66. Connection fee imposed. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No.
13-2005]
§ 56-67. Payment of fees.
The connection fee imposed shall be payable at the time of the issuance of
a construction permit.
§ 56-68. Scheduled structure or use. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 13-2005]
When a business, structure or use is described in the Schedule of Equivalent
Units, the connection fee shall be computed by multiplying the number of
EDUs attributed to the connector by the sewer connection rate or the water
connection rate set forth herein.
§ 56-69. Nonscheduled structure or use. [Amended 3-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 13-2005]
When a business, structure or use is not described in the Schedule of
Equivalent Units, the connection fee shall be computed by multiplying
the number of service units attributed to each connector by the sewer
connection rate or water connection rate set forth herein.
§ 56-70. Certification required.
In the event a business, structure, or use, is not described in the Schedule of
Equivalent Dwelling Units, the owner or developer shall provide to the City
A. A connection fee shall be imposed for each sewer connection, based on
the sewer connection rate set forth herein and the total number of
equivalent dwelling units attributed to a connector set forth in the
schedule, or the total number of service units attributed to a connector
when the schedule does not apply.
B. A connection fee shall be imposed for each water connection based on
the water connection rate set forth herein and the total number of
equivalent dwelling units attributed to a connector set forth in the
schedule, or the total number of service units attributed to a connector
when the schedule does not apply.
C. The connection fees imposed by this section are hereby waived for the
following construction: for public buildings and public improvements
constructed for or constructed by the municipality within its
boundaries. [Added 7-1-2008 by Ord. No. 18-2008]
§ 56-65 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-70
35:1090
Engineer a certification from an engineer, for the average daily projected
sewer flow and water consumption for each business, structure or use.
The water connection fee and the sewer connection fee shall be calculated
based on the certification provided in accordance with the above formulas.
§ 56-71. Multiple uses.
Where a building or structure is to be occupied by more than one
residential, commercial or industrial use or establishment, or any
combination thereof, the connection fee imposed shall be determined by
applying the aforesaid schedule or formula for each residential, commercial
or industrial use or establishment located thereon.
§ 56-72. Sewer and water connection rates. [Amended 3-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 13-2005; 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 33-2009128]
The sewer connection rate for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) and
each service unit is hereby established at $1,740. The water connection rate
for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) and each service unit is hereby
established at $940.
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Classification Number of EDUs
Residential dwelling units:
Single-family home 1 per unit
Apartment 1 per unit
Condominium 1 per unit
Duplex and half double 1 per unit
Mobile home 1 per unit
Townhouse 1 per unit
Other dwelling units:
Boarding house 1/4 per room
Hotel 1/4 per room
Motel 1/4 per room
Nursing home 1/2 per room
Roominghouse 1/4 per room
Tourist lodging 1/4 per room
Schools including staff:
Boarding school 1 per 3 persons
Day school with:
Cafeteria and showers 1 per 15 persons
128. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date for these connection fees of
12-1-2009.
§ 56-70 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-72
35:1091
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Classification Number of EDUs
Cafeteria or showers 1 per 20 persons
No cafeteria and no showers 1 per 30 persons
Type
Equivalent
Dwelling Units
Office, retail or general commercial building
a. The sewer connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of sewage.
b. The water connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of water.
c. If a certification from an engineer cannot be
provided estimating the average daily sewer
flow or water flow at the time that the
construction permit is issued, then the
connection fee imposed shall be based on the
following: each 2,400 square feet or portion
thereof.
1
d. The connection fee shall be adjusted when the
estimated average daily flow is known and
imposed at the time that the occupancy permit is
issued.
Industrial or manufacturing building
a. The sewer connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of sewage.
b. The water connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of water.
c. If a certification from an engineer cannot be
provided estimating the average daily sewer
flow or water flow at the time that the
construction permit is issued, then the
connection fee imposed shall be based on the
following: each 2,400 square feet or portion
thereof.
1
d. The connection fee shall be adjusted when the
estimated average daily flow is known and
imposed at the time that the occupancy permit is
issued.
Warehouse
a. The sewer connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of sewage.
b. The water connection fee shall be based on the
estimated average daily flow of water.
§ 56-72 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-72
35:1092
Type
Equivalent
Dwelling Units
c. If a certification from an engineer cannot be
provided estimating the average daily sewer
flow or water flow at the time that the
construction permit is issued, then the
connection fee imposed shall be based on the
following: each 10,000 square feet or portion
thereof.
1
d. The connection fee shall be adjusted when the
estimated average daily flow is known and
imposed at the time that the occupancy permit is
issued.
§ 56-72 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-72
35:1093

ARTICLE VIII
Sewer Discharge Control Regulations for Fats, Oils and Greases
[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 31-2007]
§ 56-73. Purpose and scope.
The City of Millville is the owner and NJDEP permittee of the municipal
wastewater treatment facility and sanitary sewage collection system. The
City has established regulations for sanitary sewage dischargers within the
municipal service area. The following regulations are hereby established
to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These regulations are
established to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages, odors,
and obstructions from contributions and accumulations of fats, oils, and
greases into the municipal sewer system from commercial or industrial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. Such
clogs can result in sewer backups into homes or local waterways and result
in increased maintenance costs of the collection system and treatment
facility.
§ 56-74. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments primarily engaged
in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption, foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods),
boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are
infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and any other food preparation
activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle
that requires washing. Users are including, but not limited to, cafeterias,
hospitals, hotels, restaurants (including fast food establishments), church
halls, school kitchen operations, supermarket food processing areas, or
other nonresidential establishments.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASES — Organic polar compounds derived from
animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended
from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as F.O.G. (fats, oils,
greases).
GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR — A device for separating and retaining
waterborne F.O.G. complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and
entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment facility. These devices
also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food preparation
activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary
sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are
sometimes referred to as "grease interceptors."
§ 56-73 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-74
35:1095
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPACITY — The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain F.O.G. from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public
sanitary sewer.
NONCOOKING ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments primarily
engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any
form of cooling. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation
and serving establishments.
USER — Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits
of the municipality, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution
or discharge of wastewater into the POTW. This includes persons who
contribute such wastewater from mobile sources such as those who
discharge hauled wastewater.
§ 56-75. Grease interceptor maintenance, recordkeeping and grease
removal.
A. Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the City
Engineer, Superintendent of the Sewer Utility or their designee. Grease
interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense, when such user
operates a cooking establishment. Grease interceptors may also be
required in noncooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs
establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments
when they are deemed necessary by the City Engineer, Superintendent
of the Sewer Utility, or their designee for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing F.O.G. No user shall allow wastewater discharge
concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed 30 milligrams
per liter. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity
easily accessible for user cleaning and City inspection. All such grease
interceptors shall be inspected and serviced as required in order to
maintain minimum design capacity or effective volume of the grease
interceptor, or not less often than every 30 days.
B. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor
shall:
(1) Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time at actual peak flow
and at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the
Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between the influent and
effluent baffles with 20% of the total volume of the grease
interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate,
identified hereafter as a "sludge blanket."
(2) Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge blanket as
required, but at intervals of not longer than 90 days at the user's
expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid
materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils,
cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle and thereby
reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor.
§ 56-74 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-75
35:1096
(3) (Reserved)129
(4) Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said
device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently
achieved. "Consistently" shall mean any wastewater sample taken
from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical
attainment described in Subsection A above. If an establishment
desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternate to
an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative
location shall contain the following information:
(a) Location of City sewer main and easement in relation to
available exterior space outside building.
(b) Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing
for all services at the site.
(5) Understand and agree that: The use of biological additives as an
F.O.G. degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior
written approval by the City Engineer and the Sewer Utility
Superintendent. Any establishment using this method of F.O.G.
abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner
that attainment of the F.O.G. wastewater discharge limit as
measured from the trap's outlet is consistently achieved.
(6) Understand and agree that: The use of automatic F.O.G. removal
systems is conditionally permissible upon prior written approval by
the City Engineer and the Sewer Utility Superintendent, the Lead
Plumbing Inspector of the City of Millville, the County Department
of Health, and the NJDEP. Any establishment using this equipment
shall operate the system in such a manner that the attainment of
the F.O.G. wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's
outlet, is consistently achieved.
(7) Understand and agree that: F.O.G. recovered on site for off-site
disposal shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) All solid wastes shall be stored in appropriate containers.
(b) Users and disposers shall comply with all applicable hazardous
waste regulations of the NJDEP and the NJDOT.
(c) Users shall maintain records of types and volumes of all waste
generated. These records must be maintained for a period of
five years.
(8) Understand and agree that: The City Engineer and the Sewer
Utility Superintendent reserve the right to make determinations of
grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all
relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance,
129. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), regarding reintroduction of treated wastes back
into the City’s wastewater treatment system, was repealed 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 16-2017.
§ 56-75 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-75
35:1097
§ 56-76. Violations and penalties.
A person violating any of the provisions of these regulations, any provision
of the pretreatment standards for sewerage, N.J.S.A. 58:11-49 et seq.,
N.J.A.C. 7:14 et seq., or any regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be
liable for a penalty of not more than $50,000 per day (N.J.S.A. 58:11-49). If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation. The City shall seek penalties as referenced in the
City's Emergency Response Plan. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:14-8.1(f),
the City shall assess the following civil administrative penalty assessments:
facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to or
modifications or replacement of such traps.
C. The user shall maintain a written record of grease interceptor
maintenance for five years. All such records will be available for
inspection by the City at all times.
D. Non-F.O.G.-laden sources are not allowed to be connected to sewer
lines intended for grease interceptor service.
E. No wastewater in excess of 140° F. (60° C.) shall be discharged into a
grease interceptor.
F. Grease interceptors shall be installed as required by these regulations.
Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following the
adoption of these regulations, no enforcement actions will be taken
under these regulations for failure to achieve limits on F.O.G.
discharges from grease interceptors. If, during this one-year period, an
obstruction of a City sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow
to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said
overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey
sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of
F.O.G. in the City's sewer main(s), the City will take appropriate
enforcement actions as stipulated in § 56-76, Violations and penalties,
against the generator or contributor of such F.O.G.
G. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes
shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained
to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manhole shall also have
readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, residuals removal, and
wastewater sampling activities.
A. The City shall assess a mandatory minimum penalty of not less than
$1,000 for each serious violation as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:14-8.16.
B. The City shall assess a mandatory minimum penalty of not less than
$5,000 for each violation that causes a violator to be, or continue to be,
a significant noncomplier as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:14-8.16.
§ 56-75 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-76
35:1098
§ 56-77. Information purposes only.
The City is providing the following information to assist the user in meeting
the requirements set forth in these rules and regulations. The City is not
making any representations or warranties concerning the information being
provided.
C. Each violation, including each parameter that is required to be
monitored, sampled and reported and that is not monitored, sampled
and reported, is an additional, separate and distinct violation. Each day
during which a violation continues shall constitute an additional,
separate distinct violation.
D. The requirement that the City assess penalties pursuant to the City's
Enforcement Response Plan shall in no way be construed to limit the
ability of the City to assess a penalty, bring an action for a penalty for a
violation at any time after a violation occurred, or to assess a more
stringent penalty against a person pursuant to the City's Enforcement
Response Plan.
E. The City Engineer; Sewer Utility Superintendent or their designee shall
issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the offending party. The
offending party will be directed to show why service should not be
terminated or penalties imposed. Notice shall be served on the
offending party to show why enforcement action should not be taken.
A. A sample copy of a grease system cleaning log is attached. Users should
begin utilizing the sample form or one that suits their own requirements
as long as the form used contains all of the information which is on the
sample form. These records shall be maintained on file for review by
inspectors and for later submission to the Municipal Sewer Utility as
provided in these rules and regulations.
B. A list of oil and grease haulers and recyclers who are available to assist
users in cleaning and/or removing accumulated grease is set forth
below. The City is not recommending any particular vendor. This list is
being provided for informational purposes only. The City has not
investigated the business practices of any of the haulers on this list.
Other haulers also exist.
Rendering companies F.O.G.
Darlington International, Newark, NJ; 1-800-914-1221
Mopac; 1-800-967-8325
Russell Reid; 1-800-356-4468
Kemco Rendering; 732-869-0981
Pumping and transportation companies
M&E Soap; 973-539-6433
OilMatic; 1-877-379-3764
§ 56-76 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-77
35:1099
American Bye Products, Morristown, NJ; 973-267-0109
Allstate Power Vac, Inc.; 732-815-0220
Russell Reid; 1-800-356-4468
Gary W. Gray Trucking, Inc.; 908-962-1890
Spectraserv Inc.; 973-589-0277
Hood cleaning companies
Fire Equipment; East Hanover, NJ; 973-560-1600
USA Pressure Cleaning, Jersey City, NJ; 210-432-1100
C. A list of selected Internet websites that provide guidance in the
purchase and maintenance of grease traps and interceptors and
provide answers to frequently asked questions about these systems is
set forth below. The City does not recommend or endorse any of these
products or manufacturers. This list is provided for informational
purposes only, and the City recommends that users retain an
independent environmental professional before investing in or
installing any grease trap or interceptor.
www.greaseland.com
www.mopac.com
www.epa.gov
§ 56-77 MILLVILLE CODE § 56-77
35:1100
Chapter 60
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 20.
Land use and development — See Ch. 30.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 56.
Woodland management — See Ch. 70.
§ 56-77 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 56-77
35:1101

ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management Regulations
§ 60-1. Scope and purpose.
§ 60-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 60-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) These regulations shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review: Nonresidential
major developments, and aspects of residential major
developments which are not preempted by the Residential Site
Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) These regulations also shall be applicable to all major
developments undertaken by the City of Millville.
D. Compatibility with other permit and laws. Development approvals
issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to these regulations are
to be considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process. These regulations do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required approvals
or permits for activities regulated by other laws, rules or regulations.
The provisions of these regulations as interpreted and applied shall be
viewed as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations are not intended
to abrogate or annul any other law, rule or regulation with provisions
which contain more restrictive requirements or higher standards.
§ 60-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-2
35:1103
in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or are based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-1-2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Costal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing regulations. The county review agency may either be
a county planning agency or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit, any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and the municipal review of any activity
not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
§ 60-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-2
35:1104
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Millville, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended [42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
§ 60-2 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-2
35:1105
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow)
that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration of groundwater recharge
or stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
§ 60-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-2
35:1106
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly
known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 60-3. General standards.
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.
§ 60-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 60-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in these regulations apply only to new development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
major development in accordance with § 60-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
§ 60-2 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1107
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G below.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion.
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of Subsections F and G below may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The application demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G below to
the maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G below, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G below that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G below shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. The applicant
shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the
design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-4
35:1108
for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures identified
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits of areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within the watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 60-4E(3);
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
§ 60-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1109
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implanting rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 60-4E above shall comply
with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 60-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surface include
surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking
areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) below are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-4
35:1110
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1) below; or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G below shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 60-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations in § 60-5 either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
§ 60-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1111
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[Amended 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facitlites; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, which is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials, intermediate products, final products,
waste materials, by-products, industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-4
35:1112
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations in § 60-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing land use and development regulations in the
drainage area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in § 60-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
§ 60-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1113
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purpose of this section,
"agricultural development" means land uses normally associated
with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses
do not include the development of land for the processing or sale of
food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9919
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-4
35:1114
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 60-7, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 60-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = = A ÷ B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs; and
A = = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment
device
See § 60-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
§ 60-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1115
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 60-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 60-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1-4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County
Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These
areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection F(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-4
35:1116
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of the bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable.
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under the section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
§ 60-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-4
35:1117
§ 60-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for
a waterway subject to § 60-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 60-4G(8)
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in § 60-4G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the special
water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Section 60-4G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology set forth above and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods set forth above. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be
used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
§ 60-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-5
35:1118
§ 60-6. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modification as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/nigs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measure are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
§ 60-5 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-6
35:1119
§ 60-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 60-8.
B. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established in § 60-4 of these regulations.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 60-4 of these regulations, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed in Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 60-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-7
35:1120
§ 60-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee are
incorporated in N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee.
(2) Copies of these standards also may be obtained from any of the soil
conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location,
address, and telephone number of each soil conservation district
may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O.
Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540.
(3) Copies also may be obtained from the Rutgers Cooperative
Extension Service, (732) 932-9306.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet for the stormwater management
basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin outlets in
accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe of the structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack shall
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage
and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the
net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
§ 60-7 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-8
35:1121
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency set forth
below, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from
this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See
Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Exemption or waiver from safety standards. An exemption or a waiver
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the Municipal Planning Board
that the exemption or waiver will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 60-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-8
35:1122
§ 60-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to these regulations, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the checklist for the site development
stormwater plan as part of the submission of the application for
subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in these regulations.
(3) The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C below.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board from
§ 60-8 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-9
35:1123
which municipal approval is sought for the project. The municipal board
shall consult with the City Engineer to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in these regulations.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marsh lands and other wetland, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards contained in this
article are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe
how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater
quantity problems at the source by land management and source
controls whenever possible.
§ 60-9 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-9
35:1124
§ 60-10. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, the
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 60-4 of these regulations.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 60-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal board
reviewing an application under these regulations may, in
consultation with the City Engineer, waive submission of any of the
requirements set forth in § 60-9C(1) through (6) when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain, and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review under this article shall comply
with the requirements set forth in this section.
B. General maintenance.
§ 60-9 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-10
35:1125
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such a person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified pursuant to
these regulations is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and
any future revisions shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified pursuant to
these regulations shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified pursuant to
these regulations shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified pursuant to
these regulations shall retain and make available, upon request by
§ 60-10 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-10
35:1126
§ 60-11. Violation and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of these regulations shall be
subject to the following penalties:
§ 60-12. through § 60-15. (Reserved)
any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by these regulations.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and (4) above do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another government agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public health or safety, or if it is in need of maintenance
or repair, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in
writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall
have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a
manner that is approved by the City Engineer or his designee. The
municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for
effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the
municipality or county may immediately proceed to do so and shall
bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. A fine not to exceed $2,500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by a like fine and/or penalty.
B. Nothing in this article shall be constructed to limit the City's right to
institute and maintain a civil action, from seeking an active injunction,
or setting aside or invalidating any conveyance made pursuant to a
contract of sale.
§ 60-10 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-12
35:1127

ARTICLE II
General Provisions for Pollution Control
§ 60-16. Findings and purpose.
The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) adopted
regulations regarding stormwater management and pollution control which
are applicable to all municipalities within the State of New Jersey. These
regulations require the municipality to develop, implement and enforce a
stormwater pollution prevention plan. As part of this plan, the municipality
is required to adopt regulations to control pollution of the waters of the
state within its jurisdiction to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 60-17. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Millville Police Department and
the Streets and Roads Department to enforce the regulations contained in
this chapter as herein provided.
§ 60-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the regulations contained in this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, of the Municipal Code of the City
of Millville.
§ 60-19. Severability.
Each article, section or paragraph of this chapter is declared to be an
independent article, section or paragraph, and the finding or holding of any
portion of this chapter to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause or reason shall not affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 60-20. Repealer.
Any ordinances or regulations of the municipality which are in conflict with
the provisions set forth in this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 60-16 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-20
35:1129

ARTICLE III
Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
§ 60-21. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations for dumpsters and
other refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to
ensure that they are covered at all times so as to prohibit the dumping,
leaking, spilling or otherwise discharging of liquids, semiliquids or solids
from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated
by the City of Millville or to the waters of the state. These regulations are
designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe
penalties for those who fail to comply.
§ 60-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Millville or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 60-23. Regulations.
A. Any person who owns, leases, controls or otherwise uses a dumpster or
refuse container must ensure that such dumpster or container is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from overflowing or
spilling out of the dumpster or container.
B. Any person who owns, leases, controls or otherwise uses a dumpster or
refuse container must ensure that such dumpster or container does not
§ 60-21 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-23
35:1131
§ 60-24. Exceptions.
The following containers are not covered by the regulations set forth in this
article.
leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the municipality.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers;
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit; and
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 60-23 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-24
35:1132
ARTICLE IV
Illicit Connection
§ 60-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Millville so as to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 60-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Millville,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, City streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the City of Millville or other public body and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 60-25 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-26
35:1133
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 60-27. Regulations.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
City of Millville any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 60-26 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-27
35:1134
ARTICLE V
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 60-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the disposal, dumping, or spilling
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the City of Millville, so as to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 60-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains that is owned or operated by the City of Millville, or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 60-30. Regulations.
§ 60-31. Exceptions.
A. The disposal, dumping, or spilling of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of
Millville is prohibited.
B. The disposal, dumping, or spilling of materials other than stormwater in
such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system also is prohibited.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater, for example, infiltration, basement or
crawl space sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, and rising
groundwaters are permissible if the disposal, dumping, or spilling of
materials does not create a traffic hazard or hazardous conditions.
[Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 18-2019]
§ 60-28 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-31
35:1135
C. Air conditioning condensate, excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water.
D. Irrigation water, including landscape and lawn-watering runoff.
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
G. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes.
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing materials applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from the equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods, for example,
shoveling and sweeping. Recovered materials are to be returned to
storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
the exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts, and does not apply
to engines or other enclosed machinery.
H. Residential car-washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
I. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
§ 60-31 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-31
35:1136
ARTICLE VI
Litter Control
§ 60-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the City of Millville, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe the penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 60-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, cloth, glass, paper, plastic,
rubber, wood or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to containers or packaging made from
the aforesaid materials, such as any bag, bottle, box, can, or jar and the
cap, lid, tab or top from a container or packaging. It also includes any
construction material, debris, garbage, refuse, rubbish or trash, together
with any cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming or glowing material. It
does not include the waste from the primary processes of farming, logging,
manufacturing, mining or other resource extraction processes, or
sawmilling.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 60-34. Regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, drop, throw or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon private property or public property
other than in litter receptacles or, having done so, to allow such litter to
remain.
B. Whenever any litter is discarded or thrown, or allowed to fall from a
boat or motor vehicle in violation of this article, the operator or owner,
or both, of the boat or motor vehicle also shall be deemed to have
violated this article.
§ 60-32 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-34
35:1137

ARTICLE VII
Pet Waste
§ 60-35. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Millville, so as to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 60-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall harbor, house, maintain, or
possess any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal kept for amusement or companionship, other
than a disability assistance animal.
PET SOLID WASTE — Excrement or waste matter expelled from the bowels
of the pet.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or the disposal
into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 60-37. Regulations.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any private property or public
property not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 60-38. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 60-35 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-38
35:1139

ARTICLE VIII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
§ 60-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations for the retrofitting of
existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with reconstruction,
repairing, repaving, resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property and to prevent the discharge of floatables and solids such as cans,
food wrappers, plastic bottles and other litter to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the City of Millville. These regulations are
designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply with these regulations.
§ 60-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Millville or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 60-41. Regulations.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 60-42 below prior to
the completion of the project.
§ 60-39 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-42
35:1141
§ 60-42. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 60-41 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see Subsection C below.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under the grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curbing-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
§ 60-42 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-42
35:1142
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 60-42 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-42
35:1143

ARTICLE IX
Wildlife Feeding
§ 60-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City
of Millville, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 60-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
FEED — To deposit, distribute, expose, give, place, or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 60-45. Regulations.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any property owned or
operated by the City of Millville, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife;
for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers.
§ 60-43 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-45
35:1145

ARTICLE X
Yard Waste Collection and Handling Program
§ 60-46. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the proper method of
collecting, disposing, and handling of yard waste within the City of Millville
so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 60-47. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a plastic bag so as
to prevent the yard waste from blowing or spilling out into the street and
coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, drive, parkway, road, street, viaduct,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise curbs, gutters, parking areas, pavement,
shoulders, sidewalks, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 60-48. Regulations.
A. The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of the owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not blow, rake, sweep, or otherwise place yard waste at
the curb or along the street unless the yard waste is containerized.
B. The blowing, raking, sweeping or otherwise placing of yard waste that
is not containerized at the curb or along the street is allowed only
during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection
and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet.
C. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any
other time or in any other manner is a violation of this section. If such
placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of
the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said
party shall be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 60-46 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 60-48
35:1147
Chapter 61
STREETS AND ROADS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering and dumping of waste
material — See Ch. 11, Art. VII.
Paving of streets — See Ch. 30, § 30-173.
Shoulder paving — See Ch. 30, § 30-176.
Solid waste disposal — See Ch. 30, § 30-177.
§ 60-48 MILLVILLE CODE § 60-48
35:1148
ARTICLE I
Standards for the Construction of New Streets
[Amended 12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 45-2001]
§ 61-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4, the State of New Jersey adopted
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. The
Legislature found and declared that it was in the public interest to avoid
unnecessary costs in the construction process and that uniform site
improvement standards would be both cost effective and predictable for
developers.
§ 61-2. Applicability.
All new streets in residential areas shall be constructed in accordance
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards, pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. and any conditions set forth by the Planning Board
of the City.
§ 61-3. Certificate of approval.
A. Upon completion of street construction in accordance with the
aforesaid standards to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the City
Engineer shall certify to the governing body that the street in question
is suitably improved and complies with all applicable performance
standards and conditions set forth by the Planning Board of the City.
B. Certification may be extended with a performance guarantee approved
by the governing body posted in an amount sufficient to cover the costs
of the required uncompleted construction as established by the City
Engineer in a form approved by the City Attorney which is adequate to
protect the public health, safety and welfare for the special
circumstances of the particular street.
§ 61-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-3
35:1149

ARTICLE II
Excavation of Curbs, Sidewalks and Streets
[Amended 12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 45-2001]
§ 61-4. Purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare it is necessary to regulate the manner
in which curbs, sidewalks and streets are excavated. The governing body of
the City further finds and declares that problems of traffic control and safety
occur when excavation and restoration of curbs, sidewalks and streets take
place. It is the intent and purpose of this article to regulate the manner in
which these activities take place and to provide reasonable standards for
the performance of these activities.
§ 61-5. Director to regulate and enforce.
The Director in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is hereby
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations which are necessary to
carry out the intent of this article and to provide for its enforcement.
§ 61-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
DIRECTOR — The Commissioner who is the Director in charge of the
Streets and Roads Department.
ENGINEER — The City Engineer or his designated representative.
PAPER STREET — Any area designated as a proposed future street that
may or may not in the future be accepted by the City which is recorded on
a plot located in the County Clerk’s office or shown on the City Tax Maps
and which has not been accepted or maintained by the City as a public
street.[Added 5-20-2014 by Ord. No. 21-2014]
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, LLC, partnership,
trust, or other legal entity.
STREET — Any alley, highway, roadway, public way, easement or other rightof-
way accepted or maintained by the City as a public street, as well as
any state or county highway or street over which the City has acquired
jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 61-7. Permit required.
A. No person shall break the surface of, excavate, clear or tunnel under
any curb, sidewalk, street or paper street within the City without first
obtaining a permit from the City. [Added 5-20-2014 by Ord. No.
21-2014]
§ 61-4 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-7
35:1151
§ 61-8. Permit fees.
The permit fees required for any work connected with a curb, sidewalk or
street shall be paid to the City Clerk as follows:
§ 61-9. Applications.
B. In the event of an emergency which requires that any of the aforesaid
activities begin immediately, the application for a permit shall be filed
simultaneously with the commencement of the work and the verbal
approval of the City Engineer to proceed. When the permit is issued it
shall be retroactive to the date when the work was commenced.
C. All permits issued pursuant to this article shall apply only to the person
to whom the permit is issued and shall not be transferable.
D. If special circumstances exist, the City official issuing the permit may
impose special written conditions to which the issuance of the permit
shall be subject, provided they are not inconsistent with these
regulations.
E. Work to be performed under a permit shall commence within 90 days
from the date the permit is issued. If the work is not commenced within
that time period, the permit shall automatically be void. The permittee
may request an extension of the time limit by filing a written request
with the City Engineer who is authorized to extend the time limit for the
permit for good cause.
F. No person shall break the surface of, excavate, clear or tunnel under
any paper street within the City without obtaining a permit from the
City and securing approval from the City of Millville Planning Board in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 30 of this Code, Land Use
and Development Regulations. [Added 5-20-2014 by Ord. No.
21-2014]
A. Administrative fee: $50.
B. Inspection fee: a base fee of $50, plus $25 for each $1,000 estimated
cost of construction or fraction thereof.
C. Restoration fee for all City and county road conditions shall be
determined as follows:
Required Restored
Condition
Base Fee
(4'x4')
Additional Charge
Per Square Foot
12" gravel subbase
4" MABC base
2" FABC $125 $7
§ 61-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-9
35:1152
A. Applications for all permits required for sewer and water excavations
shall be filed in writing with the Water Utility Superintendent on a form
provided by his office. Applications for all other permits required by this
article shall be filed in writing with the City Engineer on a form
provided by his office. Each application shall provide the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property abutting the
area where the work is to be performed.
(3) The block and lot number of the property to be benefited by the
work to be performed.
(4) The name and address of the contractor or person who is to
perform the work.
(5) The nature of the surface where the opening is being made.
(6) The character and purpose of the work proposed.
(7) The time and date when the work is to be commenced and
completed.
(8) The estimated cost of the proposed work.
(9) The application shall be accompanied with five sets of plans
showing the exact dimensions and location of the excavation area.
The applicant shall supply, at a minimum, the length and width of
the excavation, the distance from the street opening to the center
line of the roadway being excavated, and the distance from the
street opening to the center line of the nearest intersecting street.
The Engineer may require additional information such as the line
and grade of the repair and the location of nearby utilities.
(10) The application shall be accompanied by a statement that the
applicant agrees to notify the Engineer no later than 48 hours prior
to the commencement of work and to obtain a utility markout
verification number by calling the underground utility markout
telephone number at least three business days prior to
commencement of the excavation.
(11) The application shall be accompanied by a statement that the
applicant agrees to restore the subgrade required by these
regulations immediately upon completion of the work.
Furthermore, the applicant shall place temporary patch in the
opening as required by these regulations.
(12) The application filed by a utility company shall be accompanied by
a statement that the utility shall restore the curb, gutter, sidewalk,
and street and other appurtenant structures in the right-of-way of
§ 61-9 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-9
35:1153
§ 61-10. Regulations.
the City to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
B. The application shall be filed with the appropriate City official before
any work is commenced. All permit fees due under this article shall be
paid to the City at the time that the application is filed.
C. Upon the receipt of an application which necessitates an inspection or
investigation by any City official, a copy of the application shall be
referred to each City official who is required to inspect or investigate
the site.
D. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished satisfactory
proof that the applicant is insured for liability resulting in injury to any
person and damage to any property caused by the actions or omissions
of the applicant, his agents, servants or employees, including
contractors intending to perform work pursuant to this article. The
policy limits for said insurance shall be a single limit of $1,000,000 for
personal injury and $500,000 for property damage. The City Engineer is
hereby authorized to waive the requirements of this section for work
considered minor in nature and which does not include the excavation
of a street.
E. The City official authorized to issue the permit shall issue a permit to all
applicants who have paid all required fees, complied with the
regulations contained in this article, and complied with the written
regulations promulgated by the Director in charge of the Streets and
Roads Department.
A. A copy of the permit and a copy of the approved plans shall be kept in
the possession of the person actually performing the work and
presented to any City employee upon request who is authorized to see
these documents such as employees from the Engineering Department
or police officers from the Millville Police Department.
B. All construction and restoration operations conducted on streets within
the City shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways and shall be subject to the regulations
contained in Chapter 39 of the Municipal Code of the City, specifically
§§ 39-39 through 39-47.
C. All material and refuse placed on or near the street during excavation
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the work.
D. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and shall
be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner
prescribed by the Engineer. Where the Engineer determines that the
excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill
with other suitable material approved by the Engineer which shall be
placed in layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth and thoroughly
§ 61-9 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-10
35:1154
§ 61-11. Specifications.
§ 61-12. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
compacted in the manner prescribed by the Engineer. On completion
of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess material and leave
the premises in a clean condition. If the Engineer determines that
any backfill excavation has settled or caved in, he shall so notify the
permittee, who shall promptly resume backfilling until the Engineer
determines that settlement is complete.
E. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
F. There shall be no blasting without prior notification to the City
Engineer.
G. If the work is not completed within 48 hours or any extension granted
by the Director, or is not performed in accordance with the regulations
set forth in this article or any other regulations promulgated by the
Director, or any conditions imposed with the issuance of the permit,
then the City may complete the work and restore the surface of the
street. The cost of completing the work and restoring the street shall be
charged to the permittee and recovered by additional billing or by an
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
H. Utility companies shall be fully responsible for permanent restoration
within all City rights-of-way.
A. Schedule A titled "Specifications for the Restoration of Curbs and
Sidewalks in the Rights-of-Way" is attached hereto and incorporated by
reference as part of this article.130
B. Schedule B titled "Specifications for Restoration of Roadway Surfaces"
is attached hereto and incorporated by reference as part of this
article.131
A. Any application for a permit may be denied by the City official
authorized to issue the permit, or any permit issued may be suspended
or revoked by the Director in charge of the Streets and Roads
Department for any of the following causes:
(1) If the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with the
regulations contained in this article.
(2) If the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with any
regulations promulgated by the Director.
130. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
131. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 61-10 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-12
35:1155
§ 61-13. Violations and penalties.
(3) If the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with any other
applicable ordinances adopted by the City of Millville.
(4) If the permittee has violated the terms or conditions of the permit
that was issued.
(5) If the permittee is performing the work in a manner which
endangers the public health, safety or welfare.
B. If the applicant or permittee disagrees with the decision made by the
City official, he may request a hearing before the Director by filing a
written request for a hearing with the City Clerk which sets forth the
reasons for the appeal. The hearing shall be held within 10 days
following submission of the written request for hearing.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or to a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. Each and every day in which a violation of any of the provisions of this
article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 61-12 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-13
35:1156
ARTICLE III
Repairs to Curbs and Sidewalks
§ 61-14. Purpose. [Added 12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 45-2001]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq., the governing body of the City finds and
declares that curbs and sidewalks develop defects and deteriorate over time
which increases the risk of injury to the general public utilizing them for
pedestrian travel. The governing body of the City further finds and declares
that it is in the interest of public safety that property owners abutting curbs
and sidewalks shall maintain them in good condition and repair them when
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. It is the intent
and purpose of this article to establish a procedure for the orderly and
reasonable enforcement of this policy.
§ 61-15. Responsibility of property owners.
Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining the curbs and
sidewalks abutting their property in reasonably good condition, free from
defects and dangerous conditions which could cause injury to persons
properly using the curbs and sidewalks. Property owners are not
responsible for minor flaws and stretches of minor uneveness.
§ 61-16. Notification to make repair; deadline.
Whenever the Board of Commissioners shall, by resolution, determine that
repairs are required to a curb or sidewalk of an abutting landowner, the
director in charge of streets and roads shall notify, in writing, the owner of
the abutting land to make the necessary repairs. Said repairs shall be made
within 30 days from the date of service of the written notice.
§ 61-17. Failure to repair; work done by City; cost to become lien.
In the event that said repairs are not effected within 30 days after written
notice has been served on the abutting landowner to make the necessary
repairs, the director in charge of streets and roads may procure such
repairs as shall be required at the expense of the City, and all costs
expended therefor shall become a lien upon the abutting lands where
such repairs were made to the same extent that assessments for local
improvements are liens. The cost thereof shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for the collection of such assessments.
§ 61-18. Filing of complaint; restitution.
In the event that the abutting landowner has failed to make the necessary
repairs to the curbs or sidewalks within 30 days of the service of the
written notice, a formal complaint may be filed by the City against said
property owner with the Municipal Court for enforcement of this article.
The Municipal Court, in its discretion, may impose penalties as prescribed
by Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, of the Code and, in addition,
§ 61-14 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-18
35:1157
may impose restitution in favor of the City for all moneys expended to effect
the necessary repairs to the curbs or sidewalks.
§ 61-19. Filing of action to recover costs.
In addition thereto, the City may file an action to recover the amount due
against the property owner in any court having competent jurisdiction. A
certified copy of the certificate of assessment shall in such action be prima
facie evidence of the existence of the debt due from the property owner to
the City.
§ 61-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-19
35:1158
ARTICLE IV
Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011132]
§ 61-20. Statutory authority.
§ 61-21. Purpose and scope.
§ 61-22. Commissioner to regulate and enforce.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, the Legislature of the State of New Jersey
authorized municipalities to adopt laws, that are not contrary to the
laws of the state or the United States, that it deems necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-1 et seq., the Legislature of the State of New
Jersey authorized municipalities to adopt laws to provide for the
cleaning of streets of the municipality and for the collection or disposal
of solid wastes. The municipality is authorized to establish and operate
a system therefor and to make such laws as it may deem necessary and
proper for the introduction, operation and management of such system,
subject to the provisions of the Solid Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-1 et seq.)
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-1, a municipality that establishes a system
for the collection or disposal of solid waste may limit service by it to
curbside collection along public streets or roads that have been
dedicated to and accepted by the municipality. The municipal governing
body may also refuse to enter upon private property to remove solid
waste from dumpsters or other solid waste containers.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds that the orderly collection,
disposal and utilization of solid waste is a matter of important public
concern to all residents living within the municipality. The efficient
collection and disposal of solid waste protects the public health, safety
and welfare.
B. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally interpreted so
as best to achieve the purposes set forth herein. This article shall be
interpreted in harmony with the Solid Waste Management Act133 and
the current Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules concerning the enforcement of
this article, including the collection or disposal of solid waste.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was previously
Collection of Bulky Waste, Garbage and Trash.
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
§ 61-20 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-22
35:1159
§ 61-23. Definitions. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016;
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 46-2019]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CATHODE RAY TUBE — A vacuum tube or picture tube used to convert an
electronic signal into a visual image.
COMMINGLE — To combine or consolidate different types of solid waste at
the point of generation or origin.
COMPUTER — An electronic, magnetic, optical, electrochemical, or other
high-speed data-processing device performing logical, arithmetic, or
storage function, and may include both a computer central processing unit
and a monitor, but the term shall not include an automated typewriter or
typesetter, a portable handheld calculator, a portable digital assistant, or
other similar device.
CONTAINER — A wheeled cart provided by the City, the capacity and
specifications of which shall be determined by the Director of Public Works.
CURB — The area closest to the shoulder of the alley, highway, road or
street; in the absence of a shoulder, it means the area closest to the traveled
portion of the alley, highway, road or street.
CURBSIDE — The area between the curb and the sidewalk. In the absence
of a curb or sidewalk, it means the area closest to the curb as defined herein
without endangering traffic safety or obstructing pedestrian travel.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — Cathode ray tubes, desktop or personal
computers, computer monitors, portable computers, televisions, and
electronic devices, including telephones of any type that have a video
display with a viewing area greater than four inches when measured
diagonally.
FOOD WASTE — Any waste generated by food service and/or food sales
establishments that would normally be landfilled and can be used as animal
feed or is composted in some manner.
GARBAGE — Shall be considered to be the meat and vegetable solids
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods,
and considered originated principally from kitchens.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste material defined as a hazardous
material in the federal environmental statutes or regulations, state
B. The Commissioner is authorized to designate the municipal employees
responsible for the enforcement of the rules and regulations.
C. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers or opening
solid waste bags to detect, by sight or sound, any violation of these
rules and regulations.
§ 61-22 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-23
35:1160
environmental statutes or regulations, county health ordinances or
regulations, or the municipal ordinances.
MONITOR — A separate video display component of a computer, whether
sold separately or together with a computer central processing unit and
computer box, and includes a cathode ray tube, liquid crystal display, gas
plasma, digital light processing, or other image projection technology,
greater than four inches measured diagonally, and its case, interior wires
and circuitry, cable to the central processing unit, and power cord.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which more than 10 dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes, except hotels,
motels or other guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1
et seq.).
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Millville located within the County of
Cumberland and State of New Jersey.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative, enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PORTABLE COMPUTER — A computer and video display greater than four
inches in size that can be carried as one unit by an individual, including a
laptop computer.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Included in this article are as follows:
OLD NEWS PRINT (ONP) — Shall be considered to mean all
uncontaminated newspaper(s), catalogues, unwanted mail, magazines,
telephone books, office paper.
A.
ALUMINUM CANS — Shall be considered to mean all beer and soda
metal cans not to exceed one gallon in size.
B.
GLASS — Shall be considered clear, green, blue and amber glass. Rings
and labels do not need to be removed.
C.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — All materials designated GMFBC,
including plastic beverage containers. Specifically, commingling
includes glass, metal and beverage containers. Specifically,
commingling includes glass, metal and plastic food and beverage
containers mixed in one container and delivered in same fashion.
D.
GMFBC — Glass and metal food and beverage containers, including all
plastic soda bottles.
E.
§ 61-23 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-23
35:1161
RESIDENT — Any human being residing within the municipality on a
temporary or permanent basis, excluding transient or seasonal guests
staying at hotels, motels or other guesthouses.
RESOURCE RECOVERY — The collection, separation, recycling and
recovery of glass, metals, paper and other materials for reuse. It also
includes the incineration of solid waste for energy production and the
recovery of recyclable materials from that process.
SANITARY LANDFILL FACILITY — A solid waste facility at which solid
waste is deposited on or in the land as fill for the purpose of permanent
disposal or storage for an extended period of time. It shall not include any
waste facility approved for the disposal of hazardous waste.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, trash, and other discarded materials resulting
from domestic and community activities. It also includes these same
materials resulting from commercial industrial and institutional
establishments.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to the pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a transfer station
or other authorized solid waste facility.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — Includes all activities related to the
collection and disposal of solid waste by any person engaged in such
process.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN — The District Solid Waste
Management Plan for Cumberland County as approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
SOURCE SEPARATION — To separate different types of solid waste at the
point of generation or origin.
TELEVISION — A stand-alone display system containing a cathode ray
tube or any other type of display primarily intended to receive video
programming via broadcast, having a viewable area greater than four
inches measured diagonally, able to adhere to standard consumer video
PLASTIC — All plastic containers with the symbol 1, 2, 4, 5, and 7,
such as laundry detergent bottles, excluding motor oil or any petroleum
products or other hazardous waste.
F.
OFFICE PAPER — All high-grade white bond paper, mixed office paper,
i.e., computer paper, envelopes, legal paper. Shredded paper is not
permitted.
G.
H. GABLE-TOPPED CARTONS — Soup, milk, and juice cartons.
CARDBOARD — Cereal, cracker and pasta boxes, cardboard beverage
holders, detergent, show and tissue boxes, and any corrugated
cardboard boxes. All cardboard should be flattened; however, failure to
flatten the cardboard shall not be cause to refuse collection so long as
the cardboard is contained within the totes.
I.
§ 61-23 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-23
35:1162
formats and having the capability of selecting different broadcast channels
and supporting sound capability.
TRASH — Shall be considered to mean all rubbish, ashes, broken crockery,
old clothing, pipes, boards, and such similar waste material; including,
scraped-off wallpaper, vegetative waste such as bagged grass, household
redecorating or maintenance refuse, discarded household utensils, bulk
items such as household furniture, small appliances, boards. Rubbish and
trash shall be considered to include any article or refuse material discarded
by a householder in the usual and ordinary course of living, whether same
be metal or wood; provided, however, that same must be properly broken up
and placed in containers or bundles for convenient handling by one person.
Trash material for collection under this article shall be deemed to include all
vegetative waste; provided however, that it is properly contained in plastic
bags, hampers or other suitable containers, manufactured lumber in length
not over five feet and bundled and tied, not to exceed 45 pounds. The trash
material for collection to be from residential properties only and placed by
the residents at the curb or roadside, in suitable containers for convenient
handling.
VIDEO DISPLAY — An output surface having a viewable area greater than
four inches when measured diagonally that displays moving graphical
images or a visual representation of image sequences or pictures, showing a
number of quickly changing images on a screen in fast succession to create
the illusion of motion, including, if applicable, a device that is an integral
part of the display and cannot be easily removed from the display by the
consumer that produces the moving image on the screen. A video display
typically uses a cathode ray tube, liquid crystal display, gas plasma, digital
light processing, or other image projection technology.
§ 61-24. Curbside collection program. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2-2016; 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017; 10-1-2019 by Ord. No.
46-2019]
A. There is hereby established within the municipality a curbside program
for the collection of garbage and trash. This program is for residential
customers residing within the municipality whose solid waste is
collected at the curbside by the municipality.
B. The collection of garbage and trash shall be made once every week for
each customer. Collection shall occur in accordance with a schedule
established by the municipality.
C. Garbage and trash as said terms are defined in § 61-23 above shall be
containerized in a wheeled cart provided by the City, the capacity and
specifications of which shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage or trash at the
curbside for collection before 3:00 p.m. on the day in advance of the day
designated for collection in accordance with the schedule established
by the municipality.
§ 61-23 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-24
35:1163
§ 61-25. Residential dwelling compliance requirements. [Amended
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 38-2016; 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017;
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 38-2017]
§ 61-26. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
§ 61-27. Electronic waste.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave garbage or trash of empty
containers at the curbside after 7:00 a.m. on the day after the day
designated for collection in accordance with the schedule established
by the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle garbage and trash with
other solid waste, which is required to be source separated and
recycled.
G. The municipality has placed clean communities containers within the
Central Business District, parks and other public property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste in these containers
which was generated from a residential dwelling or a nonresidential
establishment.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of any residential dwelling shall comply
with the rules and regulations established by the municipality.
B. For multifamily dwellings, the management or owner is responsible for
providing an appropriately sized dumpster or such smaller containers
as may be sufficient to accommodate solid waste collection from its
units at its own expense. Solid waste shall be collected from said
dumpster or other such container on a schedule of at least one time per
week. The management or owner shall also be required to provide proof
that it has contracted with a private waste hauler in order to register its
units as provided § 11-73. Violations and penalty notices shall be
directed to the owner or management in those instances where the
violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and
every six months during their occupancy.
A. Nonresidential establishments include commercial, industrial and
institutional generators of solid waste. Any person who owns or
operates a nonresidential establishment shall comply with the rules and
regulations established by the municipality.
B. Any person who owns or operates a nonresidential establishment shall
arrange for the proper source separation, collection and disposal of
solid waste, including garbage, trash and bulky waste.
§ 61-24 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-27
35:1164
§ 61-28. Hazardous waste.
§ 61-29. Violations and penalties.
A. The Electronic Waste Management Act134 became effective on January
1, 2011. This act bans the disposal of electronic waste through the
municipal curbside collection solid waste program. Electronic waste
includes, among other things, all types of computers and related
equipment including computer monitors.
B. No electronic waste shall be placed at the curbside for collection by the
municipality. All persons are required to take electronic waste to an
approved dropoff point, such as a county or municipal solid waste
collection center or a participating electronics retail store.
A. The improper disposal of hazardous waste pollutes the environment
and poses a threat to human health. The improper disposal of these
materials includes pouring them down the drain, depositing them into
storm sewers, or depositing them on or in the ground.
B. No hazardous waste shall be placed at the curbside for collection by the
municipality. All persons are required to take hazardous waste to an
approved dropoff point, such as the county or municipal hazardous
waste collection center.
C. Household hazardous waste includes leftover household products that
contain corrosive, ignitable, reactive or toxic ingredients. Common
examples include batteries, cleaning compounds, garden chemicals
including herbicides and pesticides, paints, paint cleaners, finishes and
stains and petroleum-related products, such as antifreeze, gasoline,
kerosene, and oil.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues constitutes an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
B. The following violations are considered less serious in nature and
therefore the minimum mandatory penalties set forth below shall apply:
Violation Fine
Container used of improper size or type $50
Container exceeding permitted weight limit $50
Garbage and trash placed for collection at improper
locations or times
$100
Bulky waste placed for collection at improper
locations or times
$100
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.94 et seq.
§ 61-27 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-29
35:1165
C. The municipality reserves the right to institute a suit in equity to
enforce the provisions of this article and to obtain an injunction to
restrain the violation of these regulations. This remedy shall be deemed
a concurrent remedy available in addition to the penalties set forth
above.
§ 61-29 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-29
35:1166
ARTICLE V
Source Separation of Recyclable Materials
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011135]
§ 61-30. Statutory authority.
§ 61-31. Purpose and scope.
§ 61-32. Commissioner to regulate and enforce.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, the Legislature of the State of New Jersey
authorized municipalities to adopt laws, that are not contrary to the
laws of the state or the United States, that it deems necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. The Solid Waste Management Act was made effective on May 6, 1970
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.). The purpose of the Act was to establish a
framework for the coordination of solid waste collection, disposal and
utilization activity within the state.
C. The New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling
Act was made effective on April 20, 1987 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.).
The purpose of the Act was to remove certain recyclable materials from
the municipal solid waste stream to decrease the flow of solid waste
into the sanitary landfill facilities. It would also aid in the conservation
and recovery of valuable resources, increase the supply of reusable raw
materials for industry, and conserve energy in the manufacturing
process.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds that the orderly
separation, collection and utilization of recyclable materials is a matter
of important public concern to all residents living within the
municipality. The removal of recyclable materials from the municipal
solid waste stream will decrease the flow of solid waste into the sanitary
landfill facility, aid in the conservation and recovery of valuable
resources, increase the supply of reusable raw materials for
manufacturing industries, and conserve energy in the manufacturing
process.
B. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally interpreted so
as best to achieve the purposes set forth herein. This article shall be
interpreted in harmony with the Solid Waste Management Act and the
current Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules concerning the enforcement of
135. Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was previously
Separation of Recyclable Materials.
§ 61-30 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-32
35:1167
§ 61-33. Definitions. [Amended 10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 46-2019]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
COMMINGLE — To combine or consolidate different types of solid waste at
the point of generation or origin.
CONTAINER — A wheeled cart provided by the City, the capacity and
specifications of which shall be determined by the Director of Public Works.
CURB — The area closest to the shoulder of the alley, highway, road or
street; in the absence of a shoulder, it means the area closest to the traveled
portion of the alley, highway, road or street.
CURBSIDE — The area between the curb and the sidewalk. In the absence
of a curb or sidewalk, it means the area closest to the curb as defined herein
without endangering traffic safety or obstructing pedestrian travel.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items of solid waste
designated for recycling within the Cumberland County Solid Waste
Management Plan. Examples include glass, metal, paper, plastic, polycoated
paperboard packaging, beverage containers and aseptic packaging,
corrugated and other cardboard, magazines, newspapers, or high-grade
office paper.
DISTRICT RECYCLING PLAN — The plan adopted by the governing body
of the Cumberland County Improvement Authority and approved by the
appropriate state authority.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which more than 10 dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes, except hotels,
motels or other guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1
et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person appointed by the
director and who shall be authorized to enforce these regulations and any
other rules promulgated hereunder.
this article, including the source separation of solid waste and the
collection thereof.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator is primarily responsible for the
enforcement of these regulations. However, the Commissioner is
authorized to designate such other municipal employees as may be
necessary to assist in the enforcement of the rules and regulations.
C. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers or opening
solid waste bags to detect, by sight or sound, the presence of any
recyclable material.
§ 61-32 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-33
35:1168
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — All residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within the boundaries of the
municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Millville located within the County of
Cumberland within the boundaries of New Jersey.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Included in this article are as follows:
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — To separate different types of solid waste at the
point of generation or origin.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated from other solid waste at the point of generation by the
generator for the purposes of recycling.
OLD NEWS PRINT (ONP) — Shall be considered to mean all
uncontaminated newspaper(s), catalogues, unwanted mail, magazines,
telephone books, office paper.
A.
ALUMINUM CANS — Shall be considered to mean all beer and soda
metal cans not to exceed one gallon in size.
B.
GLASS — Shall be considered clear, green, blue and amber glass. Rings
and labels do not need to be removed.
C.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — All materials designated GMFBC,
including plastic beverage containers. Specifically, commingling
includes glass, metal and beverage containers. Specifically,
commingling includes glass, metal and plastic food and beverage
containers mixed in one container and delivered in same fashion.
D.
GMFBC — Glass and metal food and beverage containers, including all
plastic soda bottles.
E.
PLASTIC — All plastic containers with the symbol 1, 2, 4, 5, and 7
such as laundry detergent bottles, excluding motor oil or any petroleum
products or other hazardous waste.
F.
OFFICE PAPER — All high-grade white bond paper, mixed office paper,
i.e., computer paper, envelopes, legal paper. Shredded paper is not
permitted.
G.
H. GABLE-TOPPED CARTONS — Soup, milk, and juice cartons.
CARDBOARD — Cereal, cracker and pasta boxes, cardboard beverage
holders, detergent, show and tissue boxes, and any corrugated
cardboard boxes. All cardboard should be flattened; however, failure to
flatten the cardboard shall not be cause to refuse collection so long as
the cardboard is contained within the totes.
I.
§ 61-33 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-34
35:1169
§ 61-34. Mandatory source separation.
§ 61-35. Curbside collection of recyclable materials. [Amended
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 46-2019]
A. Residential dwellings. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, tenants or occupants of residential dwellings within the
municipality to separate designated recyclable materials from other
solid waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be placed separately
at the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be
established by the municipality.
B. Multifamily dwellings. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
manage or own multifamily dwellings within the municipality to
separate designated recyclable materials from other solid waste.
Designated recyclable materials shall be placed separately at the curb
in a manner and on such days and times as may be established by the
municipality. If this is not practical, then the management or owner
shall provide for the proper separation, collection and recycling of the
recyclable materials.
C. Nonresidential establishments. Nonresidential establishments include
commercial, industrial and institutional generators of recyclable
materials. It shall be mandatory for all persons who own or operate
nonresidential establishments within the municipality to separate
designated recyclable materials from other solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be collected and recycled by the owner or
operator or their designee.
A. There is hereby established within the municipality a curbside program
for the collection of recyclable materials. This program is for residential
customers residing within the municipality whose recyclable materials
are collected at the curbside by the municipality.
B. The collection of recyclable materials shall be made once every two
weeks for each customer. Collection shall occur in accordance with a
schedule established by the municipality.
C. Recyclable materials shall be placed in a City-supplied wheeled
container and placed at the curbside for collection by the municipality.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to place recyclable materials at the
curbside for collection more than 12 hours in advance of the day
designated for collection by the municipality.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave recyclable materials or
empty containers at the curbside more than 12 hours after the day
designated for collection by the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle recyclable materials
with other solid waste and place it at the curbside for collection by the
municipality.
§ 61-34 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-35
35:1170
§ 61-36. Residential dwelling compliance requirements. [Amended
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 38-2016]
§ 61-37. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
G. Once recyclable materials are placed at the curbside for collection, they
become the property of the municipality. No person except the owner or
a person authorized by the municipality shall collect, remove or tamper
with these materials.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of any residential dwelling shall comply
with the rules and regulations established by the municipality.
B. For multifamily dwellings, the management or owner is responsible for
the proper separating of recyclable materials and providing an
appropriate dumpster sufficient to accommodate recyclables from its
units. Recyclables shall be collected from said dumpster on a schedule
of at least one time per week. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the owner or management in those instances where the
violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and
every six months during their occupancy.
A. Nonresidential establishments include commercial, industrial and
institutional generators of recyclable materials. Any person who owns
or operates a nonresidential establishment shall comply with the rules
and regulations established by the municipality.
B. Any person who owns or operates a nonresidential establishment shall
arrange for the proper separation, collection and recycling of
designated recyclable materials. Any person who owns or operates a
nonresidential establishment and who provides outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials.
C. Any person who owns or operates a nonresidential establishment shall
report on an annual basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator on
recycling activities at his/her premises. The forms shall be prescribed
by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and shall include the type of
material, the quantity, the date and market to which the material was
sold or the recycling center where the material was transported.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 21-2013]
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall
comply with the recycling requirements set forth in this article.
Additionally, all food service establishments shall be required to recycle
grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing of food or food
products. Furthermore, these establishments shall maintain such
records as may be prescribed for inspection by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator or any code enforcement officer.
§ 61-35 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-38
35:1171
§ 61-38. New developments of residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional properties.
§ 61-39. Violations and penalties.
A. Any application to the Municipal Planning Board for subdivision or site
plan approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of five units
or more, or single-family developments of 50 units or more must include
a recycling plan. Any application to the Municipal Planning Board for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of any
commercial, industrial or institutional development utilizing 1,000
square feet or more of land must include a recycling plan. The plan shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the amounts and composition of solid waste
and designated recyclable materials expected to be generated at
the proposed development; and
(2) The locations documented on the site plan which provide for
convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
locations and contain other attributes such as fencing, lighting and
signage as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality,
the owner of any development described in Subsection A above must
supply a copy of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for
the collection and disposal of solid waste, and the collection and
recycling of designated recyclable materials in those instances where
the municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer, provision shall be
made for the indoor or enclosed outdoor storage of solid waste and
source-separated designated recyclable materials.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues constitutes an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
B. The following violations are considered less serious in nature, and
therefore the minimum mandatory penalties set forth below shall apply:
Violation Fine
Container used of improper size or type $50
Container exceeding permitted weight limit $50
Recyclable materials placed for collection at
improper locations or times
$100
§ 61-38 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-39
35:1172
C. The municipality reserves the right to institute a suit in equity to
enforce the provisions of this article and to obtain an injunction to
restrain the violation of these regulations. This remedy shall be deemed
a concurrent remedy available in addition to the penalties set forth
above.
§ 61-39 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-39
35:1173

ARTICLE VI
Debris from Construction, Renovation and Demolition
[Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011136]
§ 61-40. Statutory authority.
§ 61-41. Purpose and scope.
§ 61-42. Enforcing authority.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, the Legislature of the State of New Jersey
authorized municipalities to adopt laws, that are not contrary to the
laws of the state or the United States, that it deems necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. The Solid Waste Management Act137 was made effective May 6, 1970.
The purpose of the Act was to establish a framework for the
coordination of solid waste collection, disposal and utilization within
the state. Pursuant to the Act, solid waste management plans were
adopted by each county and approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds that the orderly collection,
disposal and utilization of solid waste is a matter of important public
concern to all residents living within the municipality. The efficient
collection and disposal of solid waste protects the public health, safety
and welfare. The efficient utilization of such waste is also in the public
interest.
B. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally interpreted so
as best to achieve the purposes set forth herein. This article shall be
interpreted in harmony with the Solid Waste Management Act138 and
the current Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules for the enforcement of this
article.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator is primarily responsible for the
enforcement of these regulations. However, the Commissioner is
authorized to designate such other municipal employees as may be
necessary to assist in the enforcement of the rules and regulations.
136. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VI, Condominium Services Act.
137. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
§ 61-40 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-43
35:1175
§ 61-43. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation, or demolition project for
which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which
a dumpster or roll-off container shall be placed on the premises for the
purpose of placement of the debris.
DEBRIS — The remains, rubble or solid waste material from a covered
project. This includes, but is not limited to, asphalt, brick, concrete, scrap
metal, tree stumps and trees.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative, enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
§ 61-44. Debris recovery plan.
Any person pursuing a covered project shall file a debris recovery plan
with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator prior to the commencement of
the covered project. The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and
estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to be generated
from the project, how each material will be managed, and the name of each
facility or service provider that the person will use to manage each material.
The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall ensure that a minimum
of 50% of the materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.
§ 61-45. Review of debris recovery plan.
A. Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and approved if it provides all of the information
required by these regulations. An approved debris recovery plan shall
be marked "Approved" and returned to the person who submitted the
plan.
B. Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by these regulations. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the person who submitted the plan shall
be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected, including the
reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building or demolition
permit sought, the person who will carry out the construction,
renovation, or demolition project shall make the required changes and
resubmit the debris recovery plan to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
§ 61-43 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-46
35:1176
§ 61-46. Diversion requirement adjustment.
§ 61-47. Debris recovery plan reporting requirements.
A. Application. If the person carrying out a covered project experiences
circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion
requirement set forth in these regulations, the person may apply for an
adjustment. The person shall indicate in writing why it is infeasible to
divert 50% of the materials being generated from the covered project
and specify what percentage of diversion could be achieved. Increased
costs to the person carrying out the covered project will not be an
acceptable justification for an adjustment.
B. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the person. If warranted the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the person to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the person carrying out a covered
project to divert 50% of the generated construction and demolition
debris from the covered project, the percentage of diversion required
shall be adjusted. The Recycling Coordinator shall notify in writing the
person carrying out the covered project of the adjusted diversion
requirement, and the person shall be required to divert the percentage
of construction and demolition debris required by the adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is feasible for the person carrying out a covered
project to meet the diversion requirement set forth in these regulations,
the Recycling Coordinator shall notify the person in writing of the
denial of the diversion requirement adjustment.
E. Appeal. The person carrying out the covered project may appeal to the
Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department within 30
days of the decision made by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator. The
appeal shall be made in writing and shall set forth all of the facts and
basis for the appeal. A decision by the Commissioner shall be made
within 10 days and shall be final.
A. Documentation. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the
final inspection, the person carrying out a covered project shall submit
in person or by certified mail to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator,
the documentation required to demonstrate that the applicant has met
the diversion requirement. The required documentation shall include
the following:
(1) A completed debris recovery report, signed by the person carrying
out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material
generated during the covered project and the quantity diverted or
disposed;
§ 61-46 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-47
35:1177
§ 61-48. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to these regulations and determine whether the person
carrying out the covered project has complied with or failed to comply
with the diversion requirement. The Recycling Coordinator shall provide in
writing the determination regarding compliance to the person carrying out
the covered project.
§ 61-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues
constitutes an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
(2) Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert
and dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
(3) Any additional information that the person carrying out the covered
project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirements.
§ 61-47 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-49
35:1178
ARTICLE VII
Yard Waste
[Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011]
§ 61-50. Statutory authority.
§ 61-51. Purpose and scope.
§ 61-52. Enforcing authority.
§ 61-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BRUSH — Branches, sticks, tree limbs, twigs and vines that are no larger
than 12 inches in diameter and no longer than six feet in length.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, the Legislature of the State of New Jersey
authorized municipalities to adopt laws, that are not contrary to the
laws of the state or the United States, that it deems necessary and
proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property, and for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare of
the municipality and its inhabitants.
B. The Solid Waste Management Act was made effective on May 6, 1970
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.). The purpose of the Act was to establish a
framework for the coordination of solid waste collection, disposal and
utilization activity within the state.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds that the orderly collection,
disposal and utilization of yard waste is a matter of important public
concern to all residents living within the municipality. The efficient
source separation, collection and disposal of yard waste aids in the
control of pollution and protects the public health, safety and welfare.
B. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally interpreted so
as best to achieve the purposes set forth herein. This article shall be
interpreted in harmony with the Solid Waste Management Act139 and
the current Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules for the enforcement of this
article.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator is primarily responsible for the
enforcement of these regulations. However, the Commissioner is
authorized to designate such other municipal employees as may be
necessary to assist in the enforcement of the rules and regulations.
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
§ 61-50 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-53
35:1179
COMMINGLE — To combine or consolidate different types of solid waste at
the point of generation or origin.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a plastic bag so as
to prevent the yard waste from blowing or spilling out into the street and
coming into contact with stormwater.
CURB — The area closest to the shoulder of the alley, highway, road or
street. In the absence of a shoulder, it means the area closest to the traveled
portion of the alley, highway, road or street.
CURBSIDE — The area between the curb and the sidewalk. In the absence
of a curb or sidewalk, it means the area closest to the curb as defined herein
without endangering traffic safety or obstructing pedestrian travel.
LEAF COMPOSTING FACILITY — A solid waste facility which is designed
and operated solely for the purpose of composting leaves, and shall also
include leaf mulching operations on land being actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which five or more dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes, except hotels,
motels or other guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1
et. seq.).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative, enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having
officers or directors.
SOURCE SEPARATION — To separate different types of solid waste at the
point of generation or origin.
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, drive, parkway, road, street, viaduct,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, as may comprise curbs, gutters, parking areas, pavement,
shoulders, sidewalks, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Branches, brush, grass clippings, leaves, stumps and parts
of trees, and trimmings from bushes, plants and other vegetation.
§ 61-54. Mandatory source separation.
A. Residential dwellings. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, tenants or occupants of residential dwellings within the
municipality to separate yard waste from other solid waste. Designated
§ 61-53 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-54
35:1180
§ 61-55. Curbside collection of yard waste. [Amended 3-15-2019 by
Ord. No. 15-2019]
yard waste shall be placed separately at the curbside in a manner and
on such days and times as may be established by the municipality.
B. Multifamily dwellings. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
manage or own multifamily dwellings within the municipality to
separate designated yard waste from other solid waste. Designated
yard waste shall be placed separately at the curbside in a manner and
on such days and times as may be established by the municipality. If this
is not practical, then the management or owner shall provide for the
proper source separation, collection and recycling of yard waste.
C. Nonresidential establishments. Nonresidential establishments include
commercial, industrial and institutional generators of yard waste. It
shall be mandatory for all persons who own or operate nonresidential
establishments within the municipality to separate yard waste from
other solid waste. Designated yard waste shall be separated, collected
and recycled by the owner or operator or their designee.
A. There is hereby established within the municipality a curbside program
for the collection of designated yard waste. This program is for
residential customers residing within the municipality whose yard
waste is collected at the curbside by the municipality.
B. The collection of grass clippings, leaves and trimmings from small
bushes and plants shall be made once every week for each customer.
Collection shall occur in accordance with a schedule established by the
municipality. This type of yard waste shall be containerized in plastic
bags and placed at the curbside for collection by the municipality.
C. Loose brush, which shall include branches, tree limbs, trunks, sticks
and other vegetation no larger than 12 inches in diameter and no longer
than six feet in length, but shall not include stumps, will be collected by
the municipality two times per year, once during the month of March
and a second time during the month of September. Collection will take
place on a variable schedule during said months that follows a
systematic route that encompasses the entire municipality. This route
will then be repeated on a regularly recurring basis so that the entire
municipality is covered each time. The specific locations and times for
loose brush pickup will vary depending upon the volume of loose brush
encountered and the workload requirements of municipal employees.
D. The municipality will designate a month in the spring and two months in
the fall each calendar year for the general cleanup of yard waste.
During these periods yard waste may be placed at the curbside without
being containerized.
§ 61-54 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-55
35:1181
§ 61-56. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
§ 61-57. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
§ 61-58. Pollution control.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to place yard waste at the curbside
for collection containing brush, tree limbs, tree stumps or trunks that
are larger than 12 inches in diameter and longer than six feet in length.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to place containerized yard waste at
the curbside for collection more than 12 hours in advance of the day
designated for collection by the municipality.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave containerized yard waste at
the curbside more than 12 hours after the day designated for collection
by the municipality.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle yard waste with other
types of solid waste and place it at the curbside for collection by the
municipality.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of any residential dwelling shall comply
with the rules and regulations established by the municipality.
B. For multifamily dwellings, the management or owner is responsible for
setting up and maintaining the recycling system for yard waste,
including the proper separation, collection and recycling of yard waste
in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
municipality. Violation and penalty notices will be directed to the owner
or management in those instances when the violator is not easily
identifiable. The management shall issue notification and collection
rules to new tenants when they arrive and every six months during their
occupancy.
A. Nonresidential establishments include commercial, industrial and
institutional generators of yard waste. Any person who owns or
operates a nonresidential establishment shall comply with the rules and
regulations established by the municipality.
B. Any person who owns or operates a nonresidential establishment that
generates yard waste shall arrange for the proper separation, collection
and recycling of the yard waste.
C. Any person who owns or operates a nonresidential establishment that
generates yard waste shall report on an annual basis to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator on recycling activities involving yard waste at
their premises. The forms shall be prescribed by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and shall include the amount of yard waste by
type collected and recycled, and the vendor or vendors providing the
recycling service.
§ 61-55 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-58
35:1182
§ 61-59. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues
constitutes an additional, separate and distinct offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to blow, rake, sweep or otherwise
place loose yard waste closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to blow, rake, sweep or otherwise
place loose yard waste at the curbside for collection by the municipality,
which is at a location or time not authorized by the municipality.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle yard waste with other
solid waste and place it at the curbside for collection by the
municipality.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle grass clippings, leaves
and trimmings from small bushes and plants with other yard waste and
place it at the curbside for collection by the municipality.
§ 61-58 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-59
35:1183

ARTICLE VIII
Residential Complexes
[Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011]
§ 61-60. Statutory authority.
§ 61-61. Purpose and scope.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-1, a municipality that establishes a system
for the collection and disposal of solid waste may limit service furnished
by it to curbside collection along public streets or roads that have been
dedicated to and accepted by the municipality. The municipality may
also refuse to enter upon private property to remove solid waste from
dumpsters or other solid waste containers.
B. The municipality may choose to reimburse the owners of residential
complexes which do not receive municipal curbside collection of solid
waste. Such reimbursement shall not exceed the cost that would be
incurred by the municipality in providing the collection and disposal
service directly.
C. The Condominium Act140 was enacted in 1969 and thereafter amended
on various dates. This Act requires a municipality to provide the same
services along the roads and streets of a qualified private community as
it provides to other residents along its public roads and streets, or to
reimburse the qualified private community for some or all of the
municipal services that it does not provide to the residents of a qualified
private community.
D. The Condominium Act requires that a municipality provides the
following essential services:
(1) The removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from the roads and
streets;
(2) The payment for the electricity required for the lighting of roads
and streets; and
(3) The collection of leaves, recyclable materials and solid waste along
roads and streets.
A. The governing body of the municipality finds that the orderly collection,
disposal and utilization of solid waste is a matter of important public
concern to all residents living within the municipality. The efficient
collection and disposal of solid waste protects the public health, safety
and welfare.
B. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally interpreted so
as best to achieve the purposes set forth herein. This article shall be
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
§ 61-60 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-61
35:1185
§ 61-62. Enforcing authority.
§ 61-63. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Five apartments or more located on a single
property or contiguous properties under common ownership or
management. An apartment building or garden apartment complex is
owned by a person that receives monthly rental payments from tenants who
occupy the premises for living quarters.
COMMINGLE — To combine or consolidate different types of solid waste at
the point of generation or origin.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — Five condominium units or more located
on a single property or contiguous properties under common ownership
or management. For this purpose, "condominium" shall mean the form of
ownership of real property under a master deed providing for ownership by
one or more owners of units of improvements together with an undivided
interest in common elements appurtenant to each unit.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest in the corporation or association is
entitled to possess and occupy, for dwelling purposes, an apartment, house,
or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association, or to
purchase a unit of housing constructed or erected by the corporation or
association.
CURB — The area closest to the shoulder of the alley, highway, road or
street. In the absence of a shoulder, it means the area closest to the traveled
portion of the alley, highway, road or street.
CURBSIDE — The area between the curb and the sidewalk. In the absence
of a curb or sidewalk, it means the area closest to the curb as defined herein
without endangering traffic safety or obstructing pedestrian travel.
interpreted in harmony with the Solid Waste Management Act141 and
the current Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The Commissioner in charge of the Streets and Roads Department is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules concerning the enforcement of
this article, including the collection or disposal of solid waste.
B. The Commissioner is authorized to designate the municipal employees
responsible for the enforcement of the rules and regulations.
C. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers or opening
solid waste bags to detect, by sight or sound, any violations of these
rules and regulations.
141. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
§ 61-61 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-63
35:1186
FEE SIMPLE COMMUNITY — A private community which consists of
individually owned lots or units and provides for common or shared
elements or interest in real property.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which five or more dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes except hotels,
motels or other guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those
terms are defined under the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq.)
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative, enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having
officers or directors.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative, fee simple community or horizontal property regime comprised
of a community trust or other trust device, condominium association,
homeowners' association, or council of co-owners, wherein the cost of
maintaining roads and streets and providing essential services is paid for
by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively of unit owners within the
community.
RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX — An apartment complex or a qualified private
community.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES — The collection and disposal of
solid waste.
SOURCE SEPARATION — To separate different types of solid waste at the
point of generation or origin.
TOTAL COST OF SERVICES — The cost that would be incurred by a
municipality in providing solid waste collection services to a multifamily
dwelling in the same manner as the municipality provides those services
curbside to other residents of the municipality.
§ 61-64. Curbside collection program.
A. It is the duty of the party who has generated the solid waste to see to it,
through proper diligence, that no nuisance arises from the management
of it which endangers the public health, safety or welfare.
B. A residential complex shall comply with the municipal curbside solid
waste collection program if it is practical to do so. Curbside collection
service will be deemed impractical if it is inefficient, unhealthy,
unsanitary, unsightly and otherwise unreasonable to participate in.
§ 61-63 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-64
35:1187
§ 61-65. Responsibilities of management or owner.
§ 61-66. Responsibilities of municipality.
C. Where it is impractical to require a residential complex to comply with
the municipal curbside solid waste collection program, then the
municipality shall either provide the solid waste collection services on
site or enter into a written agreement to annually reimburse the
residential complex for the total cost of the services.
A. In order to be eligible for solid waste collection services or
reimbursement for those services, a residential complex shall comply
with all recycling requirements generally applicable to other residential
properties within the municipality.
B. If a certified public works manager employed by the municipality
determines that a residential complex is not in compliance with the
recycling requirements, then the municipality may terminate solid
waste and recyclables collection services to the complex or reduce its
reimbursement payments by an amount equal to the landfill or disposal
costs that would be saved if the recyclables were separated from the
other solid waste.
C. No solid waste collection shall be terminated or reimbursement amount
shall be reduced pursuant to this subsection unless the management or
owner has been sent written notice of noncompliance and been given
30 days' written notice of the proposed reimbursement amount
reduction. During those 30 days the management or owner shall have
the opportunity to bring the residential complex into compliance with
the recycling requirements and have that compliance certified by a
certified public works manager employed by the municipality.
A. When the municipality determines not to provide solid waste collection
services to a residential complex, it shall enter into a written agreement
with the management or owner of the residential complex to annually
reimburse the complex in an amount not to exceed the cost that would
be incurred by the municipality in providing those services.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the residential complex shall be used
by the complex to pay for the solid waste collection service that the
municipality chooses not to provide.
C. The municipality shall reimburse the residential complex for the actual
cost of providing that service to the complex, but the reimbursement
amount shall not exceed the lower of the following:
(1) The actual cost of the solid waste collection services if the
municipality provided it directly; or
(2) The calculation of providing the solid waste collection services if
the dwelling units were located along public roads and streets and
the collection service was provided curbside.
§ 61-64 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-67
35:1188
§ 61-67. Proof of expenditure.
An agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for an
accounting by the residential complex of the use of the moneys paid over
to it by the municipality. The municipality shall be entitled to a refund of
any payments in excess of the amounts actually expended or contractually
committed by the residential complex during the accounting period in order
to provide for the solid waste collection services covered by the agreement.
§ 61-67 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 61-67
35:1189
Chapter 65
TAXATION
§ 61-67 MILLVILLE CODE § 61-67
35:1190
ARTICLE I
Five-Year Exemption and Abatement
[Amended 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 35-2008; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
14-2019]
§ 65-1. Legislative authority.
§ 65-2. Findings and purpose.
The governing body of the municipality finds and declares that there are
areas within the municipality which are in need of rehabilitation by private
enterprise. The governing body further finds and declares that tax
incentives are useful economic stimulants to promote the construction and
rehabilitation of commercial and industrial structures in areas threatened
with economic and social decline. It is the intent and purpose of this
article to permit the municipality the greatest flexibility possible within the
constitutional limitations to address problems of deterioration and decay.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings as set forth in the Act.
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property, as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building or
structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to the Act.
ANNUAL PERIOD — A duration of time comprising 365 days, or 366 days
when the included month of February has 29 days, that commences on
the date that an exemption or abatement for a project becomes effective
pursuant to § 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 441 (N.J.S.A. 40A:21-16).
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — A portion or all of a municipality
which has been determined to be an area in need of rehabilitation or
redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, P.L.
1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.), a blighted area as determined
A. The New Jersey Constitution authorizes the state legislature to enact
general laws under which municipalities may adopt ordinances
granting exemptions or abatements from taxation on buildings and
structures in areas declared in need of rehabilitation in accordance
with statutory criteria, within such municipalities and to the land
comprising the premises upon which such buildings or structures are
erected and which is necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof. Such
exemptions shall be for limited periods of time as specified by law, but
not in excess of five years. See Article 8, Section 1, paragraph 6.
B. This article is enacted pursuant to the Five-Year Exemption and
Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the
"Act"). This article is also enacted pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-5g of the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
§ 65-1 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-3
35:1191
pursuant to the Blighted Areas Act, P.L. 1949, c. 187 (N.J.S.A. 40:55-21.1
et seq.142), or which has been determined to be in need of rehabilitation
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq.143), P.L. 1977, c. 12
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.95 et seq.144), or P.L. 1979, c. 233 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.121 et
seq.145).
ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure, or part
thereof, used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material
or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or
for any combination thereof, which the governing body determines will
tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality,
assist in the economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase
the tax base of the municipality, and maintain or diversify and expand
commerce within the municipality. It shall not include any structure, or
part thereof, used or to be used by any business relocated from another
qualifying municipality unless: the total square footage of the floor area
of the structure, or part thereof, used or to be used by the business at
the new site, together with the total square footage of the land used or to
be used by the business, exceeds the total square footage of that utilized
by the business at its current site of operations by at least 10%; and
the property that the business is relocating to has been the subject of a
remedial action plan costing in excess of $250,000 performed pursuant to
an administrative consent order entered into pursuant to authority vested
in the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under. P.L. 1970, c. 33
(N.J.S.A. 13:1D-1 et seq.), the Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 1977, c. 74
(N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.), the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 1970, c.
39 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.), and the Spill Compensation and Control Act,
P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.).
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new dwelling, multiple-dwelling or
commercial or industrial structure, or the enlargement of the volume of
an existing multiple-dwelling or commercial or industrial structure by more
than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building or
structure to another use.
142. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-21.1 to 40:55-21.14 were repealed by L. 1992, c. 79, § 59. See
now N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
143. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 to 54:4-3.78 were repealed by L. 1991, c. 441, § 22,
effective 1-18-1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
144. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.95 to 54:4-3.112 were repealed by L. 1991, c. 441 § 22,
effective 1-18-1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
145. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.121 to 54:4-3.129 were repealed by L. 1991, c. 441 § 22,
effective 1-18-1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 65-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-3
35:1192
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion, alteration or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to the Act.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and
which does not change its permitted use. In the case of a multiple dwelling,
it includes only improvements which affect common areas or elements or
three or more dwelling units within the multiple dwelling. In the case of a
multiple-dwelling or commercial or industrial structure, it shall not include
ordinary painting, repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an
enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than 30%. In
no case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to a property for
which payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance
company at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding
the filing of an application pursuant to the Act.
PROJECT — The construction, improvement or conversion of a structure in
an area in need of rehabilitation that would qualify for an exemption, or an
exemption and abatement, pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 441 (N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1
et seq.).
§ 65-4. Municipal ordinance granting exemptions or abatements.
§ 65-5. Designation of areas in need of rehabilitation.
A. An ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act may be amended from time
to time. An amendment to an ordinance shall not affect any exemption,
abatement or tax agreement previously granted and in force prior to
the amendment.
B. Application for exemptions and abatements from taxation may be filed
pursuant to an ordinance so adopted to take initial effect in the tax year
in which the ordinance is adopted, and for tax years thereafter as set
forth in the Act, but no application for exemptions or abatements shall
be filed in the 11th tax year, or any tax year thereafter, unless the
ordinance is readopted by the governing body pursuant to the Act.
A. The areas within the municipality located within the Urban Enterprise
Zone, as amended from time to time, are areas in need of rehabilitation.
Application for exemptions and abatements from taxation may be filed
with the Assessor of the municipality for eligible projects located within
the Urban Enterprise Zone.
B. The areas within the municipality located within the Center City
Redevelopment Area, as amended from time to time, are areas in need
of rehabilitation. Application for exemptions and abatements from
taxation may be filed with the Assessor of the municipality for eligible
projects located within the Center City Redevelopment Area.
§ 65-3 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-6
35:1193
§ 65-6. Commercial and industrial projects.
§ 65-7. Contents of application for tax agreement.
Applicants for exemptions or abatements from taxation for new construction
of commercial or industrial structures shall provide the municipality with an
application setting forth the following information:
A. This article provides for the exemption from taxation of improvements
to commercial and industrial structures. In determining the value of
real property, the municipality shall regard up to the Assessor's full and
true value of the improvements as not increasing the value of the
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not
be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, unless there is damage to the structure through action
of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
B. Exemptions for commercial and industrial improvements shall be
authorized on an individual basis after review, evaluation and approval
of each application by the governing body of the municipality.
A. A general description of a project for which exemption and abatement is
sought;
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans and drawings which illustrate the general design of the project
and all the structures to be constructed;
D. The total number of full-time and part-time employees employed at the
subject property prior to the new construction. A description of the
number, classes and type of employees to be employed at the project
site within two years of the completion of the project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and abatement on
the project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing the real property taxes currently being assessed
at the project site, estimated tax payments that would be made annually
by the applicant on the project during the period of the agreement and
estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
H. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' businesses.
§ 65-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-8
35:1194
§ 65-8. Tax agreement.
All tax agreements shall be applied for and granted on a project basis in
accordance with the following procedures:
§ 65-9. Formula for computation of payments in lieu of full property
tax.
The tax agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality,
in lieu of full property tax payments, an amount annually based on the tax
A. All applications for exemptions and abatements from taxation shall be
reviewed by the Assessor of the municipality to insure that they were
filed in a timely manner, are complete and comply with the applicable
state law and municipal law. The Assessor shall thereafter refer the
application, along with a tax agreement and ordinance, to the
governing body of the municipality for its review, evaluation and
approval.
B. The Standard Form Five-Year Tax Agreement is hereby approved. All
tax agreements shall be approved using only the standard form with the
individual application for exemption and abatement from taxation
attached as an exhibit to the agreement.
C. The governing body of the municipality must review and evaluate all
applications for exemptions or abatements from taxation before
approving them.
D. No exemption or abatement for a commercial or industrial
improvement shall be granted until the application and tax agreement
is approved by ordinance of the governing body of the municipality. The
adopting ordinance shall include the following findings and
determinations:
(1) The project is a commercial or industrial project which is eligible
for exemption or abatement from taxation.
(2) The project will maintain or provide gainful employment within the
municipality.
(3) The project will assist in the economic development of the
municipality.
(4) The project will maintain or increase the tax ratable base of the
municipality.
(5) The project will maintain or diversify and expand commerce within
the municipality.
(6) The economic benefits derived from the project outweigh any
negative effects associated with granting the exemption or
abatement from taxation.
§ 65-8 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-9
35:1195
phase-in approach, which shall be an amount equal to a percentage of taxes
otherwise due according to the following schedule:
§ 65-10. Duration of tax agreements.
§ 65-11. Termination of agreement.
A. In the first full year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes
otherwise due.
B. In the second full year after completion, an amount not less than 20% of
the taxes otherwise due.
C. In the third full year after completion, an amount not less than 40% of
taxes otherwise due.
D. In the fourth full year after completion, an amount not less than 60% of
taxes otherwise due.
E. In the fifth full year after completion, an amount not less than 80% of
taxes otherwise due.
A. All tax agreements entered into by the municipality pursuant to the Act
shall be in effect for no more than the five full calendar years next
following the date of completion of the project.
B. All projects subject to a tax agreement as provided herein shall be
subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on
pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing
provisions, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
C. That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for a property bears
to the property tax which would have been paid had an exemption and
abatement not been granted for the property under the agreement shall
be applied to the valuation of the property to determine the reduced
valuation of the property to be included in the valuation of the
municipality for determining equalization for county tax apportionment
and school aid during the term of the tax agreements covering the
properties, and at the termination of an agreement for a property, the
reduced valuation procedure required under the Act shall no longer
apply.
D. Within 30 days after the execution of a tax agreement, the City Clerk
shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
A. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been
granted. The Assessor of the municipality shall notify the property
§ 65-9 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-11
35:1196
§ 65-12. Assessed value of property under exemption or abatement.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for projects subject to a tax agreement
pursuant to the Act and this article, the amount of tax to be paid for the tax
year in which the project is completed shall be based on the following:
§ 65-13. Subsequent exemptions or abatements.
owner and the tax collector forthwith. The tax collector shall, within 15
days thereof, notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes
due.
B. However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it is
determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use the
property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property, no tax
shall be due, the exemption and the abatement shall continue, and the
agreement shall remain in effect.
C. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and regulation
and local ordinance, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
A. The assessed valuation of the property for the current tax year, minus
the amount of the abatement, if any, allowed pursuant to the Act and
prorated, plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the
improvement, conversion or construction not allowed an exemption
pursuant to the Act, also prorated.
B. Subject to the provisions of the adopting ordinance, the property shall
continue to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the four
tax years subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor and
shall be prorated for the final tax year in which the exemption or
abatement expires.
A. This article also provides that an additional improvement, conversion or
construction completed on a property granted a previous exemption or
abatement pursuant to the Act during the period in which such previous
exemption or abatement is in effect shall be qualified for an exemption,
or exemption and abatement, just as if such property had not received a
previous exemption or abatement.
B. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or construction
shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements, pursuant to the Act, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or
construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to
that improvement, conversion alteration or construction for the
§ 65-11 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-13
35:1197
§ 65-14. Ineligible properties.
§ 65-15. Application forms and date due; records.
purpose of determining the assessed valuation of the property from
which any additional abatement is to be subtracted.
A. No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, pursuant to the Act with respect to any property for which
property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid. The existence of a tax
installment agreement shall not make the property eligible.
B. Residential dwellings and multiple dwellings are not eligible for
exemption or abatement from taxation for the improvements,
conversion alteration or construction pursuant to this article.
A. No exemption or abatement shall be granted pursuant to the Act except
upon written application filed with and approved by the Assessor of the
taxing district wherein the improvement, conversion alteration or
construction is made.
B. Every application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and provided for
the use of claimants by the governing body of the municipality
constituting the taxing district and shall be filed with the Assessor
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the
completion of the improvement, conversion alteration or construction.
C. Every application for exemption, or exemption and abatement, within a
municipality adopting the provisions of the Act which is filed within the
time specified shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the
degree that the application is consistent with the provisions of the
adopting ordinance or the tax agreement, provided that the
improvement, conversion alteration or construction for which the
application is made qualifies as an improvement, a conversion
alteration or construction pursuant to the provisions of the Act and the
tax agreement, if any.
D. In the absence of a tax agreement to the contrary, the granting of an
exemption, or exemption and abatement, shall relate back to, and take
effect as of, the date of completion of the project, or portion or stage of
the project for which the exemption, or exemption and abatement, is
granted. It shall continue for five annual periods from that date. The
grant of the exemption, or exemption and abatement, or tax agreement
shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records
of the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of the
termination date thereof.
§ 65-13 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-15
35:1198
ARTICLE II
Long-Term Tax Exemption
§ 65-16. Statutory authority
This article is enacted pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. and the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 65-17. Findings and purpose.
The governing body of the City finds and declares that there are areas
within the City which are blighted or in need of redevelopment by private
enterprise. The governing body further finds and declares that tax
incentives are useful economic stimulants to encourage private capital and
participation by private enterprise to contribute toward the restoration of
deteriorated or neglected properties. It is the intent and purpose of this
article to provide this economic stimulus for private enterprise to develop
those areas of the City which are in need of redevelopment.
§ 65-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
GROSS REVENUE — Annual gross revenue or gross shelter or annual gross
rents, as appropriate, and other income, for each urban renewal entity
designated pursuant to this article. The financial agreement shall establish
the method of computing gross revenue for the entity, and the method
of determining insurance, operating and maintenance expenses paid by a
tenant which are ordinarily paid by a landlord, which shall be included in
the gross revenue.
HOUSING PROJECT — Any work or undertaking to provide decent, safe
and sanitary dwellings for families in need of housing. The undertaking
may include any buildings, land (including demolition, clearance or removal
of buildings from land), equipment, facilities, or other real or personal
properties or interests therein, which are necessary, convenient or desirable
appurtenances of the undertaking such as streets, sewers, water, utilities,
parks, site preparation, landscaping, and administrative, community, health,
recreational, educational, welfare, commercial, or other facilities.
LIMITED-DIVIDEND ENTITY — An urban renewal entity incorporated
pursuant to Title 14A of the New Jersey statutes, or established pursuant to
Title 42 of the New Jersey statutes, for which the profits and the entity are
limited as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3.
NET PROFIT — The gross revenues of the urban renewal entity less all
operating and nonoperating expenses of the entity which shall be
determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
and in accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3.
§ 65-16 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-18
35:1199
NONPROFIT ENTITY — An urban renewal entity incorporated pursuant to
Title 15A of the New Jersey statutes for which no part of its net profits
inures to the benefit of its members.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — An area determined to be in need of
redevelopment and for which a redevelopment plan has been adopted by
the governing body of the City pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — Plan adopted by the governing body of the
City for the redevelopment of all or any part of a redevelopment area. This
plan shall be sufficiently complete to indicate its relationship to definite
municipal objectives as to appropriate land uses, public transportation
and utilities, recreational and municipal facilities, and other public
improvements, and to indicate proposed land uses and building
requirements in the redevelopment area.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any work or undertaking pursuant to a
redevelopment plan adopted pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., which has as its purpose the
redevelopment of all or any part of a redevelopment area, including any
commercial, industrial, residential or other use, and may include any
buildings, land (including demolition, clearance or removal of buildings
from land), equipment, facilities, or other real or personal properties which
are necessary, convenient or desirable appurtenances such as streets,
sewers, utilities, parks, site preparation, landscaping, and administrative,
community, health, recreational, educational and welfare facilities.
TOTAL PROJECT COST — The aggregate of the items as related to a unit of
a project if the project is undertaken in units, or to the total project if the
project is not undertaken in units, all of which are limited by and approved
as part of the financial agreement and as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3.
URBAN RENEWAL ENTITY — A limited-dividend entity or a nonprofit entity
which enters into a financial agreement with the governing body of the
City to undertake a project pursuant to a redevelopment plan for the
redevelopment of all or any part of a redevelopment area.
§ 65-19. Designation of redevelopment area and approval of
redevelopment plan. [Amended 8-16-2005 by Ord. No. 30-2005]
Pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1
et seq., the Planning Board and the governing body of the City have
designated the following areas as redevelopment areas and approved
redevelopment plans for those areas:
A. Airport redevelopment area. Pursuant to ordinances previously
adopted, the following area with the following boundaries is an area in
need of redevelopment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5:
(1) On the north: The boundary line of the existing residential
development adjacent to the existing Airport Industrial Park.
§ 65-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-19
35:1200
§ 65-20. Undertaking projects.
§ 65-21. Urban renewal entity.
(2) On the south: The southerly boundary of the City-owned lands
bordered by the State Wildlife Management Area.
(3) On the east: The eastern boundary of the lands owned by George F.
Pettinos, Inc., now George F. Pettinos, LLC.
(4) On the west: Nonresidential properties located within the boundary
of Hogbin Road.
B. Center city redevelopment area. Pursuant to ordinances previously
adopted, the following area with the following boundaries is an area in
need of redevelopment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5:
(1) On the north: The area of Route 47/Route 55 interchange south of
the Cumberland Crossing and the Millville Town Center
developments.
(2) On the south: The area of the former Ball-Foster Glass
Manufacturing Plant, including residential neighborhoods in South
Millville.
(3) On the east: The area consisting of the Center City neighborhood
and adjacent areas.
(4) On the west: The area consisting of the Third Ward neighborhood
and extending to the Maurice River.
A. The governing body of the City may enter into a financial agreement
with an urban renewal entity for the undertaking of a project that is in
accordance with an approved redevelopment plan.
B. The City shall retain all necessary authority and control for the
redevelopment of the redevelopment area set forth in the
redevelopment plan.
C. The undertaking of a project by an urban renewal entity pursuant to a
redevelopment plan shall be deemed a delegation of the City's powers
to undertake the project, which is limited by the terms of the financial
agreement and the provisions of applicable state law.
A. Any duly formed corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited
partnership association, or other unincorporated entity may qualify as
an urban renewal entity under state law if its certificate of
incorporation or other similar certificate or statement as may be
required by law contains the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-5.
B. When authorized by the financial agreement, the urban renewal entity
may acquire by purchase or lease, plan, develop, construct, alter,
maintain or operate housing, senior citizen housing, business,
§ 65-19 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-21
35:1201
§ 65-22. Application for project approval, form and contents.
commercial, industrial, administrative, community, health, recreational,
educational, cultural, or welfare projects, or any combination of two or
more of these types of improvements in a single project.
C. Each urban renewal entity qualifying under this article shall have and
may exercise those powers conferred by law for the form of entity
selected as shall be necessary for the operation of the business of the
entity and as shall be consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:20-6
and 7.
A. Every urban renewal entity qualifying under this article and applicable
state law, before proceeding with any projects, shall make written
application to the governing body of the City for approval thereof. The
application shall be in a form and shall certify to those facts and data as
shall be required by the City, and shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) A general statement of the nature of the proposed project, that the
undertaking conforms to all applicable City ordinances, and that
the project is consistent with the redevelopment plan and Master
Plan of the City.
(2) A description of the proposed project outlining the area included
and a description of each unit thereof if the project is to be
undertaken in units. It shall set forth architectural and site plans as
required.
(3) A statement prepared by a qualified architect or engineer of the
estimated cost of the proposed project in the detail required,
including the estimated cost of each unit to be undertaken.
(4) The source, method and amount of money to be subscribed through
the investment of private capital, setting forth the amount of stock
or other securities to be issued therefor or the extent of capital
invested and the proprietary or ownership interested obtained in
consideration therefore.
(5) A fiscal plan for the project outlining a schedule of annual gross
revenue, the estimated expenditures for operation and
maintenance, payments for interest, amortization of debt and
reserves, and payments to the City to be made pursuant to a
financial agreement to be entered into with the City.
(6) A proposed financial agreement conforming to the provisions
contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-9.
B. The application shall be addressed and submitted to the Director of
Economic Development. Within 60 days of his or her receipt of the
application, the application shall be submitted with his or her
recommendations to each member of the governing body. The
§ 65-21 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-22
35:1202
§ 65-23. Financial agreement, form and contents.
Every approved project shall be evidenced by a financial agreement
between the City and the urban renewal entity. The financial agreement
shall be prepared by the urban renewal entity and submitted as a separate
part of its application for project approval. Any amendments or
modifications of the agreement made thereafter shall be by mutual consent
of the City and the urban renewal entity, and shall be subject to approval by
resolution of the governing body upon recommendation of the Director of
Economic Development.
§ 65-24. Formulas for computation of annual service charge during
period of tax exemption.
governing body shall by resolution approve or disapprove the
application. In the event of disapproval, changes may be suggested to
secure approval. An application may be revised and resubmitted.
A. The financial agreement shall be in the form of a contract requiring full
performance within 30 years from the date of completion of the project,
and shall include the documents and information required by N.J.S.A.
40A:20-9 and 10.
B. The financial agreement approved shall include findings by the
governing body of the City setting forth appropriate tax exemption
provisions and an appropriate annual service charge schedule which
shall be based upon the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12 and
the governing body's determinations as to:
(1) The relative benefits of the project to the redevelopment of the
redevelopment area when compared to the cost, if any, associated
with the tax exemption; and
(2) An assessment of the importance of the tax exemption to be
granted in obtaining the development of the project and in
influencing the locational decisions of probable occupants of the
project or units of the project.
A. The exemptions shall be claimed and allowed in the same or similar
manner as in the case of other real property tax exemptions, provided
that no such claim shall be allowed unless the City wherein the property
is situated shall certify that a financial agreement with an urban
renewal entity for the development or the redevelopment of the
property has been entered into and is in effect as required by state law.
B. During the term of any tax exemption, in lieu of any taxes to be paid on
the improvements of the project, the urban renewal entity shall pay an
annual service charge on a quarterly basis to the City. The annual
service charge shall be computed and determined in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12.
§ 65-22 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-25
35:1203
§ 65-25. Duration of tax exemption.
§ 65-26. Condominium units.
If the financial agreement permits the conveyance of condominium units
pursuant to applicable state law, then the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:20-14
apply.
§ 65-27. Urban renewal entity which is a limited dividend entity.
If the urban renewal entity is a limited dividend entity, it shall be subject
to the conditions and limitations set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-15 during the
period of the financial agreement and tax exemption.
§ 65-28. Urban renewal entity which is a nonprofit entity.
If the urban renewal entity is a nonprofit entity, it shall be subject to the
conditions and limitations set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-16 during the period
of the financial agreement and tax exemption.
§ 65-29. Municipality or redevelopment agency authorized to make
land available for project.
The City or any redevelopment entity is authorized by resolution to make
any land owned by it available for use for a project by an urban renewal
entity, by private sale, at such prices and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be agreed upon by the governing body of the City or redevelopment
entity and the urban renewal entity.
A. The duration of the tax exemption for urban renewal entities shall be a
maximum term for all projects as follows: a term of not more than 30
years from the completion of the entire project, or not more than 35
years from the execution of the financial agreement between the City
and the urban renewal entity. If the project is undertaken in units, the
time period shall be completed from the completion of each unit.
B. The financial agreement may provide for a tax exemption period of less
than 30 years from the completion of the entire project, or less than 35
years from the execution of the financial agreement. All tax exemptions
granted shall terminate at the time prescribed in the financial
agreement.
C. The tax exemption shall apply only so long as the urban renewal entity
and its project remain subject to applicable state law and this article.
An urban renewal entity may at any time after the expiration of one year
from the completion date of the project notify the governing body of the
City that it relinquishing its status on a date certain designated in the
notice.
D. Upon the termination of the tax exemption, the project and
improvements and all affected parcels shall be assessed and subject to
taxation as are other taxable properties within the City.
§ 65-25 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-29
35:1204
ARTICLE III
Manufactured Homes
[Added 10-3-2006 by Ord. No. 32-2006]
§ 65-30. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Manufactured Home Taxation Act,
N.J.S.A. 54:4-1.2 et seq., as subsequently amended or modified.
§ 65-31. Findings and purpose.
§ 65-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the definitions contained in N.J.S.A. 54:4-1.4 are
incorporated herein as if the same were set forth with particularity.
§ 65-33. Application of regulations.
§ 65-34. Annual service fee.
A. The governing body of the City finds and declares that there are
manufactured homes located in mobile home parks within the City
which are not subject to real property assessment and taxation for
public services. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for a
method by which the municipality and the public school system may
receive reasonable payment for public services afforded the owners of
manufactured homes within mobile home parks.
B. The governing body of the City further finds and declares that, in
establishing the annual service fee, it has taken into consideration the
real property taxes paid by the owner of the mobile home park together
with the services which the park owner provides to the residents of the
mobile home park. The governing body has specifically taken into
consideration the cost of the public services which the municipality and
the Board of Education provide to the owners of manufactured homes
within the mobile home park.
A. A manufactured home which is not located within a mobile home park
shall be subject to taxation as real property if the manufactured home
meets the criteria for taxation of real property set forth in N.J.S.A.
54:4-1.5(a).
B. A manufactured home which is installed in a mobile home park shall not
be subject to taxation as real property, but it shall be subject to the
regulations contained in this article.
C. Trailers as defined in the Manufactured Home Taxation Act shall not be
subject to the regulations contained in this article.
§ 65-30 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-34
35:1205
§ 65-35. Maintenance of records.
A. A manufactured home installed in a mobile home park within the City
shall be subject to an annual service fee of $620 per calendar year.
[Amended 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
B. The annual service fee shall be prorated for each full month during the
calendar year that a manufactured home is vacant and the owner of the
home is not paying a site fee to the owner of the mobile home park.
C. The annual service fee shall be collected from each owner of a
manufactured home on a monthly basis by the owner of the mobile
home park in which the home is installed. The park owner shall issue a
receipt to the homeowner upon each collection.
D. The park owner shall transmit the annual service fees collected to the
Tax Collector of the City on a quarterly basis in the same manner and at
the same time real property taxes are due and payable within the City.
The park owner also shall transmit therewith a copy of each receipt
issued pursuant to this section.
E. The homeowner shall be charged the maximum rate of interest
authorized by N.J.S.A. 54:4-67 for the failure to pay the annual service
fee when due and payable. The park owner shall be charged the same
rate of interest for the failure to transmit the annual service fees
actually collected when required to do so by these regulations.
F. The annual service fees actually collected by the municipality shall be
allocated 60% to the municipality and 40% to the Board of Education.
A. The park owner shall provide the following information to the Tax
Collector of the City at the beginning of each calendar year, and also
during the calendar year if a written request for information is
submitted to the park owner or its agent by the Tax Collector.
(1) The name and address of all the persons who own the mobile home
park.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the manager or
operator of the mobile home park.
(3) The total number of spaces actually occupied by manufactured
homes within the mobile home park together with the date of
occupancy.
(4) The total number of spaces vacant and available for occupancy
within the mobile home park.
B. The owner or operator of the mobile home park shall maintain a record
of the aforesaid information for a period of at least three calendar
years. Said records shall be made available for inspection by the Tax
Collector or the representative of the Tax Collector.
§ 65-34 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-36
35:1206
§ 65-36. Effective date.
The effective date of these regulations shall be January 1, 2007.
§ 65-36 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-36
35:1207

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 30-2008]
§ 65-37. Statutory authority.
N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq. authorizes the governing body of a municipality to
adopt an ordinance imposing a hotel and motel occupancy tax at a uniform
percentage rate not to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004.
§ 65-38. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to implement the provisions
of the aforesaid statute which authorizes the governing body of a
municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel
room and motel room on or after July 1, 2004, subject to the exemptions set
forth in the applicable state statutes.
§ 65-39. Imposition of tax.
§ 65-40. Exemptions.
§ 65-41. Purchaser to pay tax; violations and penalties.
A. There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in
the City of Millville which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel room and motel
room within the municipality on and after the effective date of these
regulations pursuant to state statute.
B. A tax imposed under this article shall be in addition to any other tax or
fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any
governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room or motel room.
A. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or
consumer is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy
under the Sales and Use Tax Act pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3(d).
B. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or
consumer is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy
under the Sales and Use Tax Act pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9.
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
§ 65-37 LICENSING OF PROFESSIONS AND § 65-41
35:1209
§ 65-42. Collection of tax.
§ 65-43. Returns to be filed.
A person required to collect the tax imposed pursuant to this article shall
comply with the requirements set forth in the state statute for filing returns
with the Division of Taxation.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $200 for
each offense.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the
municipality by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer.
B. Each person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall be
personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be
collected hereunder.
C. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the
tax from the customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable
at the same time; provided, however, that the Chief Financial Officer of
the municipality shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding
brought to collect the tax.
§ 65-41 MILLVILLE CODE § 65-43
35:1210
Chapter 70
WOODLAND MANAGEMENT
§ 70-1. Findings.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FORESTRY — The growing and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes.
TREE — A woody plant that has the potential to reach a height of at least
10 feet, has a single stem, and has a definite crown shape.
§ 70-3. Exceptions.
Excepted from this chapter shall be:
A. The City does find that the woodlands are an important cultural,
ecological, scenic and economic resource. Proper management of this
resource will ensure maintenance of all forest benefits including, but
not limited to, watershed protection, wildlife habitat, recreational
aspects and aesthetics. Proper management also will result in greater
economic returns for harvested timber.
B. The woodlands must be preserved, protected, enhanced and
maintained. A forestry program is intended to meet these objectives by
providing opportunities for the continuing uses of the City's forest
resources which are compatible with the maintenance of the
environment. This can be accomplished by the improvement of the
forests through the application of sound management practices.
A. Any tree located on a parcel of land one acre or less in size on which a
residence has been constructed or is being constructed (building
permit issued).
B. Any tree growing on property actually being used as a nursery, garden
center, Christmas tree plantation, or an orchard.
C. Any tree growing on land being used for a sanitary landfill or for
resource extraction.
D. Any tree to be cut for personal use by the owner.
E. Any tree growing on a public right-of-way.
F. Any dead, diseased, or other tree that is likely to endanger life or
property.
§ 65-43 WOODLAND MANAGEMENT § 70-3
70:1211
§ 70-4. Application and plan.
G. Any tree harvested pursuant to an approved Woodland Management
Plan prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 18:15-2.9.
A. Any landowner desiring to cut, remove, or harvest any tree for
commercial purposes shall submit to the Zoning Officer a permit
application which shall include a Harvesting Plan detailing the
harvesting practices proposed to be employed, including but not limited
to, the following:
(1) Location and size of tracts.
(2) Owner's name, address and telephone number.
(3) Map of the property showing wetlands, types of vegetation cover,
area to be harvested, receiving waters, location of stream crossings
and alternatives, location of skid trails, location of access roads and
landings, cutting boundaries, and size of filter or buffer strips.
(4) Description of area to be harvested should include acreage, general
soil types and erodibility; range of percent of slope; timber quality
and age (forest type, species, age, DBH, height, volume, and
reproduction), and understory; number of trees in the tract and
wildlife impact determined, if any.
(5) Description of timber to be harvested (number of trees, species,
diameter classes and volume) and the reason/purpose for the
timber to be harvested (e.g. to obtain cordwood, pulpwood, lumber,
etc.).
(6) Description of regeneration plans.
(7) Description of intermediate management practices to be applied
during or after harvesting.
B. The total area of any proposed woodcutting for which a permit is sought
cannot exceed 10 contiguous acres, regardless of the size of the tract of
land involved. No requests for a woodcutting operation permit shall
involve more than two separate tracts or parcels of land as shown on
the current Tax Map of the City.
C. No single applicant or property owner in any one calendar year shall be
issued:
(1) More than two permits for ongoing woodcutting operations at any
one time. Issuance of further permits shall be dependent upon the
Zoning Officer's certification that woodcutting for one or both of
the current permits has been completed in a satisfactory manner as
provided herein, and such certification shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
§ 70-3 MILLVILLE CODE § 70-4
70:1212
§ 70-5. Forestry authorized; conditions.
Forest vegetation represents a unique and financially valuable part of the
essential character of the City. If properly managed, forests represent
significant economic opportunities to their owners while perpetuating the
overall ecological value of the City. This chapter encourages commercial
forestry that will maximize forest land values and provide for the longterm
economic and environmental integrity of the City. Forestry shall be
authorized throughout the City provided that:
(2) More than a total of three permits regardless of the acreage
involved in any one of all three permits.
D. During any one calendar year only one woodcutting permit may be
issued for any one tract or parcel of land regardless of the parcel or
tract size, ownership or the applicant involved.
A. Access to land proposed for harvesting:
(1) Follows previously established roads and trails to maximum extent
practical.
(2) Avoids wetland areas except as are absolutely necessary to harvest
wetland species or to gain access to the harvesting site.
(3) Avoids crossing streams with high and unstable banks and those
with approaching slopes exceeding 10% where alternative
crossings exist.
B. All activities during and after harvesting are carried out in a manner to
avoid damage to stream banks and bottoms, erosion, and degradation
of water quality, including the following:
(1) Stream banks at crossings shall be stabilized during and after
harvesting.
(2) Culverts and bridges shall be temporary in nature.
(3) Trees which serve to stabilize stream banks shall be retained; other
trees shall be felled to avoid stream banks where practical and
winched off such banks where felling occurs.
(4) A fifty-foot vegetated buffer along streams, ponds, marshes and
areas subject to erosion shall be maintained.
(5) The use of active and intermittent stream channels for skidding of
logs shall be prohibited.
(6) Skidding shall not occur within 50 feet of streams, ponds, lakes,
and marshes, except for necessary crossings.
(7) Access ways for forestry activities shall be located at least 100 feet
from streams, ponds, lakes and marshes, where practical.
§ 70-4 WOODLAND MANAGEMENT § 70-5
70:1213
(8) Landings shall be located in well drained areas where practical and
at least 200 feet from ponds, lakes and marshes.
(9) Filter strips shall be located between harvested areas, landings,
and skid trails; and streams, ponds, lakes and marshes.
(10)Water diversion devices shall be installed as necessary to control
erosion.
(11)Keep roads and skid trails out of wet and poorly drained spots.
(12) Plan carefully for the protection of slopes exceeding 30%.
C. The landowner notifies the City when harvesting is to commence once
application is approved.
D. Only those trees which have been selected for harvesting are cut; that
all trees are cut to the base; and all practical steps are taken to
minimize damage to undesignated trees.
E. At the conclusion of any harvesting operation:
(1) All areas disturbed for access, processing, moving or loading trees
shall be regraded to approximate natural slopes and that water
diversion devices are installed as necessary in order to avoid
erosion.
(2) All accessways shall be closed and devices installed, such as poles,
pilings or beams that will preclude use of the accessway.
(3) Bare ground areas shall be stabilized with vegetation and
replantings where necessary.
(4) All debris shall be removed from streams.
(5) All nonvegetative refuse shall be collected.
(6) All hanging trees shall be removed.
F. Harvesting and reforestation activities shall ensure the regeneration of
the harvested forest.
G. Harvesting and reforestation in Atlantic white cedar and hardwoods
swamps is conducted in the following manner:
(1) Atlantic white cedar will be cut and managed to create site
conditions favorable to regeneration of Atlantic white cedar.
(2) Reforestation to ensure Atlantic white cedar regeneration will
involve control of competitive hardwood species.
(3) Existing streams shall be cutting boundaries where practical.
§ 70-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 70-5
70:1214
§ 70-6. Performance plan.
Work shall be performed in compliance with the submitted Harvesting Plan
and shall adhere to the standards in § 70-5. Any change will require the
submission of a new or revised Harvesting Plan. The permit shall be valid
for a period not to exceed one year.
§ 70-7. Performance security; escrow account; transfer of moneys.
(4) Harvesting methods employed shall be those which minimize
environmental damage including the use of winches, corduroy
roads and helicopters.
(5) Harvesting will occur to the greatest extent practical during dry
periods or when the ground is frozen.
H. The proposed activity does not involve the draining or filling of
wetlands.
A. An applicant for a woodcutting permit shall deposit with the Zoning
Officer prior to the issuance of a woodcutting permit a sum of money
equal to $75 per acre. The money is in addition to the application fee
required. The moneys so deposited shall be held by the City to assure
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the permit issued
for the proposed woodcutting operation. If the woodcutting is carried
out in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the approved plan
and the permit issued, then all moneys deposited, except the
application fee paid, of $100 shall be refundable in full to the applicant.
B. Upon receipt of the moneys, the Zoning Officer shall deposit same with
the Chief Financial Officer who shall deposit these funds in an escrow
account. Release of the moneys shall be through the normal voucher
system employed by the City after application by the applicant for
release of funds and after certification by the Zoning Officer that the
woodcutting was properly carried out, which certification shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Failure of the applicant to properly undertake
or perform as required shall mean forfeiture of the moneys so
deposited, and the Chief Financial Officer shall turn the funds over to
the Chief as fees collected for deposit in the general fund of the City and
to be used for reforestation projects within the City and/or to clean up
the property where the applicant improperly performed.
C. An applicant can request in writing the transfer of moneys deposited to
the woodcutting escrow account in connection with one permit
application for another permit application once the original application
for which the moneys were deposited has been certified by the Zoning
Officer to be satisfactorily complete and the permit expired or
terminated as the case may be. Such transfer shall not affect the
calculation of the amount which must be so deposited for the "new"
application as set forth hereinabove.
§ 70-5 WOODLAND MANAGEMENT § 70-8
70:1215
§ 70-8. Stop-work order.
A stop-work order shall be issued by the Zoning Officer if noncompliance
with the submitted Harvesting Plan is evident or if there is nonadherence
to the standards in § 70-5. The stop order will remain in effect until the City
has determined that resuming work will not violate the conditions of the
submitted Harvesting Plan and the requirements set forth in this chapter.
The penalty for noncompliance with the submitted Harvesting Plan shall be
the forfeiture of the financial security/performance security.
§ 70-9. Fees.
A fee schedule will be determined to adequately cover the administration
costs of this chapter. The fee shall be included with the permit application.
The fee shall be $25 for the first acre involved in the application and $5 for
each additional acre or portion thereof involved in the application.
§ 70-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, business, corporation, partnership or other entity violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the sum
of $1,000 nor less than $100 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
§ 70-11. Copies on file.
Certified copies of this chapter shall be filed with the Cumberland County
Planning Board and the Pinelands Commission.
Part II, Special Legislation
Chapter 75
AIRPORT LEASE WITH DELAWARE RIVER BAY AUTHORITY
WHEREAS, the City of Millville (the "City") owns and operates the Millville
Municipal airport, together with certain facilities, property and equipment
related thereto ("airport"), located upon premises known as Block 125, Lots
2, 5, 12, 17 on the City of Millville Tax Map; and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to cease its operation of the airport and
therefore desires (i) to enter into a lease with the Delaware River and Bay
Authority ("DRBA") of the premises comprising the airport, (ii) to dispose of
all of its right, title and interest in certain personal property and equipment
owned by it and used in conjunction with operation of the airport, and (iii) to
grant certain rights in other assets of the City associated with the operation
of the airport to the DRBA; and
WHEREAS, the DRBA desires (i) to enter into a contemplated lease of the
premises comprising the airport, (ii) to purchase all of the City's right, title
§ 70-8 MILLVILLE CODE § 70-11
70:1216
and interest in that certain personal property and equipment owned by it
and used in conjunction with the airport, (iii) to acquire other rights of the
City in those other assets associated with operation of the airport, and (iv)
to thereafter operate, maintain and develop the airport until the termination
of said lease; and
WHEREAS, representatives of the City and the DRBA have entered into
negotiations for these purposes in order to reach such agreement, and the
terms and conditions of such agreement are set forth in the Acquisition
Agreement and Ground Lease which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that the undertakings contemplated by
the Acquisition Agreement and the Ground Lease are in the best interest
of the City because they will, among other things (i) reimburse the City for
certain prior capital expenditures in connection with the airport, (ii) relieve
the City of ongoing airport operating and capital expenses, (iii) relieve the
City of the need for future capital expenditures necessary to maintain the
airport, (iv) ensure the continued operation and development of the airport,
and (v) provide that any net revenues from the operation of the airport be
dedicated to economic development initiatives and/or improvements at the
airport for the benefit of the residents and taxpayers of the City; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that the DRBA possesses the
administrative expertise, financing capabilities and other resources to
manage, supervise, strengthen and develop the economic potential of the
airport, and that the DRBA is authorized to enter into this lease and to
engage in such undertakings pursuant to its Compact (Public Law 87-678,
87th Congress, Public Law 101-565, 101st Congress) and certain
companion statutes, including New Jersey Law 1989, c. 191; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that the real property comprising the
airport is no longer needed for its public use and that the lease of such
real property to the DRBA may be undertaken by the City pursuant to New
Jersey Law 1971, c. 199, as amended; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that the personal property and
equipment owned by it and used in conjunction with the airport to be
conveyed hereunder is no longer needed for its public use and that such
conveyance may be undertaken pursuant to New Jersey Law 1971, c. 198.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF MILLVILLE:
§ 75-1. Incorporation of prefatory material.
The above prefatory paragraphs of this ordinance are incorporated herein
and made a part hereof.
§ 75-2. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the Acquisition
Agreement and Ground Lease in accordance with the terms contained
§ 70-11 WOODLAND MANAGEMENT § 75-2
70:1217
therein, together with such other instruments as may be necessary or
desirable to effectuate the purpose thereof.
§ 75-3. Additional undertakings authorized.
The Mayor and those other representatives of the City as may be designated
therefor are hereby authorized to engage in such additional undertakings
as may be deemed necessary and appropriate in order to accomplish lease
of the premises comprising the airport and the transfer of the airport and
its operations to the DRBA, including, but not limited to, such undertakings
as are specifically set forth in the Acquisition Agreement and Ground Lease,
with all deliberate speed so that the residents and taxpayers of the City may
obtain the benefits to be derived therefrom.
Chapter 76
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast Cablevision renewal of its
nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and
under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and
public places in the municipality poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus
and equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-l et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's Application for Renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
§ 75-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 76-2
76:1218
CITY or MUNICIPALITY — The City of Millville, County of Cumberland,
State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast Cablevision of South Jersey, Inc."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The office of Cable Television of the Board.
§ 76-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 76-4. Duration of franchise.
§ 76-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ 76-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 76-6
76:1219
§ 76-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ 76-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application.
§ 76-8. Construction requirements.
§ 76-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the municipality Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surface in
the nature topography, the company shall, at its sole expense, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, relay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
report of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
§ 76-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 76-9
76:1220
§ 76-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ 76-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 76-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 76-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ 76-14. Commitments by the company.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every effort to meet or exceed voluntary
standards for telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable
Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer or impair the right of the complaint
officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
A. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall activate a dedicated government access
channel to be viewed by residents of the City. Qualified individuals and
organizations may utilize the access channel for the purpose of cable
§ 76-9 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 76-14
76:1221
casting noncommercial access programming in conformance with the
City's published access rules.
B. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall construct a dedicated fiber optic return
line to a location designated by the City for the purpose of cablecasting
live and/or recorded programming on the education-government access
channel. Upon reasonable written request, the City shall notify the
company regarding the location for the dedicated fiber return line.
C. The company will provide and maintain the cable, modulators and
equipment necessary for the City education-government access channel
to send a signal to the company and to receive the return feed of signal.
The company will not be responsible for the maintenance of any studio
equipment used for the access channel, including but not limited to
cameras, editing decks, monitors and character generators, etc.
D. The City has indicated that it is receptive to those municipalities in the
Millville sending district area receiving the access channel while
recognizing the activation of the access channel for those
municipalities might only occur as a direct result of agreements
reached during the franchise renewal negotiations.
E. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval, the
company shall provide the City with a one-time technology grant in the
amount of $25,000 for purchase of video production equipment in
association with the government access channel or for any other
purpose the City deems appropriate.
F. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall provide a dedicated fiber link beginning
at the Municipal Building to the High School.
G. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall provide a dedicated fiber link beginning
at the Municipal Building to the Culver (Administration) Building.
H. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company will realign the Laurel Lakes section of the
City to feed from the existing head end that services all other sections
of the City.
I. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
J. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management facility
§ 76-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 76-14
76:1222
§ 76-15. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing twoway
or interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to
the BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions
of such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall be borne by
the municipality.
§ 76-16. Emergency uses.
§ 76-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
and public library in the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets.
K. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable modem, to one nonnetworked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future school in the City, public and private,
elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to the students and not for administrative use only.
L. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable modem on one nonnetworked personal computer in each qualified
existing and future public library at no charge, provided the facility is
located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
service shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
A. The company will comply with the emergency alert system (EAS) rules
in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ 76-14 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 76-18
76:1223
§ 76-18. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms
and conditions of this municipal consent. The application and any other
relevant writing submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and
made a part hereof by reference as long as it does not conflict with state
or federal law. All ordinances or parts of ordinances or other agreements
between the municipality and the company that are in conflict with the
provisions of this agreement are hereby declared invalid and superseded.
§ 76-19. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 76-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ 76-21. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU and publication as provided by law.
Chapter 77
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE
§ 76-18 MILLVILLE CODE § 76-21
76:1224
ARTICLE I
Areas Designated as Urban Enterprise Zone
§ 77-1. Preamble.
The State of New Jersey has adopted legislation creating certain areas
within certain cities as Urban Enterprise Zones, and the State of New
Jersey has adopted amending legislation providing for eligible zones having
areas defined by a contiguous border within more than one contiguous
qualifying municipality. The City of Vineland and the City of Millville have
been designated as a Joint Enterprise Zone, and under said legislation the
Urban Enterprise Zone Authority was created for the purpose of examining
particular areas in cities and designating these cities as Joint Enterprise
Zones. The City of Millville, by resolution, did seek to have certain areas
designated along with the City of Vineland as a Joint Urban Enterprise Zone,
and did seek to have a zone plan approved by the Authority. Representatives
of the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority did designate the areas set forth
in the cities of the City of Millville and the City of Vineland as an Urban
Enterprise Zone and did approve the application of these municipalities as
authorized by the aforesaid resolution.
§ 77-2. Designation accepted.
The City of Millville hereby accepts the designation of Urban Enterprise
Zone, pursuant to the joint application approved by the Urban Enterprise
Zone Authority of the State of New Jersey on October 25, 1985.
§ 77-3. Expansion accepted.
A. The City of Millville hereby accepts the expansion of the existing
boundary lines of the Vineland-Millville Joint Urban Enterprise Zone
which was approved by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone
Authority on July 12, 1989.
B. The City of Millville hereby accepts the expansion of the existing
boundary lines of the Vineland-Millville Joint Urban Enterprise Zone
which was approved by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone
Authority on November 8, 1995.
C. The City of Millville hereby accepts the expansion of the existing
boundary lines of the Vineland-Millville Joint Urban Enterprise Zone
which was approved by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone
Authority on September 12, 2001. [Added 3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
9-2002]
§ 77-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 77-3
76:1225

ARTICLE II
Enterprise Zone Development Corporation of Vineland and Millville
§ 77-4. Preamble.
§ 77-5. Execution of Certificate of Incorporation. [Amended
9-19-2000 by Ord. No. 39-2000]
The City of Millville is hereby authorized to act as an incorporator with
the City of Vineland to create a nonprofit corporation to be known as
the "Enterprise Zone Development Corporation of Vineland and Millville."
The Mayor and the Clerk of the City of Millville are hereby authorized to
execute a Certificate of Incorporation containing provisions authorized by
and consistent with this ordinance. The Clerk of the City of Millville is
further authorized to jointly file with the Clerk of the City of Vineland the
Certificate of Incorporation authorized by this section after execution by the
Mayor and Clerk of both municipalities.
§ 77-6. Purposes.
The purposes to be included in the Certificate of Incorporation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 15A-1 et seq. shall include the following:
A. The Urban Enterprise Zone Authority of the State of New Jersey has
designated the City of Vineland and the City of Millville as a Joint Urban
Enterprise Zone pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zone Act, as amended, and, pursuant to this Act, the
governing body of a qualifying municipality must create a nonprofit
corporation to formulate and propose a preliminary zone development
plan and to thereafter coordinate and administer the activities of the
municipality, zone businesses and community organizations within the
designated enterprise zone.
B. The joint designation of the City of Vineland and the City of Millville
requires the creation of a Nonprofit Zone Development Corporation by
both municipalities in order to implement the Joint Urban Enterprise
Zone.
A. The Certificate of Incorporation shall include the address of the
corporation's registered office and the name of the corporation's
registered agent at that address as required by the New Jersey
Nonprofit Corporation Act. Thereafter, the Board of Directors may
change the corporation's registered office and the corporation's
registered agent consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et
seq.
B. The Certificate of Incorporation shall also contain the names and
addresses of the Board of Directors of the corporation and such
additional information as may be required by the New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation Act.
§ 77-4 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 77-6
76:1227
§ 77-7. Board of Directors.
The Beard of Directors of the Zone Development Corporation shall consist
of nine members, as follows:
A. To formulate and propose a Preliminary Zone Development Plan to the
governing bodies of the Cities of Vineland and Millville, setting forth the
boundaries of the proposed enterprise zone in both municipalities,
setting forth findings of fact concerning the economic and social
conditions existing in the area proposed in the Joint Enterprise Zone,
and setting forth each municipality's policy and intentions for
addressing the conditions in said Joint Enterprise Zone;
B. The powers of the corporation shall be consistent with the conferred
authority of the New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation Act, as set forth
under N.J.S.A 15A:3-1 et seq.; [Amended 9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
39-2000]
C. To utilize state assistance through the provisions of the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act relating to exemptions from, and credits
against, state taxes;
D. To secure the involvement in, and commitment to, zone economic
development by private entities, including zone neighborhood
associations, voluntary community organizations supported by
residents and businesses in said Joint Enterprise Zone;
E. To make recommendations for the revision of municipal planning and
zoning ordinances and other land use regulations as they pertain to the
Joint Enterprise Zone for both municipalities, so that the cities of
Vineland and Millville may use the powers conferred by law to enhance
the attractions of the Joint Enterprise Zone to prospective developers;
F. To increase the availability and efficiency of support services, public
and private, generally used by and necessary to the efficient
functioning of commercial and industrial facilities in the area, to the
extent to which the increase or improvement is to be provided and
financed by the cities of Vineland and Millville or by other entities;
G. To take such additional action, not inconsistent with the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act, as the Board of Directors of the Enterprise
Zone Development Corporation deems necessary for the development,
administration and coordination of activities in the Joint Enterprise
Zone for the benefit of zone businesses and community organizations
within said Joint Enterprise Zone, for the ultimate purpose of the
economic betterment of the residents of said zone and the participating
municipalities. [Amended 9-19-2000 by Ord. No. 39-2000]
A. The Mayor of the City of Vineland who shall serve as Chairman of the
Board of Directors in alternating years.
§ 77-6 MILLVILLE CODE § 77-7
76:1228
§ 77-8. Duration of Corporation; increase in term.
The duration of the Corporation shall be for a period of 20 years, provided
that the Board of Directors shall have the authority to amend the Certificate
of Incorporation to increase the duration of the Corporation in the event of
an amendment to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Act which permits
the Joint Urban Enterprise Zone to exist for a period of more than 20 years.
§ 77-9. Bylaws established.
The Directors of the Corporation shall develop bylaws for the Corporation,
which shall include an executive officer to be known as the Enterprise
Zone Administrator. The Board shall develop qualifications for the Zone
Administrator, and shall thereafter appoint an Administrator who meets
these qualifications for a term not to exceed four years. The Board may
thereafter reappoint the same individual as Zone Administrator for
successive terms, provided that no term shall exceed four years. The Board
shall also hire such other persons, including professional persons, as may
be necessary for the efficient operation of the Enterprise Zone Corporation.
§ 77-10. Voting procedures.
All ordinary business conducted by the Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation shall be approved by a simple majority of those Board members
B. The Mayor of the City of Millville who shall alternate as Chairman of the
Board with the Mayor of Vineland.
C. Three members of the business community, two of whom shall be
members of the business community of the City of Vineland and one of
whom shall be a member of the business community of the City of
Millville. Each shall be appointed by the Mayors of the respective
municipality. Each member so appointed shall serve for a term of three
years; provided, however, that the initial terms of such members shall
be staggered with one Vineland member serving an initial term of one
year and one Vineland member serving an initial term of three years.
The member appointed from the City of Millville shall serve an initial
term of two years.
D. One member from the governing body of the City of Vineland and one
member from the governing body of the City of Millville, each of whom
shall serve for a term concurrent with his term of office. The Millville
members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
E. Two members to be selected from among community organizations in
Vineland and Millville, one member to be appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Vineland and one member to be appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Millville. Each member shall serve a term of three years,
provided that the initial term of the Millville appointment shall be for a
term of one year, and the initial term of the Vineland appointment shall
be for a term of two years.
§ 77-7 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 77-10
76:1229
who are present at any regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors.
However, amendments to the Zone Development Corporation's bylaws,
modification of zone boundaries, proposals for projects to receive money
from the Zone Assistance Fund, the hiring of an Enterprise Zone
Administrator and the hiring of professional, technical and consultant
personnel shall require the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the entire Board of
Directors.
§ 77-11. Use of funds.
Consistent with the provisions of the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone
Act, Vineland and Millville shall have access to funds collected and
deposited in the Zone Assistance Fund. Funds which are generated within
the City of Vineland shall be available to Vineland, and funds generated
within the City of Millville shall be available to Millville; provided, however,
that such funds shall first be used for the payment of expenses approved by
the Board of Directors of the Corporation before any such funds are paid to
either City; provided further, that such funds shall be available to pay for
extraordinary projects having a regional impact when a project is supported
by resolutions of endorsement from both cities and receives an affirmative
vote of 2/3 of the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
§ 77-12. Reimbursement of start-up moneys.
The Corporation shall reimburse to each municipality all start-up moneys
paid by Vineland and Millville from funds collected or received by the
Corporation as soon as such funds are reasonably available. Once the
Corporation has been created and organized, and initial funds provided
by each municipality, neither Vineland nor Millville shall be compelled to
contribute additional municipal funds to the Corporation.
§ 77-13. Distribution of assets upon termination.
Upon the termination of the Corporation, the Corporation's assets shall be
distributed to the Cities of Vineland and Millville on a pro-rata basis, in
proportion to the funds generated from within each City and received or
collected by the Corporation during the Corporation's existence.
§ 77-14. Tax exempt status. [Amended 9-19-2000 by Ord. No.
39-2000]
The Board of Directors of the corporation is authorized to apply to the
federal government for tax exempt status under Section 501c(3) of the
Internal Revenue code or the corresponding section of any future Federal
Tax Code. Consistent with the requirements contained therein the following
provisions apply:
A. No part of the net earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit
of or be distributed to its members, trustees, officers, or other private
persons, except that the corporation shall be authorized and
empowered to pay reasonable compensation for services rendered and
§ 77-10 MILLVILLE CODE § 77-14
76:1230
to make payments and distributions in furtherance of the purposes
set forth in the purpose clause hereof. No substantial part of the
activities of the corporation shall be the carrying on of propaganda,
or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and the corporation
shall not participate in or intervene in (including the publishing or
distribution of statements) political campaigns on behalf of any
candidate for public office. Furthermore, the corporation shall not carry
on any other activities not permitted to be carried on by a corporation
exempt from federal income tax under Section 501c(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future Federal Tax
Code or by a corporation, contributions to which are deductible under
Section 170c(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section
of any future Federal Tax Code.
B. Upon the dissolution of the corporation, assets shall be distributed for
one or more exempt purposes within the meaning of Section 501c(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future
Federal Tax Code, or shall be distributed to the federal government, or
to a state or local government for public purposes. Any such assets not
disposed of shall be disposed of by a court of competent jurisdiction
located within the county in which the principal office of the
corporation is then located, exclusively for such purposes or to such
organizations as said court shall determine which are organized or
operated for such purposes.146
146. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Millville Development Corporation, consisting of §§ 77-15
through 77-23, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
6-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2015.
§ 77-14 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 77-14
76:1231
Chapter 78
AIRPORT REDEVELOPMENT AREA
§ 78-1. Preamble.
A. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board conducted a public hearing on
April 14, 2003, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 to determine whether a
proposed area known as The Airport Redevelopment Area with the
following boundaries is an area in need of redevelopment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5:
(1) On the north: the boundary line of the existing residential
development adjacent to the existing Airport Industrial Park.
(2) On the south: the southerly boundary of City-owned lands bordered
by the State Wildlife Management Area.
(3) On the east: the eastern boundary of the lands owned by George F.
Pettinos, Inc. now George F. Pettinos, LLC.
(4) On the west: the nonresidential properties located within the
boundary of Hogbin Road.
B. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board adopted Resolution No. 03-16-01
on April 14, 2003, recommending that the study area should be
designated by the governing body of the City to be an area in need of
redevelopment and therefore a redevelopment area; and
C. Whereas, the governing body of the City adopted Resolution No. A-4359
on June 17, 2003, designating The Airport Redevelopment Area with the
following boundaries pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and directing the
Millville Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment plan pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7:
(1) On the north: the boundary line of the existing Airport Industrial
Park.
(2) On the south: the southern boundary of City-owned lands bordered
by the State Wildlife Management Area.
(3) On the east: the eastern boundary shall be Dividing Creek Road.
(4) On the west: the nonresidential properties located within the
boundary of Hogbin Road.
D. Whereas, the Redevelopment Plan for the Airport Redevelopment Area
dated July 24, 2003, prepared by The Atlantic Group and Greenbaum,
Rowe, Smith, Ravin, Davis & Himmel, LLP in conjunction with Donald S.
Ayres, Director of Economic Development, and Dr. Kimberly Warker,
Director of Planning, has been presented to the Millville Planning
Board; and
§ 77-14 MILLVILLE CODE § 78-1
78:1232
§ 78-2. Redevelopment plan adopted.
The Redevelopment Plan for The Airport Redevelopment Area, dated July
24, 2003, is hereby adopted.
§ 78-3. No effect on zoning district.
The Zoning District for The Airport Redevelopment Area shall not be
modified by the adoption of the Redevelopment Plan for The Airport
Redevelopment Area.
Chapter 79
CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA
E. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7
has reviewed the plan, has received comments on the plan from its
planning consultant, Clark, Caton and Hintz, its planning staff, its board
members and the public on September 8, 2003; and
F. Whereas, the governing body of the City has given due consideration to
the proposed plan and the recommendations made by the Millville
Planning Board as set forth in Resolution No. 03-39 adopted September
8, 2003.
§ 78-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 78-3
79:1233

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Redevelopment Plan
§ 79-1. Preamble.
A. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board conducted a public hearing on
March 10, 2003, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 to determine whether a
proposed area known as The Center City Redevelopment Area with the
following boundaries is an area in need of redevelopment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5:
(1) On the north: the area of Route 47/Route 55 interchange south of
the Cumberland Crossing and Millville Town Center Development.
(2) On the south: the area of the former Ball-Foster glass
manufacturing plant, including residential neighborhoods in South
Millville.
(3) On the east: the area consisting of the Center City neighborhood
and adjacent areas.
(4) On the west: the area consisting of the Third Ward neighborhood
and extending to the Maurice River.
B. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board adopted Resolution No. 03-10 on
March 10, 2003, recommending that the study area should be
designated by the governing body of the City to be an area in need of
redevelopment and therefore a redevelopment area; and
C. Whereas, the governing body of the City adopted Resolution No. A-4260
on March 18, 2003, designating The Center City Redevelopment Area
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and directing the Millville Planning
Board to prepare a redevelopment plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7;
and
D. Whereas, the Redevelopment Plan for The Center City Redevelopment
Area dated August 11, 2003, prepared by The Atlantic Group and
Greenbaum, Rowe, Smith, Ravin, Davis & Himmel, LLP in conjunction
with Donald S. Ayres, Director of Economic Development, and Dr.
Kimberly Warker, Director of Planning, has been presented to the
Millville Planning Board; and
E. Whereas, the Millville Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7
has reviewed the plan, has received comments on the plan from its
planning consultant, Clark, Caton and Hintz, its planning staff, its board
members and the public on September 8, 2003; and
F. Whereas, the governing body of the City has given due consideration to
the proposed plan and the recommendations made by the Millville
Planning Board as set forth in Resolution No. 03-38 adopted September
8, 2003.
§ 79-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 79-2
79:1235
§ 79-2. Adoption of redevelopment plan.
The Redevelopment Plan for The Center City Redevelopment Area, dated
August 11, 2003, is hereby adopted.
§ 79-3. No effect on zoning district.
The Zoning District for The Center City Redevelopment Area shall not be
modified by the adoption of the Redevelopment Plan for The Center City
Redevelopment Area.
§ 79-2 MILLVILLE CODE § 79-3
79:1236
ARTICLE II
Boundary Amendment October 2005
[Added 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 46-2005]
§ 79-4. Preamble.
A. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Resolution
No. A-4260 on March 18, 2003, designating an area of the City as an
area in need of redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. (LRHL), which area is
known as the Center City Redevelopment Area; and
B. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Ordinance
No. 27-2003 on October 7, 2003, which adopted the Redevelopment
Plan for the Center City Redevelopment Area; and
C. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville has determined that
portions of two additional properties, which are located directly
adjacent to the northwestern portion of the Center City Redevelopment
Area are necessary for inclusion in the Center City Redevelopment Area
in order to effectively carry out a comprehensive redevelopment of the
area pursuant to the Center City Redevelopment Plan. These properties
are as follows: Block 227, Lot 1 (approximately 8.178 acres); Block 227,
Lot 1.01 (approximately 4.076 acres).
D. Whereas, the professional staff of the City of Millville has recommended
the inclusion of these properties in the Center City Redevelopment Area
to carry out the intent and purposes of the Center City Redevelopment
Plan, and to facilitate the construction of a regional shopping center to
be located at the Routes 47/55 interchange area which requires these
two properties along with other properties to complete the assemblage
of land required for the construction of the regional shopping center;
and
E. Whereas, the redeveloper for the regional shopping center proposes to
construct approximately 500,000 square feet of retail space to be
located on approximately 60 acres of land adjacent to the two state
highways, it is estimated that the total cost of the project would be
approximately $70,000,000 with employment of approximately 1,000
jobs together with the generation of significant real estate taxes and
UEZ revenues for the City of Millville; and
F. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Resolution
No. A-5205 on August 16, 2005, which authorized the municipal
Planning Board to undertake a preliminary investigation to determine if
these properties meet the criteria for inclusion into the Center City
Redevelopment Area and to consider an amendment to the Center City
Redevelopment Plan to include said properties in the plan; and
G. Whereas, the municipal Planning Board undertook the required
investigation and public hearing on September 13, 2005, and approved
§ 79-4 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 79-4
79:1237
§ 79-5. Center City Redevelopment Area and Plan amended.
§ 79-6. Action authorized.
The Director of Economic Development is hereby authorized to amend
the list of the blocks and lots of properties attached to the Center City
Redevelopment Plan to include the subject properties listed above.
a written report which set forth its findings that the Center City
Redevelopment Area should be amended to include the subject
properties and the Center City Redevelopment Plan also should be
amended to include the subject properties.
A. The Center City Redevelopment Area is hereby amended to include the
subject properties listed above.
B. The Center City Redevelopment Plan is hereby amended to include the
subject properties listed above.
§ 79-4 MILLVILLE CODE § 79-6
79:1238
ARTICLE III
Plan and Boundary Amendment November 2005
[Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 55-2005]
§ 79-7. Preamble.
A. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Resolution
No. A-4260 on March 18, 2003, designating an area of the City as an
area in need of redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. (LRHL), which area is
known as the Center City Redevelopment Area; and
B. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Ordinance
No. 27-2003 on October 7, 2003, which adopted the Redevelopment
Plan for the Center City Redevelopment Area; and
C. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville has determined that
nine additional properties, which are located adjacent to the Routes 47/
55 interchange area and are adjacent to or within the general
boundaries of the Center City Redevelopment Area are necessary for
inclusion in the Center City Redevelopment Area in order to effectively
carry out a comprehensive redevelopment of the area pursuant to the
Center City Redevelopment Plan. These properties are as follows:
Block 228, Lot 11
Block 228, Lot 12
Block 228, Lot 13
Block 228, Lot 15
Block 228, Lot 16
Block 228, Lot 17
Block 228, Lot 18
Block 228, Lot 19
Block 228, Lot 20
D. Whereas, the professional staff of the City of Millville has recommended
the inclusion of these properties in the Center City Redevelopment Area
to carry out the intent and purposes of the Center City Redevelopment
Plan, and to facilitate the construction of a regional shopping center to
be located at the Routes 47/55 interchange area which requires these
nine properties along with other properties to complete the assemblage
of land required for the construction of the regional shopping center;
and
E. Whereas, the redeveloper for the regional shopping center proposes to
construct approximately 500,000 square feet of retail space to be
located on approximately 60 acres of land adjacent to the two state
highways, it is estimated that the total cost of the project would be
approximately $70,000,000 with employment of approximately 1,000
§ 79-7 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 79-7
79:1239
§ 79-8. Center City Redevelopment Area and Plan amended.
§ 79-9. Action authorized.
The Director of Economic Development is hereby authorized to amend
the list of the blocks and lots of properties attached to the Center City
Redevelopment Plan to include the subject properties listed above.
§ 79-10. Map adopted.
The aerial map for the Revenue Allocation District dated October 2005 is
hereby approved.
§ 79-11. Block number map approved.
The block number map for the Revenue Allocation District dated October
2005 is hereby approved.
jobs together with the generation of significant real estate taxes and
UEZ revenues for the City of Millville; and
F. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville adopted Resolution
No. A-5255 on October 4, 2005, which authorized the municipal
Planning Board to undertake a preliminary investigation to determine if
these properties meet the criteria for inclusion into the Center City
Redevelopment Area and to consider an amendment to the Center City
Redevelopment Plan to include said properties in the plan; and
G. Whereas, the municipal Planning Board undertook that required
investigation and public hearing on October 31, 2005, and approved a
written report which set forth its findings that the Center City
Redevelopment Area should be amended to include the subject
properties, and the Center City Redevelopment Plan also should be
amended to include the subject properties.
A. The Center City Redevelopment Area is hereby amended to include the
subject properties listed above.
B. The Center City Redevelopment Plan is hereby amended to include the
subject properties listed above, and condemnation is authorized to
acquire the subject properties for construction of the Regional
Shopping Center.
§ 79-7 MILLVILLE CODE § 79-11
79:1240
Chapter 80
CITY REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
[HISTORY:147 Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the City of
Millville 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 80-1. Adoption of plan.
The City hereby adopts the "Redevelopment Plan For the City of Millville,
Cumberland County, NJ, February 2017" to facilitate the rehabilitation and
redevelopment of the City of Millville.
§ 80-2. Determination of conformance with state law.
The Commission declares and determines that said Redevelopment Plan
meets the criteria, guidelines and conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7,
provides realistic opportunities for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of
the City and is otherwise in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A: 12A-1 et seq.
§ 80-3. Authority of Commission.
The Commission shall have, be entitled to, and is hereby vested with all
power and authority granted by the aforementioned statutory provisions to
effectuate the redevelopment plan.
§ 80-4. Effect on other regulations and Zoning Map.
The redevelopment plan shall be an overlay to other local development
regulations, and the City Zoning Map is hereby amended to conform with
the provisions of the redevelopment plan.
Chapter 81
SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
§ 81-1. Preamble.
A. Whereas, on June 17, 2003, the governing body of the City of Millville
adopted Resolution No. A-4359 designating the Airport Redevelopment
Area pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq. (the "Redevelopment Law"); and
B. Whereas, the governing body of the City of Millville has adopted a
Redevelopment Plan for the Airport Redevelopment Area pursuant to
the Redevelopment Law; and
147. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 80, Center City Revenue Allocation District, adopted 9-19-2006
by Ord. No. 27-2006, was removed from the Code upon the dissolution of said district
11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 38-2014.
§ 79-11 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 81-1
79:1241
C. Whereas, the State of New Jersey enacted the Sports and
Entertainment District Urban Revitalization Act (the “Act”) on January
26, 2007, authorizing eligible municipalities to create a sports and
entertainment district and to impose additional taxes within the district
to promote the development of certain sports and entertainment
facilities; and
D. Whereas, the City of Millville is an eligible municipality under the Act;
and
E. Whereas, the purpose of this ordinance is to create a sports and
entertainment district encompassing a portion of the Airport
Redevelopment Area, and to impose additional taxes in the district to
finance the development of sports and entertainment facilities pursuant
to the Act, and to promote a successful redevelopment project; and
F. Whereas, the proposed project for the sports and entertainment district
is identified as the "New Jersey Motorsports Park, Raceplex and
Conference Center featuring Thunderbolt Raceway" (the "project"); and
G. Whereas, pursuant to the Act, a sports and entertainment district shall
consist of an area of the municipality designated in a project plan
prepared by the developer and approved by municipal ordinance duly
adopted by the governing body; and
H. Whereas, the developer, New Jersey Motorsports Park, LLC (the
"developer"), has prepared a project plan entitled "Sports and
Entertainment District Plan" (the "project plan"), consisting of the
properties to be included in the sports and entertainment district which
have been identified in the project plan; and
I. Whereas, the project plan is incorporated herein by reference and shall
serve as documentation that the properties to be included in the sports
and entertainment district have been identified in the project plan; and
J. Whereas, it is estimated that the sports and entertainment district will
generate $21,517,502 in total tax revenues during the time period
covered by the project plan, and that an estimated $21,517,502 of those
revenues will be allocated to the project; and
K. Whereas, it is anticipated that the project will produce substantial
economic benefits for the City of Millville including the generation of
more than $20,000,000 in private investment, and the creation of 1,500
new jobs; and
L. Whereas, at least $20,000,000 in private investment has been
committed by the developer to the project as set forth in the Amended
Municipal Development Agreement between the City of Millville and
the developer (the "agreement"), which is incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 81-1 MILLVILLE CODE § 81-2
79:1242
§ 81-2. Creation of District.
The City of Millville hereby creates a Sports and Entertainment District
(the "District") pursuant to the Act, which shall be the same district created
pursuant to Ordinance No. 23-2004 entitled the "Airpark, Motorsports
Entertainment District." The District is hereby created to encourage and
promote development within the District.
§ 81-3. Identification of District.
§ 81-4. Approval of project plan for District.
The project plan prepared for the District is hereby approved and
incorporated herein.
§ 81-5. Description of project.
The project shall consist of three phases, to be completed as specified in the
agreement.
A. The District shall consist of the following properties, all of which are
entirely located in the Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ), and which are
located along Buckshutem Road near or adjacent to the Millville Airport
as identified in the agreement.
Block 124, Lot 16 200 +/- acres
Block 125, Lot 1 110 +/- acres
Block 125, Lot 2 91 +/- acres
Block 125, Lot 3 107 +/- acres
Block 125, Lot 5 139 +/- acres
Block 136, Lot 1.01 60 +/- acres
B. A map of the District is attached hereto as Exhibit A148 and incorporated
herein.
A. Phase I of the project shall include the following, subject to changes
that may be made in the GDP approved by the City of Millville:
(1) Thunderbolt Racetrack and ancillary facilities.
(2) Track-related services.
(3) Concessions.
(4) Sixty to 200 Shade Tree Garages.
(5) Country club clubhouse.
(6) VIP suites.
148. Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 81-2 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 81-5
79:1243
§ 81-6. Period of construction.
The exact schedule of construction for improvements shall be determined
by the developer based upon budget constraints, market conditions and
demand. It is anticipated that Phases I, II and III will be substantially
complete and operational in accordance with the agreement.
§ 81-7. Necessary approvals.
The following approvals shall be obtained or have been obtained in
connection with the project as set forth in the agreement:
(7) Go-karting track.
(8) Driver training school.
B. Phase II of the project shall include the following, subject to changes
that may be made in the GDP approved by the City of Millville:
(1) Two hotels (approximately 250 rooms).
(2) Two hotels (approximately 320 rooms).
(3) Three restaurant pads.
(4) Trackside villas.
(5) Research and development raceplex businesses.
(6) ATV course.
(7) Classic car gallery and museum.
C. Phase III of the project shall include the following, subject to changes
that may be made in the GDP approved by the City of Millville:
(1) Off-road vehicle course/training facility.
(2) One hotel (200 rooms with conference center).
(3) Three-fourth-mile oval track.
A. Planning Board approval. The Developer shall obtain approval for the
project from the Planning Board of the City of Millville and the Planning
Board of Cumberland County prior to construction of the project,
including, but not limited to, preliminary and final site plan and
subdivision approval.
B. NJDEP approval. The developer shall obtain approval from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) prior to
construction of the sewer and water main extension, and shall obtain
NJDEP approval in connection with any other aspect of the project
requiring NJDEP approval.
§ 81-5 MILLVILLE CODE § 81-7
79:1244
§ 81-8. Taxes.
C. UEZ approval. Approval and remittance of Urban Enterprise Zone
(UEZ) funds shall be obtained for the project. The approval process
shall entail obtaining the approval of (1) the governing body of the City
of Millville; (2) the Enterprise Zone Development Corporation of
Vineland and Millville, and (3) the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone
Authority.
D. DRBA and FAA approval. The City of Millville shall obtain consent from
the Delaware River and Bay Authority and the Federal Aviation
Administration for the sale of portions of Block 125, Lots 2 and 5 to the
developer.
E. Miscellaneous approvals. The developer shall obtain all other approvals
as determined to be necessary by the Planning Board of the City of
Millville, the Planning Board of Cumberland County, and any other
governmental agency having jurisdiction over the project.
A. The following taxes shall be imposed in the District for a period of 30
years from the effective date of this chapter.
(1) A tax at the rate of 2% on the receipts from every sale within the
District of tangible personal property subject to taxation pursuant
to subsection (a) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
(2) A tax at the rate of 2% on the receipts from every sale within the
District of food and drink subject to taxation pursuant to subsection
(c) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
(3) A tax at the rate of 2% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a
room or rooms in a hotel located within the District and subject to
taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
(4) A tax at the rate of 2% on the admission charge to a place of
amusement within the District and subject to taxation pursuant to
subsection (c) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3).
B. Any tax imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other tax
or fee imposed pursuant to state statute or local ordinance or resolution
by any governmental entity upon the same transaction.
C. Any tax imposed under this section shall be imposed only on sales that
occur within the District and shall not include mail order sales,
telephone sales, Internet sales or any other sales that do not directly
take place within the District, except that mail order sales, telephone
sales and Internet sales shall be considered as occurring within the
District if the product or service rendered is received within the
District.
§ 81-7 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 81-9
79:1245
§ 81-9. Effect upon Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ).
For any lands included in the District which are part of the UEZ, in which
a tax exemption has been granted, the City of Millville shall continue to
administer those sales tax revenues collected within the UEZ as otherwise
provided pursuant to P.L. 1983, c.303 (N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.).
§ 81-10. Payment of taxes; violation of provision; penalties.
§ 81-11. Collection of taxes.
Taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the
municipality by the person collecting the receipts, charges or rent from the
customer, and such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting
the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the receipts, charges
and rent and payable at the same time. Each person required to collect a
tax imposed by this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax imposed,
collected or required to be collected pursuant to this chapter. The Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality shall be joined as a party in any action
or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 81-12. Submission of taxes to Director, Division of Taxation.
A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall,
on or before the dates required pursuant to section 17 of P.L. 1966, c.30
(N.J.A.C. 54:32B-17), forward to the Director of the State of New Jersey's
Division of Taxation ("Division of Taxation") in the Department of the
Treasury the tax collected in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the Act.
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged as stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
E. Penalties shall be assessed against any person found to be in violation
of this section of the chapter in accordance with the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Act.
§ 81-9 MILLVILLE CODE § 81-13
79:1246
§ 81-13. Training.
In connection with the collection of taxes under this chapter and the Act,
vendors in the District and UEZ coordinators may be required by the
Division of Taxation to attend training sessions conducted by the Division
of Taxation relating to the different tax rates charged in the District. Prior
to the collection of taxes under this chapter and the Act, all vendors in
the District and the UEZ coordinators shall be responsible for ascertaining
any training requirements imposed by the Division of Taxation and for
complying with any such training requirements.
§ 81-14. Amendment of District.
There shall be no expansion or contraction of the boundaries of the District
or the designation of the pledged revenues without the adoption of an
amending ordinance approved by the Treasurer of the State of New Jersey
as provided for in the Act.
§ 81-15. Transmittal of ordinance to State Treasurer.
A copy of this chapter shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of the State
of New Jersey for approval after first reading as an application, together
with all included and incorporated certificates and documents and such
additional documents as the Treasurer shall require. This chapter shall be
approved by the Treasurer of the State of New Jersey as provided for in the
Act prior to final adoption of this chapter by the municipal governing body.
A copy of this chapter shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of the State of
New Jersey after final adoption.
§ 81-16. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect after final adoption and publication as
required by law, except that the taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
take effect on the first day of the first full month occurring 90 days after the
date of transmittal to the Treasurer of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 82
RECAPTURE AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 30.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
A. The City of Millville has agreed to enter into a repayment agreement
with Goodmill, LLC to reimburse Goodmill, LLC for costs in excess of its
§ 81-13 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 82-1
79:1247
§ 82-2. Nonresidential properties.
"fair share" of the construction of off-tract road improvements in
accordance with a traffic circulation plan along Route 47, High Street
and Sharp Street (the "project"). The project as shown in concept on
plans prepared by Shropshire Associates dated November 7, 2008, for
the High Street and Sharp Street intersection and dated February 17,
2009, for the Sharp Street and Route 47 intersection, to be approved
by the City of Millville, Cumberland County and the New Jersey
Department of Transportation will benefit the citizens of the City and
provide access to the regional shopping center in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and
B. It is estimated that the initial cost of constructing the project will be
approximately $3,500,000; and
C. Goodmill, LLC has agreed to fund the entire cost of constructing the
project, subject to reimbursement of the excess of its "fair share"; and
D. The City and Goodmill, LLC have agreed that Goodmill's "fair share" of
constructing the project will be 33 1/3% of the actual cost of the
project, more fully described in the repayment agreement; and
E. It is recognized that future residential and commercial developers,
developments and/or projects in the City will benefit from the project;
therefore, such future residential and commercial developers,
developments and/or projects should participate in repaying Goodmill,
LLC for constructing the project in accordance with its repayment
protocol.
A. Properties subject to the repayment protocol shall include all
nonresidential properties located in the geographical areas of the City
Zoning Map consisting of all or portions of the Lakeshore Conservation
District (LSC), and the General Business (B-4), Interchange Mixed Use
(I-2), General Industry (I-1) and Professional Services (B-2) Zones. The
area is more specifically defined by the City boundary to the north, "G"
Street to the south, Union Lake and bordering residential zones to the
west and the railroad right-of-way to the east.
B. The formula for computation of the repayment protocol shall be $1,000
for each unit of nonresidential construction with 1,500 square feet or
less.
C. The formula for computation of the repayment protocol for
nonresidential projects larger than 1,500 square feet will be based on
measurable traffic impacts resulting from a traffic study. A "Proposed
Fair Share Calculation Methodology" has been prepared by the City's
Traffic Consultant, Aurora and Associates, P.C., and attached to and
made a part of this chapter.149 This shall serve as a guidance document
149. Editor's Note: Said document is on file in the City offices.
§ 82-1 MILLVILLE CODE § 82-2
79:1248
§ 82-3. Residential properties.
§ 82-4. Payments.
Chapter 83
BLOCK 266 REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 83-1. Adoption of plan.
The City hereby adopts the "Redevelopment Plan for Block 266, Lots 7.04,
7.05, 7.06, 7.07, City of Millville, Cumberland County, NJ, September 2017"
to facilitate the rehabilitation and development of the project area and City
of Millville.
§ 83-2. Determination of conformance with state law.
The Commission declares and determines that said redevelopment plan
meets the criteria, guidelines and conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7,
provides realistic opportunities for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of
the City and is otherwise in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq.
for calculating an applicant's fair share based on the measurable
impact to the project intersections.
A. This repayment protocol will be applicable to new residential
construction located within the geographical area of the entire
municipality; and
B. Individual residential property and small subdivisions of five residential
units or fewer are exempt from the repayment protocol.
C. The formula for computation of the repayment protocol for residential
construction shall be $1,000 for each unit of residential construction
with 1,500 square feet or less of living area and $1,500 for each unit of
residential construction excess of 1,500 square feet of living area.
However, applicants for residential development in excess of 20 units
shall be permitted an opportunity to submit an impact statement,
supported by research, data and professional traffic studies, to identify
a "fair share" burden for the applicant's contribution toward this
protocol obligation. Such submission shall precede the issuance of any
building permit and shall be evaluated by the City of Millville
Engineering office to determine the appropriate sums due and payable
by the applicant.
A. The payment required from the owner or developer of new construction
shall be made to the City at the time of the issuance of the building
permit.
B. The repayment protocol shall continue for 25 years from the issuance of
the first building permit subject to the repayment protocol.
§ 82-2 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § 83-3
79:1249
§ 83-3. Authority of Commission.
The Commission shall have, be entitled to, and is hereby vested all power
and authority granted by the aforementioned statutory provisions to
effectuate the redevelopment plan.
§ 83-4. Effect on other regulations and Zoning Map.
The redevelopment plan shall be an overlay to other local development
regulations, and the City Zoning Map is hereby amended to conform with
the provisions of the redevelopment plan.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
33-2001 11-5-2001 Bond NCM
34-2001 11-5-2001 Salary NCM
35-2001 11-19-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
36-2001 11-19-2001 Salary NCM
37-2001 12-4-2001 Administration amendment Ch. 2
38-2001 12-4-2001 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
39-2001 12-4-2001 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
40-2001 12-4-2001 Bond NCM
41-2001 12-4-2001 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
42-2001 12-18-2001 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
43-2001 12-18-2001 Flood damage prevention Ch. 20
44-2001 12-18-2001 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
45-2001 12-18-2001 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
46-2001 12-18-2001 Taxation amendment Ch. 65
1-2002 2-5-2002 Lease of property NCM
2-2002 2-5-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
§ 83-3 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1250
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2002 2-19-2002 Lease agreement NCM
4-2002 2-19-2002 Accept easement deed NCM
5-2002 3-5-2002 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment
Ch. 5
6-2002 3-5-2002 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
7-2002 3-5-2002 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
8-2002 3-5-2002 Licensing of professions
and occupations
amendment
Ch. 35
9-2002 3-19-2002 Urban enterprise zone
amendment
Ch. 77
10-2002 3-19-2002 Loan guarantee NCM
11-2002 4-2-2002 Sale of property NCM
12-2002 4-2-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
13-2002 4-2-2002 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
14-2002 4-16-2002 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
15-2002 5-7-2002 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
16-2002 5-7-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
17-2002 6-4-2002 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2002 6-18-2002 Bond NCM
19-2002 6-4-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
20-2002 7-2-2002 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
21-2002 7-2-2002 Bond NCM
22-2002 7-2-2002 Bond NCM
23-2002 8-6-2002 Length of service awards
program amendment
NCM
24-2002 8-6-2002 Administration amendment Ch. 2
25-2002 8-20-2002 Bond NCM
26-2002 8-20-2002 Animal control amendment Ch. 8
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1251
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-2002 9-3-2002 Acquisition of real estate NCM
28-2002 10-1-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
29-2002 10-1-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
30-2002 10-15-2002 Sale of real estate NCM
31-2002 11-18-2002 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
32-2002 11-18-2002 Administration amendment Ch. 2
33-2002 11-18-2002 Salaries NCM
34-2002 12-17-2002 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
1-2003 2-18-2003 Cable television franchise Ch. 76
2-2003 2-18-2003 Sale of real estate NCM
3-2003 3-18-2003 Salaries NCM
4-2003 3-18-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
5-2003 3-18-2003 Salaries NCM
6-2003 4-1-2003 Bond NCM
7-2003 4-1-2003 Bond NCM
8-2003 4-15-2003 Bond NCM
9-2003 5-6-2003 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 5
10-2003 5-6-2003 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
11-2003 5-6-2003 Bond NCM
12-2003 5-6-2003 Street vacation NCM
13-2003 5-20-2003 Bond NCM
14-2003 5-20-2003 Sale of land NCM
15-2003 6-3-2003 Salaries NCM
16-2003 6-3-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
17-2003 6-3-2003 Parks and public property
amendment
Ch. 43
18-2003 6-17-2003 Bond NCM
19-2003 7-15-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1252
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-2003 8-19-2003 Parks and public property
amendment
Ch. 43
21-2003 8-19-2003 Massage businesses Ch. 33, Art. XVIII
22-2003 8-19-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
23-2003 8-19-2003 Charitable organizations Not adopted
24-2003 9-2-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
25-2003 9-16-2003 Bond NCM
26-2003 10-7-2003 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 11, Art. XI
27-2003 10-7-2003 Center City redevelopment
plan
Ch. 79
28-2003 10-21-2003 Real estate sale NCM
29-2003 10-21-2003 Real estate sale NCM
30-2003 10-21-2003 Real estate sale NCM
31-2003 10-21-2003 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. XXI
32-2003 10-21-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
33-2003 11-3-2003 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
34-2003 11-3-2003 Airport redevelopment plan Ch. 78
35-2003 11-3-2003 Conveyance of real estate NCM
36-2003 11-17-2003 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
37-2003 11-14-2003 Conveyance of real estate NCM
38-2003 12-16-2003 Personnel policies Ch. 46
39-2003 12-16-2003 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 33
1-2004 1-6-2004 Sale of property NCM
2-2004 1-6-2004 Promissory note NCM
3-2004 1-20-2004 Sewer installation costs
assessment
NCM
4-2004 1-20-2004 Sewer installation costs
assessment
NCM
5-2004 2-3-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1253
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2004 2-17-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
7-2004 2-17-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
8-2004 2-17-2004 Sale of property NCM
9-2004 2-17-2004 Authorization for use of
highway for coin toss
NCM
10-2004 3-16-2004 Sewer use charges
amendment
Ch. 56
11-2004 3-16-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
12-2004 3-16-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
13-2004 4-6-2004 Acquisition of property NCM
14-2004 4-6-2004 Bond NCM
15-2004 5-18-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
16-2004 7-6-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
17-2004 7-6-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2004 6-15-2004 Sale of property NCM
19-2004 6-15-2004 Development agreement NCM
20-2004 7-6-2004 Sale of property NCM
21-2004 7-20-2004 List of abandoned
properties
Ch. 11, Art. XV
22-2004 Special events Not adopted
23-2004 8-17-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
24-2004 8-3-2004 Acceptance of
improvements
NCM
25-2004 8-17-2004 Bond NCM
26-2004 8-17-2004 Street vacation NCM
27-2004 8-17-2004 Conveyance of property NCM
28-2004 8-17-2004 Noise amendment Ch. 52, Art. VIII
29-2004 9-7-2004 Budget CAP bank NCM
30-2004 9-7-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
31-2004 9-21-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1254
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
32-2004 9-21-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
33-2004 10-5-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
34-2004 10-5-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
35-2004 10-19-2004 Condemnation of land NCM
36-2004 10-5-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
37-2004 10-19-20004 Acquisition of land NCM
38-2004 11-15-2004 Street vacation NCM
39-2004 11-15-2004 Sale of land NCM
40-2004 11-15-2004 Sale of land NCM
41-2004 12-7-2004 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
42-2004 12-7-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
43-2004 12-21-2004 Bond NCM
44-2004 12-21-2004 Bond NCM
1-2005 1-4-2005 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
2-2005 1-4-2005 Administration amendment Ch. 2
3-2005 2-1-2005 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
4-2005 2-1-2005 Sale of land NCM
5-2005 2-1-2005 Sale of land NCM
6-2005 2-1-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
7-2005 2-15-2005 Administration and Police
Department amendment
Chs. 2 and 50
8-2005 2-15-2005 Property assessment for
failed sewer lateral
NCM
9-2005 3-1-2005 Stormwater management
and pollution control
Ch. 60
10-2005 3-1-2005 Sexually oriented
businesses
Ch. 33, Art. XIX
11-2005 3-1-2005 Application for coin drop
on state highway
NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1255
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2005 3-15-2005 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
13-2005 3-15-2005 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
14-2005 4-5-2005 Development agreement NCM
15-2005 4-5-2005 Conveyance of property NCM
16-2005 4-6-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
17-2005 4-19-2005 Maurice River Bicycle and
Walking Trail
Ch. 43, Art. VIII
18-2005 4-19-2005 Unfit structures and
abandoned properties
amendment
Ch. 11, Arts. IV
and XV
19-2005 4-19-2005 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
20-2005 6-21-2005 Sale of real estate NCM
21-2005 6-21-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
22-2005 6-21-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
23-2005 7-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 39
24-2005 7-5-2005 Permission for coin drop NCM
25-2005 7-5-2005 Acquisition of real estate NCM
26-2005 7-5-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
27-2005 8-2-2005 Street vacation: Sassafras
Street
NCM
28-2005 8-2-2005 Sale of real estate NCM
29-2005 8-2-2005 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 30
30-2005 8-16-2005 Taxation amendment Ch. 65
31-2005 8-16-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
32-2005 9-6-2005 Sale of real estate NCM
33-2005 9-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 30, table only
34-2005 9-6-2005 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 30
35-2005 9-20-2005 Alley vacation NCM
36-2005 9-20-2005 Conveyance of real estate NCM
37-2005 9-20-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
38-2005 10-4-2005 Budget cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1256
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
39-2005 10-4-2005 Sale of real estate NCM
40-2005 10-4-2005 Sale of real estate NCM
41-2005 10-4-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 39
42-2005 10-4-2005 Leasing of public property NCM
43-2005 10-4-2005 Leasing of public property NCM
44-2005 10-18-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 30, table only
45-2005 10-18-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
46-2005 10-18-2005 Center City redevelopment
plan amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
47-2005 10-18-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
48-2005 11-1-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
49-2005 11-1-2005 Sale of property NCM
50-2005 11-1-2005 Sale of property NCM
51-2005 11-1-2005 Motor vehicles and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
52-2005 11-1-2005 Sale of property NCM
53-2005 11-14-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
54-2005 11-14-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
55-2005 11-14-2005 Center City redevelopment
plan amendment
Ch. 79, Art. III
56-2005 12-6-2005 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
57-2005 12-20-2005 Sex offenders Ch. 52
58-2005 12-20-2005 Sale of property NCM
59-2005 12-20-2005 Bond NCM
60-2005 12-20-2005 Bond NCM
61-2005 12-20-2005 Bond NCM
1-2006 1-3-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
2-2006 1-3-2006 Sale of property NCM
3-2006 1-3-2006 Bond NCM
4-2006 2-7-2006 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
5-2006 2-7-2006 Grant of easement NCM
6-2006 2-21-2006 Motor vehicles and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
7-2006 2-21-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1257
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2006 3-7-2006 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 30
9-2006 3-7-2006 Permission for coin drop NCM
10-2006 3-7-2006 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 30
11-2006 3-21-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
12-2006 3-21-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
13-2006 3-21-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
14-2006 4-18-2006 Bond NCM
15-2006 5-2-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
16-2006 5-2-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
17-2006 5-16-2006 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2006 6-6-2006 Permission for coin drop NCM
19-2006 7-3-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
20-2006 7-3-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
21-2006 7-3-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
22-2006 7-3-2006 Leasing of public property NCM
23-2006 Taxation of manufactured
homes
Defeated
24-2006 9-5-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
25-2006 9-5-2006 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
26-2006 9-5-2006 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
27-2006 9-19-2006 Center City Revenue
Allocation District
Repealed by Ord.
No. 38-2014
28-2006 9-19-2006 Street vacation NCM
29-2006 9-19-2006 Sale of real estate NCM
30-2006 10-17-2006 Cap bank established NCM
31-2006 10-3-2006 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
32-2006 10-3-2006 Taxation: manufactured
homes; licensing and
permits: mobile home
parks and trailer courts
repealer
Ch. 65, Art. III;
Ch. 33, Art. XI
(reference only)
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1258
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
33-2006 10-17-2006 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
34-2006 11-6-2006 Municipal development
agreement
NCM
35-2006 11-20-2006 Land exchange NCM
36-2006 12-19-2006 Center City Revenue
Allocation District
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 38-2014
37-2006 12-5-2006 Easement NCM
38-2006 1-2-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
1-2007 1-16-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
2-2007 2-6-2007 Bond NCM
3-2007 2-20-2007 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
4-2007 2-20-2007 Center City Revenue
Allocation District
Municipal Utility
Repealed by Ord.
No. 38-2014
5-2007 3-6-2007 Exchange of property NCM
6-2007 4-3-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
7-2007 4-3-2007 Application for coin drop
on state highway
NCM
8-2007 4-3-2007 Sale of property NCM
9-2007 4-3-2007 Tax exemption and
financial agreement
NCM
10-2007 4-3-2007 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
11-2007 4-3-2007 Sale of property NCM
12-2007 4-17-2007 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
13-2007 7-3-2007 Sports and Entertainment
District
Ch. 81
14-2007 5-15-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
15-2007 5-15-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
16-2007 5-15-2007 Conveyance of land NCM
17-2007 6-5-2007 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2007 7-3-2007 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1259
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2007 7-3-2007 Police regulations
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 40-2015
20-2007 7-3-2007 Salaries NCM
21-2007 7-3-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
22-2007 7-17-2007 Stormwater management
and pollution control
amendment
Ch. 60
23-2007 8-21-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
24-2007 7-17-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
25-2007 7-17-2007 Approval for coin drop NCM
26-2007 3-4-2008 Sports and Entertainment
District amendment
Ch. 81, Art. II,
footnote only
27-2007 8-21-2007 Center City Revenue
Allocation District
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 38-2014
28-2007 8-21-2007 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
29-2007 9-4-2007 Sports and Entertainment
District amendment
Ch. 81
30-2007 9-4-2007 Appropriation NCM
31-2007 9-4-2007 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
32-2007 9-7-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
33-2007 9-18-2007 Bond NCM
34-2007 10-2-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
35-2007 10-2-2007 Administration amendment Ch. 2
36-2007 10-2-2007 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment
Ch. 5
37-2007 10-2-2007 Animal control amendment Ch. 8
38-2007 10-2-2007 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
39-2007 10-2-2007 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1260
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
40-2007 11-5-2007 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
41-2007 10-16-2007 Bond NCM
42-2007 10-16-2007 Bond NCM
43-2007 11-19-2007 Sale of real estate NCM
44-2007 11-19-2007 Airport agreement
amendment
NCM
45-2007 11-19-2007 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
46-2007 12-4-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
1-2008 1-15-2008 Street vacation NCM
2-2008 1-15-2008 Street vacation NCM
3-2008 1-15-2008 Street vacation NCM
4-2008 1-15-2008 Sale of real estate NCM
5-2008 2-5-2008 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections: UCC fees
amendment
Ch. 11, Art. XIV
6-2008 2-19-2008 Bond NCM
7-2008 2-19-2008 Bond NCM
8-2008 2-19-2008 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
9-2008 3-18-2008 Approval of one-time coin
drop collection by Fire
Department
NCM
10-2008 4-15-2008 Bond NCM
11-2008 5-20-2008 Administration amendment Ch. 2
12-2008 5-20-2008 Bond NCM
13-2008 6-3-2008 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
14-2008 6-3-2008 Approval of one-time coin
drop collection by Rescue
Squad
NCM
15-2008 6-17-2008 Bond NCM
16-2008 7-1-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
17-2008 7-15-2008 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1261
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2008 7-1-2008 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
19-2008 7-15-2008 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
20-2008 8-19-2008 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
21-2008 8-19-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
22-2008 8-19-2008 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
23-2008 9-2-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 54, Art. I
24-2008 9-2-2008 Sale of real estate NCM
25-2008 9-2-2008 Sale of real estate NCM
26-2008 10-7-2008 Salaries NCM
27-2008 10-7-2008 Deputy Emergency
Management Coordinator
job title established
NCM
28-2008 11-3-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
29-2008 10-21-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
30-2008 10-21-2008 Taxation amendment Ch. 65
31-2008 10-21-2008 Police regulations
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 40-2015
32-2008 11-17-2008 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
33-2008 11-17-2008 Sale of real estate NCM
34-2008 11-17-2008 Bond amendment NCM
35-2008 12-16-2008 Taxation amendment Ch. 65
1-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
2-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
3-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
4-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
5-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
6-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
7-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1262
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
9-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
10-2009 1-6-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
11-2009 2-3-2009 Street vacation NCM
12-2009 3-3-2009 Appropriation NCM
13-2009 3-3-2009 Recapture agreements Repealed by Ord.
No. 18-2014
14-2009 3-17-2009 Alley vacation NCM
15-2009 3-17-2009 Salaries NCM
16-2009 4-7-2009 Approval for coin drop NCM
17-2009 5-5-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2009 6-16-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
19-2009 6-16-2009 Bond NCM
20-2009 6-16-2009 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
21-2009 7-7-2009 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
22-2009 7-7-2009 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
23-2009 7-7-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
24-2009 7-21-2009 Administration amendment Ch. 2
25-2009 7-21-2009 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52, footnote
only
26-2009 7-21-2009 Drainage easement
vacation
NCM
27-2009 8-4-2009 Property acquisition NCM
28-2009 8-18-2009 Motor vehicles and traffic
regulations amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 46-2009
29-2009 8-18-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
30-2009 9-1-2009 Property acquisition NCM
31-2009 9-1-2009 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1263
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
32-2009 9-1-2009 Stormwater management
and pollution control
amendment
Ch. 60
33-2009 11-2-2009 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
34-2009 11-16-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
35-2009 11-16-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
36-2009 11-16-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
37-2009 11-16-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
38-2009 11-16-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
39-2009 11-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 30, table only
40-2009 12-1-2009 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
41-2009 12-1-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
42-2009 12-1-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
43-2009 12-1-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
44-2009 12-1-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
45-2009 12-1-2009 Tax abatement agreement NCM
46-2009 12-1-2009 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
1-2010 1-5-2010 Municipal development
agreement
NCM
2-2010 2-16-2010 Urban Enterprise Zone
amendment
Ch. 77
3-2010 4-20-2010 Sale of real estate NCM
4-2010 5-4-2010 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
5-2010 5-18-2010 Taxation amendment Ch. 65
6-2010 5-18-2010 Sale of real estate NCM
7-2010 5-18-2010 Administration amendment Ch. 2
8-2010 5-18-2010 Appropriation NCM
9-2010 6-1-2010 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment;
Fire Department
amendment
Chs. 11; 17
10-2010 6-1-2010 Approval for coin drop NCM
11-2010 7-6-1010 Quit claim deed NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1264
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2010 7-20-2010 Street vacation NCM
13-2010 7-20-2010 Salaries NCM
14-2010 8-3-2010 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
15-2010 8-3-2010 Salaries NCM
16-2010 8-3-2010 Administration amendment Ch. 2
17-2010 9-7-2010 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2010 9-21-2010 Municipal development
agreement amendment
NCM
19-2010 10-5-2010 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
20-2010 10-5-2010 Salaries NCM
21-2010 11-1-2010 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
22-2010 11-1-2010 Street acceptance NCM
23-2010 12-21-2010 Tax abatement agreement NCM
24-2010 12-21-2010 Tax abatement agreement NCM
25-2010 12-21-2010 Tax abatement agreement NCM
26-2010 12-21-2010 Tax abatement agreement NCM
27-2010 12-21-2010 Administration amendment Ch. 2
28-2010 12-21-2010 Salaries NCM
29-2010 12-21-2010 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
1-2011 1-4-2011 Salaries NCM
2-2011 1-18-2011 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
3-2011 3-1-2011 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
4-2011 4-5-2011 Salaries NCM
5-2011 4-19-2011 Approval for coin drop NCM
6-2011 4-19-2011 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
7-2011 5-3-2011 Sale of real estate NCM
8-2011 6-7-2011 Approval for coin drop NCM
9-2011 6-7-2011 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1265
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2011 7-5-2011 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
11-2011 8-2-2011 Appropriation NCM
12-2011 8-2-2011 Lease agreement NCM
13-2011 8-16-2011 Salaries NCM
14-2011 9-6-2011 Salaries NCM
15-2011 9-20-2011 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
16-2011 9-20-2011 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
17-2011 9-20-2011 Acceptance of property NCM
18-2011 10-18-2011 Animal control amendment Ch. 8
19-2011 11-1-2011 Tax abatement agreement NCM
20-2011 11-1-2011 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
21-2011 11-14-2011 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
22-2011 11-14-2011 Salaries NCM
23-2011 12-5-2011 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
24-2011 12-20-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
25-2011 12-20-2011 Tax abatement agreement NCM
26-2011 12-20-2011 Tax abatement agreement NCM
1-2012 1-3-2012 Street acceptance NCM
2-2012 1-3-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
3-2012 1-17-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
4-2012 2-21-2012 Bond NCM
5-2012 2-21-2012 Administration amendment Ch. 2
6-2012 2-21-2012 Approval for coin drop NCM
7-2012 2-21-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
8-2012 2-21-2012 Street vacation NCM
9-2012 2-21-2012 Salaries NCM
10-2012 3-6-2012 Bond NCM
11-2012 4-3-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1266
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2012 4-3-2012 Feral cat program Ch. 8, Art. II
13-2012 4-3-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
14-2012 4-17-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
15-2012 5-1-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
16-2012 5-1-2012 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment; Fire
Department amendment;
licensing and permits
amendment; police
regulations amendment
Chs. 5; 17; 33; 52
17-2012 5-1-2012 Approval for coin drop NCM
18-2012 5-1-2012 Approval for coin drop NCM
19-2012 5-15-2012 Bond NCM
20-2012 5-15-2012 Salaries NCM
21-2012 6-19-2012 Stormwater management
and pollution control
amendment
Ch. 60
22-2012 6-19-2012 Municipal development
agreement amendment
NCM
23-2012 7-3-2012 Approval for coin drop NCM
24-2012 7-3-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
25-2012 9-4-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
26-2012 11-5-2012 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
27-2012 9-18-2012 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
28-2012 9-18-2012 Salaries NCM
29-2012 9-18-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
30-2012 10-2-2012 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
31-2012 10-2-2012 Bureau of permits and
inspections amendment
Ch. 11
32-2012 10-2-2012 Salaries NCM
33-2012 10-16-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1267
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
34-2012 10-16-2012 Tax abatement agreement NCM
35-2012 10-16-2012 Street vacation NCM
36-2012 11-5-2012 Bond NCM
37-2012 11-20-2012 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
38-2012 12-4-2012 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
39-2012 12-18-2012 Bond NCM
40-2012 12-18-2012 Animal control: licensing
and control amendment
Ch. 8, Art. I
1-2013 1-2-2013 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
2-2013 3-5-2013 Change in fiscal year NCM
3-2013 3-19-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
4-2013 3-19-2013 Bond NCM
5-2013 4-16-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
6-2013 4-16-2013 Sale of property NCM
7-2013 5-7-2013 Salaries NCM
8-2013 5-21-2013 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
9-2013 5-21-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
10-2013 5-21-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
11-2013 5-21-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
12-2013 5-21-2013 Salaries NCM
13-2013 5-21-2013 Salaries NCM
14-2013 6-4-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
15-2013 6-4-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
16-2013 6-4-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
17-2013 6-4-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
18-2013 6-4-2013 Salaries NCM
19-2013 7-2-2013 Administration amendment Ch. 2
20-2013 7-2-2013 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1268
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-2013 7-2-2013 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
22-2013 7-2-2013 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
23-2013 8-20-2013 Approval for coin drop NCM
24-2013 8-20-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
25-2013 9-3-2013 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
26-2013 9-3-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
27-2013 9-17-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
28-2013 10-1-2013 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
29-2013 10-15-2013 Consent to South Jersey
Gas Company to use public
streets
NCM
30-2013 11-4-2013 Feral cat program
amendment
Ch. 8, Art. II
31-2013 11-18-2013 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
32-2013 12-17-2013 Tax exemption agreement NCM
33-2013 12-17-2013 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
34-2013 12-17-2013 Acceptance of dedication of
property
NCM
35-2013 Tabled
36-2013 12-31-2013 Salaries NCM
1-2014 2-18-2014 Salaries NCM
2-2014 2-18-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
3-2014 3-4-2014 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
4-2014 3-4-2014 Police Chaplains Ch. 49
5-2014 3-4-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-2014 3-18-2014 Approval for coin drop NCM
7-2014 3-18-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1269
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2014 3-18-2014 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
9-2014 3-18-2014 Parks and public property
amendment
Ch. 43
10-2014 4-1-2014 Tax exemption agreement NCM
11-2014 4-1-2014 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
12-2014 4-15-2014 Approval for coin drop NCM
13-2014 4-15-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
14-2014 5-6-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
15-2014 5-6-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
16-2014 5-6-2014 Street acceptance NCM
17-2014 5-6-2014 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
18-2014 5-20-2014 Recapture agreements Ch. 82
19-2014 5-20-2014 Approval for coin drop NCM
20-2014 5-20-2014 Salaries NCM
21-2014 5-20-2014 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
22-2014 6-3-2014 Approval for coin drop NCM
23-2014 6-3-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
24-2014 6-3-2014 Sale of property NCM
25-2014 6-17-2014 Sale of property NCM
26-2014 Tabled
27-2014 7-1-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
28-2014 8-19-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
29-2014 8-19-2014 Administration amendment Ch. 2
30-2014 8-19-2014 Street vacation NCM
31-2014 8-19-2014 Salaries NCM
32-2014 9-16-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
33-2014 9-16-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1270
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
34-2014 10-7-2014 Approval for coin drop NCM
35-2014 10-7-2014 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
36-2014 10-7-2014 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
37-2014 10-21-2014 Salaries NCM
38-2014 11-17-2014 Dissolution of Center City
Revenue Allocation District
Ch. 80, reference
only
39-2014 11-17-2014 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
40-2014 11-17-2014 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
41-2014 12-2-2014 Administration amendment Ch. 2
42-2014 12-16-2014 Tax exemption agreement NCM
43-2014 12-16-2014 Tax exemption agreement NCM
44-2014 12-16-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
45-2014 12-30-2014 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
1-2015 1-20-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
2-2015 Bond Not adopted
3-2015 2-17-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
4-2015 3-17-2015 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
5-2015 3-17-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-2015 3-17-2015 Administration amendment Ch. 2
7-2015 4-7-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
8-2015 4-7-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
9-2015 4-7-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
10-2015 4-21-2015 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
11-2015 5-5-2015 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
12-2015 5-19-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
13-2015 5-19-2015 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
14-2015 5-19-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1271
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-2015 6-2-2015 Urban Enterprise Zone
amendment
Ch. 77, footnote
only
16-2015 6-16-2015 Bond NCM
17-2015 7-7-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
18-2015 7-7-2015 Salaries NCM
19-2015 8-18-2015 Appropriation NCM
20-2015 8-18-2015 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
21-2015 8-18-2015 Salaries NCM
22-2015 9-1-2015 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
23-2015 9-1-2015 Salaries NCM
24-2015 9-15-2015 Salaries NCM
25-2015 9-15-2015 Salaries NCM
26-2015 11-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 30, table only
27-2015 10-20-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
28-2015 10-20-2015 Salaries NCM
29-2015 10-20-2015 Approval for coin drop NCM
30-2015 11-2-2015 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
31-2015 11-2-2015 Salaries NCM
32-2015 11-16-2015 Salaries NCM
33-2015 11-16-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
34-2015 12-1-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
35-2015 12-1-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
36-2015 12-1-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
37-2015 12-1-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
38-2015 11-16-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
39-2015 12-1-2015 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
40-2015 12-15-2015 Police regulations
amendment
Ch. 52
41-2015 12-15-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1272
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
42-2015 12-29-2015 Submission of question to
voters at general election
in November 2016
regarding election of
Charter Study Commission
NCM
1-2016 1-19-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
2-2016 2-2-2016 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
3-2016 2-16-2016 Salaries NCM
4-2016 2-16-2016 Administration amendment Ch. 2
5-2016 2-16-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
6-2016 2-16-2016 Bond NCM
7-2016 2-16-2016 Appropriation NCM
8-2016 3-1-2016 Refunding bond NCM
9-2016 3-1-2016 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
10-2016 3-15-2016 Administration amendment Ch. 2
11-2016 3-15-2016 Salaries NCM
12-2016 4-5-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
13-2016 4-5-2016 Approval for coin drop NCM
14-2016 4-5-2016 Approval for coin drop NCM
15-2016 4-5-2016 Salaries NCM
16-2016 4-5-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
17-2016 4-5-2016 Approval for coin drop NCM
18-2016 4-19-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
19-2016 5-17-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
20-2016 5-17-2016 Salaries NCM
21-2016 5-17-2016 Salaries NCM
22-2016 6-7-2016 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 20
23-2016 6-7-2016 Salaries NCM
24-2016 6-7-2016 Bond NCM
25-2016 6-7-2016 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1273
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
26-2016 6-21-2016 General provisions: public
notary service
Ch. 1, Art. IV
27-2016 6-21-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
28-2016 7-5-2016 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment; Fire
Department amendment;
licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 17; Ch.
33
29-2016 7-19-2016 Bond NCM
30-2016 8-2-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
31-2016 8-2-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
32-2016 8-16-2016 Approval for coin drop NCM
33-2016 8-16-2016 Salaries NCM
34-2016 8-23-2016 Bond NCM
35-2016 9-6-2016 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
36-2016 9-6-2016 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
37-2016 9-6-2016 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
38-2016 9-6-2016 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
39-2016 9-20-2016 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
40-2016 9-20-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
41-2016 9-20-2016 Salaries NCM
42-2016 9-20-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
43-2016 9-20-2016 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
44-2016 10-4-2016 Approval for coin drop NCM
45-2016 10-18-2016 Bond NCM
46-2016 12-6-2016 Salaries NCM
47-2016 12-20-2016 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1274
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
48-2016 12-20-2016 Salaries NCM
49-2016 12-20-2016 Tax exemption agreement NCM
1-2017 1-3-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
2-2017 1-17-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment;
police regulations
amendment
Ch. 30; Ch. 52
3-2017 2-7-2017 Streets and roads
department amendment
Ch. 61
4-2017 2-7-2017 Licensing and permits
amendment
Ch. 33
5-2017 2-21-2017 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
6-2017 2-21-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
7-2017 2-21-2017 Salaries NCM
8-2017 3-7-2017 Approval for coin drop NCM
9-2017 3-7-2017 Approval for coin drop NCM
10-2017 3-7-2017 Approval for coin drop NCM
11-2017 3-7-2017 Streets and roads
department amendment
Ch. 61
12-2017 3-7-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment;
police regulations
amendment
Ch. 30; Ch. 52
13-2017 3-21-2017 Salaries NCM
14-2017 4-4-2017 City redevelopment plan Ch. 80
15-2017 4-4-2017 Administration amendment Ch. 2
16-2017 4-18-2017 Sewer and water
amendment
Ch. 56
17-2017 5-2-2017 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
18-2017 5-2-2017 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
19-2017 5-2-2017 Approval for coin drop NCM
20-2017 5-2-2017 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 46
21-2017 5-2-2017 Administration amendment Ch. 2
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1275
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-2017 6-7-2017 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
23-2017 6-7-2017 Bond NCM
24-2017 6-7-2017 Bond NCM
25-2017 6-7-2017 Appropriation of
unexpended proceeds;
capital budget amendment
NCM
26-2017 6-7-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
27-2017 6-20-2017 Administration amendment Ch. 2
28-2017 6-20-2017 Approval for coin drop NCM
29-2017 6-20-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
30-2017 7-18-2017 Grant of easement; lease
assignment
NCM
31-2017 8-15-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
32-2017 9-19-2017 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
33-2017 9-19-2017 Approval of Millville Police
Athletic League coin drop
NCM
34-2017 9-19-2017 Block 266 redevelopment
plan
Ch. 83
35-2017 10-3-2017 General provisions:
adoption of Code
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
36-2017 10-17-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 30
37-2017 11-8-2017 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
38-2017 11-21-2017 Streets and Roads
Department amendment
Ch. 61
39-2017 11-21-2017 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections amendment
Ch. 11
40-2017 12-5-2017 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
41-2017 12-5-2017 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 17
43-2017 12-19-2017 Salaries NCM
42-2017 12-19-2017 Tax exemption agreement NCM
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1276
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2018 1-16-2018 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
2-2018 2-6-2018 Salaries NCM
3-2018 2-20-2018 Approval for coin drop NCM
4-2018 2-20-2018 Motor vehicle and traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 39
5-2018 2-20-2018 Approval for coin drop NCM
6-2018 3-6-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
7-2018 3-6-2018 Abatement NCM
8-2018 3-6-2018 Alcoholic Beverage Control
amendment
Ch. 5
9-2018 3-6-2018 Approval for coin drop NCM
10-2018 3-6-2018 Licensing and Permits
amendment
Ch. 33
11-2018 3-6-2018 Personnel Policies
amendment
Ch. 46
12-2018 3-6-2018 Salaries NCM
13-2018 3-20-2018 Administration Amendment Ch. 2
14-2018 3-20-2018 Salaries NCM
15-2018 3-20-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 50
16-2018 4-3-2018 Approval for Coin Drop NCM
17-2018 4-3-2018 Health Amendment;
Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 25; Ch. 46
18-2018 4-17-2018 Administration Amendment Ch. 2
19-2018 4-17-2018 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
20-2018 4-17-2018 Parks and Public Property
Amendment
Ch. 43
21-2018 4-17-2018 Salaries NCM
22-2018 4-17-2018 Salaries NCM
23-2018 5-1-2018 Licensing and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 33
24-2018 5-1-2018 Approval for Coin Drop NCM
25-2018 5-1-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 50
26-2018 5-1-2018 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1277
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-2018 5-1-2018 Sale of Land NCM
28-2018 5-1-2018 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 17
29-2018 6-6-2018 Salaries NCM
30-2018 6-6-2018 Approval for Coin Drop NCM
31-2018 6-6-2018 Salaries NCM
32-2018 6-6-2018 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 52
33-2018 6-19-2018 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
34-2018 6-19-2018 Animal Control: Licensing
and Control Amendment
Ch. 8, Art. I
35-2018 6-19-2018 Appropriation for
Codification
NCM
36-2018 6-19-2018 Salaries NCM
37-2018 6-19-2018 Salaries NCM
38-2018 6-19-2018 Licensing and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 33
39-2018 6-19-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 50
40-2018 7-3-2018 Approval for Coin Drop NCM
41-2018 7-17-2018 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
42-2018 8-7-2018 Licensing and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 33
43-2018 8-7-2018 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 30
44-2018 8-7-2018 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
45-2018 8-7-2018 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 52
49-2018 9-4-2018 Coin Drop NCM
50-2018 9-18-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
51-2018 9-18-2018 Licensing and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 33
52-2018 9-18-2018 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 17
53-2018 9-18-2018 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 46
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1278
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
54-2018 10-2-2018 Application to Cumberland
County Roadway
Department for Coin Drop
NCM
55-2018 11-7-2018 Tax Project NCM
56-2018 11-7-2018 Tax Project NCM
57-2018 11-7-2018 Licensing and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 33
58-2018 12-4-2018 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections Amendment
Ch. 11
59-2018 12-18-2018 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
1-2019 1-15-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
2-2019 1-15-2019 Salaries NCM
3-2019 2-5-2019 Salaries NCM
4-2019 2-5-2019 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections Amendment
Ch. 11
5-2019 2-19-2019 Authorizing Application NCM
6-2019 2-19-2019 Authorizing Application NCM
7-2019 2-19-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
8-2019 2-19-2019 Authorizing Application NCM
9-2019 2-19-2019 Ordinance Amendment NCM
10-2019 2-19-2019 Salaries NCM
11-2019 3-5-2019 Authorizing Application NCM
12-2019 3-5-2019 Budget NCM
13-2019 3-5-2019 Authorizing Application NCM
14-2019 3-5-2019 Taxation Amendment Ch. 65
15-2019 3-15-2019 Streets and Roads
Department Amendment
Ch. 61
16-2019 4-2-2019 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 52
17-2019 4-2-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
18-2019 4-2-2019 Stormwater Management
and Pollution Control
Amendment
Ch. 60
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1279
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2019 4-2-2019 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 17
20-2019 4-2-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
21-2019 4-2-2019 Salaries NCM
22-2019 4-16-2019 Street Vacation NCM
23-2019 4-16-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
24-2019 4-16-2019 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections Amendment
Ch. 11
25-2019 5-21-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 50
26-2019 5-21-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
27-2019 5-21-2019 Coin Drop NCM
28-2019 5-21-2019 Coin Drop NCM
29-2019 5-21-2019 Coin Drop NCM
30-2019 5-21-2019 Administration Amendment Ch. 2
31-2019 5-21-2019 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections Amendment
Ch. 11
32-2019 5-21-2019 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
33-2019 6-18-2019 Authorization of Coin Drop NCM
34-2019 6-18-2019 Authorization of Coin Drop NCM
35-2019 6-18-2019 Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 39
36-2019 6-18-2019 Bond NCM
37-2019 6-18-2019 Bond NCM
38-2019 7-2-2019 Parks and Public Property:
Special Events on Public
Lands Amendment
Ch. 43, Art. VII
39-2019 7-2-2019 Bureau of Permits and
Inspections Amendment
Ch. 11
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1280
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
40-2019 8-20-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 47
41-2019 8-20-2019 Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 39 47
42-2019 8-20-2019 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 46 47
43-2019 9-3-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 47
44-2019 9-17-2019 Parks and Public
Property
Amendment
Ch. 43 47
45-2019 9-17-2019 Parks and Public
Property
Amendment
Ch. 43 47
46-2019 10-1-2019 Streets and Roads
Department:
Collection and
Disposal of Solid
Waste Amendment;
Source Separation
of Recyclable
Materials
Amendment
Ch. 61, Art.
IV; Ch. 61,
Art. V
47
47-2019 10-15-2019 Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 39 47
48-2019 11-18-2019 Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 39 48
49-2019 11-18-2019 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 17 48
50-2019 12-3-2019 Salaries NCM 48
51-2019 12-3-2019 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 46 48
52-2019 12-3-2019 Bond NCM 48
53-2019 12-17-2019 Financial Agreement NCM 48
1-2020 1-21-2020 Salaries NCM 49
§ DL-1 CENTER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AREA § DL-1
79:1281
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2-2020 2-18-2020 Parks and Public
Property
Amendment
Ch. 43 49
3-2020 3-3-2020 Salaries NCM 49
4-2020 3-17-2020 Application to Hold
Coin Drop
NCM 49
5-2020 3-17-2020 Salaries NCM 49
6-2020 4-7-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 49
§ DL-1 MILLVILLE CODE § DL-1
79:1282